=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Vodou-in-Haitian Life and Culture.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 257
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:32:50.232635
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
Vodou in Haitian Life and Culture
1403971625ts01.qxd 29-9-06 12:55 PM Page i


--- PAGE 3 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 4 ---
Vodou in Haitian Life 
and Culture
Invisible Powers
CLAUDINE MICHEL
AND
PATRICK BELLEGARDE-SMITH
1403971625ts01.qxd 29-9-06 12:55 PM Page iii


--- PAGE 5 ---
VODOU IN HAITIAN LIFE AND CULTURE
© Claudine Michel and Patrick Bellegarde-Smith, 2006
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any 
manner whatsoever without written permission except in the case of brief 
quotations embodied in critical articles or reviews.
First published in 2006 by
PALGRAVE MACMILLAN™
175 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10010 and 
Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, England RG21 6XS
Companies and representatives throughout the world.
PALGRAVE MACMILLAN is the global academic imprint of the Palgrave
Macmillan division of St. Martin’s Press, LLC and of Palgrave Macmillan Ltd.
Macmillan® is a registered trademark in the United States, United Kingdom 
and other countries. Palgrave is a registered trademark in the European 
Union and other countries.
ISBN-13: 978–1–4039–7161–6 (hard cover)
ISBN-10: 1–4039–7161–7 (hard cover)
ISBN-13: 978–1–4039–7162–3 (paperback)
ISBN-10: 1–4039–7162–5 (paperback)
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Vodou in Haitian life and culture : invisible powers / edited by 
Claudine Michel and Patrick Bellegarde-Smith
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 1–4039–7161–7 (alk. paper)—ISBN 1–4039–7162–5 (alk. paper)
1. Voodooism. 2. Haiti—Religious life and customs. I. Michel, Claudine.
II. Bellegarde-Smith, Patrick.
BL2490. V62 2006
299.6/H1103275097294—dc22 2006043152
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Design by Newgen Imaging Systems (P) Ltd., Chennai, India.
First edition: October 2006
1 0987654321
Printed in the United States of America.
1403971625ts01.qxd  29-9-06  12:55 PM  Page iv


--- PAGE 6 ---
T o the 13 original founding members of KOSANBA who in 1997 
had the vision and the courage to create the first international 
scholarly association for the study of Haitian Vodou 
and
T o the manbo, houngan, hounsi, and other Vodouists who 
believed enough in the Lwa to allow us to capture
their encounters with les invisibles
1403971625ts01.qxd  29-9-06  12:55 PM  Page v


--- PAGE 7 ---
Hymon T. Johnson: “What can Christianity learn from other religions?”
Archbishop Desmond Tutu: “That God is not a Christian.”
Santa Barbara, California, November 4, 2005
1403971625ts01.qxd  29-9-06  12:55 PM  Page vi


--- PAGE 8 ---
Published under the auspices of The Congress of Santa Barbara (KOSANBA),
a scholarly association for the study of Haitian Vodou, and the 
Center for Black Studies, University of California, Santa Barbara
1403971625ts01.qxd  29-9-06  12:55 PM  Page vii


--- PAGE 9 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 10 ---
Contents
Invisible Powers : An Introduction xi
1 Afro-Caribbean Spirituality: A Haitian Case Study 1
Karen McCarthy Brown 
2 Vodou in Haiti: Way of Life and Mode of Survival 27
Claudine Michel 
3 African Interpretations of the Christian Cross in Vodou 39
Leslie Gerald Desmangles 
4 The Song of Freedom: Vodou, Conscientization, and 
Popular Culture in Haiti 51
Gerdès Fleurant 
5 Yon Moso Twal nan Bwa(A Piece of Cloth on Wood): The 
Drapo Vodou in Myths of Origin 65
Anna Wexler 
6 “The Jew” in the Haitian Imagination: Pre-Modern 
Anti-Judaism in the Post-Modern Caribbean 79
Elizabeth A. McAlister 
7 Resisting Freedom: Cultural Factors in 
Democracy—The Case for Haiti 101
Patrick Bellegarde-Smith 
8 The Haiti-New Orleans Vodou Connection: Zora 
Neale Hurston as Initiate Observer 117
Richard Brent Turner 
9 Water in Their Eyes, Dust on Their Land: Heat and 
Illness in a Haitian T own 135
Pierre Minn 
10 How Houngans Use the Light from Distant Stars 155
LeGrace Benson 
1403971625ts01.qxd  29-9-06  12:55 PM  Page ix


--- PAGE 11 ---
11 Vodou in Haitian Literature 181
Carrol F . Coates 
12 It’s All for You, Sen Jak! 199
Donald J. Cosentino
Notes on Contributors 217
Index 221
Contentsx
1403971625ts01.qxd  29-9-06  12:55 PM  Page x


--- PAGE 12 ---
Invisible Powers: An Introduction
Invisible powers can be made visible. They can be made visible by action, acts by
humans on the great stage of life. In Vodou, the sevitè, women and men who serve the
spirits by literally embodying the divine Lwa, les invisibles, manifest themselves during
sèvis, the ceremonies and rituals in which trances occur. During the sèvis, the invisible
and visible interact with surprising intimacy. Invisible powers can also be illuminated
through research. This volume presents the work of prominent scholars in the field of
Vodou studies who offer their expansive views of a religious system which has generally
been either unseen or misperceived.
For most of the past five centuries, Western civilization has deliberately demo-
nized peoples of African descent as an easy justification for their enslavement.
Africans were considered to be less than human. Their physical features were declared
repulsively ugly. Their cultures, denigrated. Their religions? Nonexistent, or a com-
pendium of heteroclite, ill-conceived notions of noxious superstitions emanating
from pre-literate and pre-scientific peoples who never quite rose from practicalities
into the rarefied realms of abstract thinking. As logic, sophisticated science, lan-
guages, and religion became the apanage of the West, African religions were dis-
missed with terms such as polytheism, primitivism, paganism, heathenism, and
animism, seen through European eyes as impediments to progress and material
development. The patronization that informed the “white man’s burden” became a
liberal notion whereby the little brown brother might be educated and elevated
beyond his primitive beliefs. And why not try? Many brown brothers and sisters fell
into the trap, abandoning their genetic and cultural inheritances.
This predjudice is still common currency in American discourse. “Voodoo
economics” or “voodoo politics” are part of a political arsenal in which “black” magic
defines the Other from American goodness and munificence. T oday, Western powers
continue to meddle in others’ affairs via government, the private sector, and through
missionary workers acting as “agents of civilization.” Hollywood, the film industry, and
the media perpetuate negative stereotypes. The United States and—by extension—
other Caribbean and Latin American republics, justify the military occupation of
Haiti using the same “white man’s burden” principles. As slaves were denied their full
humanity, Haiti is denied its sovereignty.
Generations of educated Haitians, taught to speak and write in French, were also
taught to embrace the ideals of their imperialist neighbors and the logic of colonial or
neocolonial power relationships, individually and collectively deprecating Haiti, its
1403971625ts01.qxd  29-9-06  12:55 PM  Page xi


--- PAGE 13 ---
citizens and its unique culture. The chapter by Carrol F . Coates is particularly
significant in this regard. He studied a half dozen novelists who, though none admit-
ted to practicing Vodou, have generally given a positive spin to Vodou. One author
in particular proudly confessed to interviewing houngan, priests, in his effort at
verisimilitude. The real story is the increasing acceptance of Vodou by middle- and
upper-class Haitians. These writers constitute a “who’s who” of progressive Haitian
politics; their lives parallel anticolonial struggles around the world.
Patrick Bellegarde-Smith extends the foregoing analysis by arguing that socioeco-
nomic development, to be secure and genuine, must always take into account the
national culture. The modernization of cultural elements—the acceptance of
the Haitian language, Kreyol, and the Vodou religion—are necessary conditions for
the realization of balanced development, befitting an autonomous culture and an
independent country. Neither democracy nor development can be “spread” from a
beneficent West to others; this is merely the white man’s burden revisited. In both
Coates and Bellegarde-Smith, one sees that social elites have realized that the emperor
(imperialism) has, in fact, no clothes. One is reminded of an African proverb: “run
from a naked man offering you a piece of cloth.”
Claudine Michel provides a clear and succinct explanation of Vodou as super-
structure. Vodou transcends its religious role, becoming a spiritual discipline that
infuses all other societal systems. Gerdès Fleurant addresses the “song of freedom”
and the impact of Vodou music from the country’s genesis to the present day, and in
the musicians’ search for renewal through modernizing their art. As a defining ele-
ment par excellence, these two chapters show how Vodou provides an integrated and
integrative worldview/worldsense that has an effect on every aspect of the Vodouist’s
life: family structure, economics, healing, and so on. This understanding goes a long
way in explicating Haiti’s development.
Karen McCarthy Brown, author of the modern classic Mama Lola, presents Haiti
as a case study in Afro-Caribbean spirituality. Her chapter is a precise and eloquent
description and analysis of the religion, with an in-depth discussion of its healing
powers—healing in all its permutations, defined broadly. This latter theme is aug-
mented by Pierre Minn in his ongoing research interest on Vodou within his areas of
specialization: illness, healing, medicine, and related nomenclature. Largely descrip-
tive, Minn’s chapter is an excellent introduction to that field.
The text by Richard Brent T urner reminds us of the Haitian cultural elements
found in New Orleans, Louisiana. While Haiti alone cannot be credited with
“Hoodoo”—as the origins of U.S. Blacks parallel those of Haitians—aspects of
Haitian Vodou, as well as African religions, were absorbed into the rituals of
Christianity practiced by American Creoles. In New Orleans and beyond, something
of the African religionwissenschaft resisted conversion to Protestantism and retained
strong Africanisms in its practice of both Catholicism and contemporary Vodou as
currently encountered in that part of the world. In Elizabeth McAlister’s chapter, one
finds the lingering and predictable colonial influences in the adoption of forms of
anti-Semitism in the Haitian rara festivals around Christian Easter. McAlister
addresses “the demonization by European Christianity of two groups—Jews and
Black Africans.” But, she states, things are never as simple as they seem, since even the
Other has agency—a recurring leitmotiv found throughout this volume.
Invisible Powers: An Introductionxii
1403971625ts01.qxd  29-9-06  12:55 PM  Page xii


--- PAGE 14 ---
Last but not least are the detailed explanations of specific elements of the religion
within overarching contexts of Vodou as worldview. Leslie G. Desmangles reminds
one that the Christian cross has alternate African meanings found in the Vodou cross
and the vèvè. It completes our understanding that culture need not be enslaved to
materiality; enslaved Africans who crossed the Atlantic with no possessions, not even
clothing—“yon men devan, yon men derye ,” one hand aft, one fore to hide their
nakedness—carried their culture with them. Similarly, LeGrace Benson, in her pio-
neering work on Islamic influences on Haitian Vodou, speaks for the many thou-
sands of enslaved Moslems who made it across and whose impact on Haitian
religious culture remains unheralded. Anna Wexler considers sequined Vodou flags as
religious art and their role in rituals and culture. Donald Cosentino’s chapter is an
envoi, un bonswa-dam, the grande finale, which illustrates through a majorLwa—Sen
Jak Maje—how the invisible is rendered visible in Haitian metaphysics, how Vodou
followers interact with spirits with astounding familiarity, and how this invisible
world impacts the daily existence of Vodouists.
The editors selected texts they felt were of great significance in presenting an
image or images of Vodou in a number of different disciplinary perspectives. Each
of the authors we chose has made serious contributions to the growing field of
Vodou studies. T ogether, these scholars account for hundreds of years, many gener-
ations of research, and one hopes that the accumulated wisdom is commensurate.
And none make apologies for wanting to rectify false information that passes for
knowledge. All would admit to having fallen to Haiti’s envoûtement, to being
enchanted by Haiti.
This book could not have been completed without the support and commitment
of many individuals and institutions. First, we thank our contributors for their will-
ingness to be part of this project and acknowledge the publishers that graciously
allowed us to reprint some rare material. These are as follows: The Brooking
Institution, Macmillan, Oxford University Press, The UCLA Fowler Museum,
Sociological Analysis, and The Journal of Haitian Studies. We are grateful to the anony-
mous reviewers who read this manuscript and offered constructive comments. We are
indebted to our editor at Palgrave Macmillan, Gabriella Pearce, who was enthusiastic
about this project from its inception and provided strong encouragement and invalu-
able editorial direction. We could not have asked for a more supportive and visionary
editor. We thank Professor Oyèrónké Oyéwùmí for telling us that Palgrave would be
a great press for this project. We also acknowledge the support and patience of vari-
ous members of the publication staff at Palgrave Macmillan, editorial assistant Joanna
Mericle, the designer, for the beautiful design; and, of course, painter Hërsza Barjon
for her superb rendition of Gede Nibo who graces and blesses the cover.
The Center for Black Studies at the University of California, Santa Barbara,
houses both the Haitian Studies Association’s Journal of Haitian Studies and the
Congress of Santa Barbara (KOSANBA), a scholarly association for the study of
Haitian Vodou; we are grateful for the support offered to both associations and
the researchers who have contributed to this anthology. Members of the Center’s
administrative and editorial staff have been incredibly supportive of our work and
initiatives. We are beholden to three core members of the Center: Chryss Yost, our
publication manager, Amber Wallace, managing editor, and Mahsheed Ayoub,
Invisible Powers: An Introduction xiii
1403971625ts01.qxd  29-9-06  12:55 PM  Page xiii


--- PAGE 15 ---
business officer, who have assisted once again with administrative and research
support and multiple editorial tasks. We also thank the Office of Research and the
College of Letters and Science at UCSB for their support of the research conducted
at the Center for Black Studies and in the Department of Black Studies, in particular
Michael Witherell, Vice Chancellor of Research, and Melvin Oliver, Dean of Social
Sciences. Professors James D. Smith, Anna Everett, Christopher McAuley and Julie
Carlson must be acknowledged as well as Louise Moore, Nancy Doner.
Our profound gratitude to our mother, sisters, and friends, Jacqueline Epingle,
Myrtha St-Louis, Minou and Mamoune Placide, Paulette Denis, Nirva Chérasard for
stoic performances during ceremonies to Nanny Placide for her incredibly elaborate
tables for the sèvis for the Lwa; and, always, to our cherished Mama Lola, a pioneer
in the defense of Vodou, for opening her home and sharing with us her knowledge
and wisdom and her family. Final thanks go to Claudine’s husband, Douglas H.
Daniels and daughter, Kyrah M. Daniels, for their support of KOSANBA and for
participating and helping with field research activities and conferences and, for
generously allowing us to have the space and time to work on one more Haiti project.
Claudine Michel and 
Patrick Bellegarde-Smith
Invisible Powers: An Introductionxiv
1403971625ts01.qxd  29-9-06  12:55 PM  Page xiv


--- PAGE 16 ---
Chapter 1
Afro-Caribbean Spirituality: A 
Haitian Case Study
Karen McCarthy Brown
Haitian views of healing and wholeness as revealed in the religious system called
Vodou provide the focus for this study. While the specifics of the discussion would
differ if it were centered in other Caribbean locales, there are certain basic attitudes
and understandings about the nature of the human condition and the causes and
cures of human suffering that are broadly shared among descendants of African slaves
throughout the Caribbean—areas that may be collectively named the Afro-Caribbean.
Before turning to Haiti, I will first consider briefly the factors that create the differ-
ences among Afro-Caribbean cultures and then attempt to outline the common
foundation on which their various healing systems rest.
T raditional attitudes and practices surrounding health and spirituality vary from
one area of the Caribbean to another for several reasons. Of first-level importance is
the place (or places) in Africa from which the slave populations were drawn and the
resulting ideas about health and spirituality that the slaves brought with them. For
example, in Haiti there are three clear lines of African influence: those of the Fon
peoples, most of whom live in the area we now call Benin; the Yoruba peoples
(Nigeria); and the Kongo peoples (Angola and Bas-Zaire). By contrast Cuban
traditional religion is dominated by Yoruba influence, while that of Jamaica has its
deepest roots among the Akan of Ghana. Other factors that account for the differ-
ences are the nature of the slave systems under which the first generations labored,
including the brand of Christianity practiced by the slaveholders; the geography,
plant and animal life of the New World setting and the differences and similarities
that the slaves found between these and the ecologies of their homelands; and the
social, political and economic history subsequent to slavery.
In relation to Haiti, the last point warrants special comment. Haiti was the second
independent republic in the Western Hemisphere and the first Black one. After its
successful slave revolution (1791–1804) and mainly as the result of trade boycotts,
1403971625ts02.qxd  28-9-06  1:07 PM  Page 1


--- PAGE 17 ---
Haiti was effectively cut off from contact with the United States and Europe for
nearly a century. Furthermore, even though the French colonists had established
Catholicism as the official religion of the people of the island, including its slave pop-
ulation, Haiti was denied priests by the church for more than fifty years following the
revolution. At the opening of the nineteenth century, when the long struggle for
independence ended, it is possible that as many as three-quarters of the slave popula-
tion of Haiti had been born in Africa. Therefore, for a substantial period of time fol-
lowing the expulsion of the French, several strong African cultural traditions
interacted in Haiti in an atmosphere relatively free of outside influence. This phe-
nomenon sharply distinguishes Haiti from the rest of the Caribbean and particularly
from places such as Jamaica. Jamaica experienced a continuing colonial presence well
into the twentieth century. As a result, the influences of Africa in Jamaican traditional
spirituality are subtler and more diffuse than those in Haiti. However, the ubiquitous
“balm yards” or healing centers in contemporary Jamaica are significant African
survivals. It is likely that their existence is a testament to the durability of a level of
religious practice that does not require elaborate temples or rituals, or the participation
of large numbers of persons. More importantly, their survival is also evidence of the
centrality of healing for African-based spirituality.
In spite of diverse input from Africa and divergent experiences during and after
the period of slavery, the various Afro-Caribbean communities share a broad range
of traditional assumptions, attitudes, and practices relating to health and healing.
I have identified six such factors, which I believe to be common to the healing
traditions of the Afro-Caribbean.
First, healing is the primary business of these religious systems. In fact, it is not an
overstatement to say that spirituality and healing are synonymous in the Afro-
Caribbean. Client-practitioner interactions occasioned by problems in the lives of
individual persons occupy much of the time of spiritual leaders. Furthermore, even
large ritual events that occur on a regular basis can be understood as healing cere-
monies when placed in their proper context.
Second, the understanding of personhood operative within these Afro-Caribbean
healing traditions is a fundamentally relational one. The individual person is defined
by a web of relationships that includes not only the extended family but also the
ancestors and the spirits or saints. Furthermore, the individual qua individual is also
understood in relational terms. Personhood is seen as constituted by a dynamic
balance of diverse spiritual energies or tendencies.
Third, healing within Afro-Caribbean traditions takes place through ritual adjust-
ments in these relational webs. T o be more specific, healing involves adjusting or reac-
tivating the reciprocal gift-giving that characterizes all relationships in the
Afro-Caribbean, whether they are relationships with the living, the dead, or the divine.
Fourth, these African-based religious traditions address a wide variety of maladies.
The expertise of the healer extends beyond physical problems to include social
problems arising from such areas as love, work, and family life. While a person with
physical symptoms could well be given herbal treatment appropriate to those symp-
toms, herbs would not represent the main part of the cure. In fact, the distinction
between physical and social maladies is finally an insignificant one. Basic diagnostic
categories are concerned with the origins of problems, and problems are virtually
Karen McCarthy Brown2
1403971625ts02.qxd  28-9-06  1:07 PM  Page 2


--- PAGE 18 ---
always seen as due to disruptions in relationships. The major curative action is
therefore, as we have seen, directed at healing relationships. Further, the connection
between a specific cause (the root problem) and a particular set of symptoms (the pre-
senting problem) is by no means a necessary one. In other words, failure to honor the
spirits could equally well result in the loss of a job or in digestive difficulties.
Fifth, these healing systems have a penchant for working through what Lévi-Strauss
called “the science of the concrete.”
1 The harmful emotional states that cause disrup-
tions in relationships—such as jealousy, despair, fear, anger—are addressed in ways
that appeal to the nonrational and even nonverbal dimensions of human interaction.
Emotional or relational states are concretized in sounds, gestures, or objects that are
laden with the highly condensed metaphoric referents of such things as taste, smell,
and color. Adjustments are then made in the externalized or concretized relational sit-
uation. For example, in Haiti, a marriage threatened by the destructive anger of the
husband could be treated by placing ice and a little sugar syrup in a jar that also
contains a slip of paper with his name written on it several times. The jar is then
inverted, the basic signal within the Vodou science of the concrete that a situation is
to be changed. The wife, who desires to “cool down” and “sweeten” her husband,
“works the point” several times a day. She lights a candle by the jar, prays over it, and
concentrates her energy on the desired end. Scientific and social-scientific thinkers
alike have tended to label this sort of healing practice “magic” or “superstition,” thus
dismissing it from the larger psychotherapeutic discussion, where it could well
suggest middle-range alternatives to drug therapy and the talking cure.
Finally, all of these traditions are involved in one stage or another of negotiation
with Great Atlantic culture, that is, with the Western world. Scientific medicine, cap-
italism, individualism, and modern technology all present challenges to customary
attitudes and practices in the area of health. In some parts of the Caribbean, exposure
to these forces has been substantial and long-term (Puerto Rico, for example), and as
a result, traditional healers have circumscribed their activity, focusing on problems
that would be considered insignificant by the church and by Western medical insti-
tutions, such as broken love affairs, predictive dreams, and chains of bad luck. By
contrast, in rural Haiti the majority of problems of all sorts are still treated by tradi-
tional healers. Yet no area in the Caribbean has been without some contact with the
trappings of modern life. African-based systems of spiritual healing characteristically
accommodate elements of modernity in their worldview rather than react to them
competitively or with hostility. For example, a traditional healer may advise a patient
to go to a hospital or get a shot of penicillin from the local clinic. Unfortunately, there
has not been the same openness in the other direction.
This summary view of the Caribbean context serves as background to a more
detailed discussion of traditional healing in Haiti, which will begin with sections on
the centrality of family and the view of person. The focus on exchange relationships
emerging from these two topics will provide the organizing motif for discussions of
Vodou rituals and of the Vodou spirits. A more specific treatment of the Haitian
Vodou understandings of the causes and cures of human suffering will follow. This
will touch on a variety of topics, including the etiology of problems, the sources of
authority used in treatment, and the questions of morality that arise in the quest for
healing.
Afro-Caribbean Spirituality 3
1403971625ts02.qxd  28-9-06  1:07 PM  Page 3


--- PAGE 19 ---
Serving the Spirits in Haiti
Haitians do not often call their religion “Vodou,” a term that in the rural areas at least
is still reserved for a particular subtype of dance and ritualizing. ( Vodou comes from
the Fon language and means “spirit.”) When Haitians refer to the religious dimen-
sion of their lives they refer to a form of activity rather than an institutional entity.
They say they “serve the spirits.” I have come to believe that human suffering is the
major impetus for serving the spirits and, furthermore, that an understanding of
Vodou ritualizing in terms of the ways in which it both comprehends suffering and
ameliorates suffering yields greater insight than any other.
“Moun fèt pou mouri” (People are born to die), Haitians are fond of saying
with a shrug of the shoulders. This proverb comments on the suffering and death that
are commonplace occurrences in poverty-stricken Haiti and shows the stoic
acceptance that, on one level at least, characterizes the Haitian attitude toward
such a life. Haitians have no vision of heaven in their religion,
2 no ideology of
progress shaping their understanding of history, and virtually no experience of
upward mobility in their lives or the lives of their children. Suffering is an
expected, recurrent condition. It is not an exaggeration to say that problem-free
periods in life are pervaded with an anxiety that anticipates crisis just around the
corner. Life as a whole is thus characterized by cycles of luck and the absence of
luck. The clever, faithful, and/or powerful person is one who manages by a juggling
of scarce resources to give generously to the living, the dead, and the spirits. The
resulting network of dependents who are obliged to serve and elders or social supe-
riors who are obliged to give sustenance and protection—even though subject to
the inherent unpredictability of personal relationships—provides the only means
any Haitian has of controlling his or her “luck.” At the very least, the obligations
created by these gifts construct the safety net that is essential for survival, given the
uncertainties of life in Haiti.
Haiti occupies the western third of Hispaniola, an island it shares with the
Dominican Republic. It is a small country—about the size of the state of Maryland—
that is home to 5.5 to 6 million people. Haiti is still largely an agricultural country,
although much of its land has been rendered nearly useless by short-range farming
techniques and soil erosion caused by cutting trees to produce the charcoal most peo-
ple still use to cook their food. Diseases such as tuberculosis, malaria, yaws, syphilis,
and elephantiasis, which have been virtually eliminated in most of the Western
Hemisphere, afflict the population in Haiti still. In parts of Haiti the infant mortal-
ity rate is above 50 percent, and anyone reaching the age of fifty-five or sixty is con-
sidered among the fortunate. The majority of children show some signs of
malnutrition: spindly arms and legs, swollen bellies, reddish brittle hair. Social disease
is also rampant in Haiti, a country that has survived a succession of brutal dictators
who have increased their personal wealth at the expense of the people and maintained
their power through random violence and intimidation. It is estimated that 80 percent
of the population is illiterate and that the average annual income for a Haitian is
somewhere between $200 and $300. When the considerable wealth of the 8 to 9 percent
of the population known as “the elite” is taken into account, it appears most persons
Karen McCarthy Brown4
1403971625ts02.qxd  28-9-06  1:07 PM  Page 4


--- PAGE 20 ---
in Haiti get by on little more than $100 a year—and yet a chicken purchased in Port-
au-Prince can cost as much as $5.
“Mizè mennen parespè,” the Haitians say, meaning, if you show you are suffering
people lose respect for you. Mizè (literally, “misery”) is an interesting word choice
here, for while it can be used to refer to suffering in general, it is used most often to
refer to poverty with all its attendant pains and indignities. There are many beggars
in Haiti. One sees them everywhere, but most often in markets, cemeteries, and
churchyards. In spite of their numbers, there is a special shame associated with beg-
ging. This becomes apparent in the way begging is used within the Vodou system.
When the spirits want to teach a lesson in humility to a devotee, they command that
person to don the ritual version of rags and go to the market and beg. The ignominy
of begging comes largely from the fact that beggars are seen as isolated individuals
whose activity announces to the world that they have been abandoned by the
extended kin group and now must forage on their own. Even if the family were lost
through death rather than discord, the person who must beg can easily be seen as
someone who was not clever enough or respectful enough or sufficiently hardwork-
ing to find a place as adopted kin in another family.
The Centrality of Family
For the slaves taken from Africa, the loss of extended family was so great that they
apparently made efforts to recreate that family before they had even set foot on the
shores of the New World. It is reported that some slaves recognized an incest prohi-
bition as existing between males and females who had undergone the Middle Passage
on the same ship. We know almost nothing about the interactions among slaves in
the early part of the eighteenth century, when large numbers of them arrived in Haiti
to work the plantations. However, knowledge of the crucial role of the extended fam-
ily throughout West Africa easily leads to the conclusion that whatever blending
among Fon, Yoruba, and Kongo cultures took place during that period must have
been compelled in large part by the need for family. In the early stages this need
would have been met through fictive kinship structures in which putative “mothers”
and “fathers,” “aunts” and “uncles,” and “cousins” provided the individual with both
identity (a place in society) and protection. Since the contributing African cultures
defined family as including the ancestors and the spirits, the need for family was both
a social and a spiritual need.
The slaves’ loss of access to family land in Africa was as great as their loss of the
African family itself. Indeed, from one perspective family and land were inseparable.
Prevented from visiting family graves and from leaving food offerings and pouring
libations at ancestral shrines, the enslaved African had also been denied the means of
ensuring the spiritual blessing and protection of the ancestors. Thus when slaves
could bring no other possessions with them, some nevertheless managed to carry
away small sacks of the soil of their motherland. This connection of family, land, and
religion persists in rural Haiti today.
Afro-Caribbean Spirituality 5
1403971625ts02.qxd  28-9-06  1:07 PM  Page 5


--- PAGE 21 ---
Unlike most of the other Caribbean nations Haiti is predominantly a country of
peasant farmers, many of whom own their own land. Where the social structures
have not been decimated by the combined pressures of overpopulation, depleted soil,
and corrupt politics, rural people in Haiti tend to live in large, patriarchal, extended
families. Even moderately successful men in the countryside may enter into multiple
plasaj or common-law unions with women. Each of these women is set up in a house
of her own in which she raises the children born of their union. Thus a multi-
generational extended family can swell to considerable size even when counting only
the blood kin. Such families, however, are not defined solely by blood ties. Large rural
families invariably include adopted “godmothers,” “godfathers,” and “cousins,” as
well as a number of “maids” and other workers who exchange their labor for a place
to sleep and for meager rations. Included in this latter group are the restavèk (literally,
the “stay-withs”), children whose parents could not afford to feed them and so either
sold them or gave them away to slightly more prosperous families. Social hierarchy is
relentless in Haiti. There is always someone poorer than oneself. Even the most minimal
rural household with only one or two able-bodied adults to work an unproductive
square of earth manages to have a servant.
The patriarch of the extended family functions as the oungan or priest when that
family serves the spirits. He is often the one who treats family members when they
become ill, although an outsider may be called in for such treatments if there is some-
one in the vicinity who has a reputation as one who “knows leaves.” However, it is
necessarily the patriarch who presides at the gwo sèvis, the big dancing and drumming
events that include animal sacrifice. These ceremonies are held annually if family
resources permit. More commonly they are held at longer intervals and then only in
response to crises within the group. The purpose of the elaborate ritualizing is to
honor, entertain, and feed the ancestors and the Vodou spirits which those ancestors
served.
The family dead are buried on the family land and the cemetery is a major center
for religious activity. In addition, a cult house for the ritual objects of the family is
often built on a small, separate plot of land. Thus, to inherit land is also to inherit the
bones of the ancestors and the duty to honor those ancestors as well as to serve the
spirits represented in the cult house. Conversely, to be separated from the land is also
to risk one’s access to the power and protection that these spirit entities provide.
Separation from land and family is, however, an increasingly frequent experience
for the younger generations of Haiti’s rural poor. Inheritance laws in Haiti work to
divide the land into smaller and smaller plots. This pressure, combined with that of
the multiple problems cited earlier, has pushed large numbers of young people off the
land and toward the elusive promise of a better life in the cities.
For young men urban life is often cruel. In the countryside they are reared to the
expectations of male privilege and power. (Even the female-headed households that
are prevalent in the cities perpetuate this ideology to a degree.) Yet some experts esti-
mate unemployment among young urban males at 60 percent and others argue that
the figure should be much higher. Women fare somewhat better in the urban envi-
ronment. Most of the factory jobs available are of the piecework variety, and
European and American employers seem to favor women for these repetitive tasks.
Urban women also have a market tradition bequeathed to them by their rural sisters.
Karen McCarthy Brown6
1403971625ts02.qxd  28-9-06  1:07 PM  Page 6


--- PAGE 22 ---
In the country it is the women who take the excess produce to market, along with
bread, candy, herbal teas, baskets, and other things they make with their own hands.
The urban woman spun away from the rural extended family frequently ends up not
only in charge of her house and her children—as she might well have been in the
country—but also solely responsible for their financial support. In the countryside
her market money would have been the “rainy-day savings” for times of drought and
hunger or the means to fulfill a private dream for herself or her children. In the cities
she must rely on the old market skills more centrally. The poor urban woman is
constantly engaged in small-scale commerce, often in several such enterprises
simultaneously. For example, even if she has a regular job, she may sell peanut candy
at the door of her home or work as a seamstress or beautician in the evenings and on
weekends.
Both men and women who no longer live with their extended families feel the loss
acutely. In fact, this sense of loss can persist for generations. In the cities, it is the Vodou
temple and the fictive kinship network it provides that compensates for the missing
large rural family. The head of the temple is called “mother” or “father,” and the initi-
ates are known as “children of the house.” The Vodou initiate owes service and loyalty
to his or her Vodou parent after the pattern of filial piety owed all parents by their
children in Haiti. In turn, Vodou parents, like actual ones, owe their children protec-
tion, care, and help in times of trouble. In certain circumstances this help is of a very
tangible sort: food, a place to sleep, assistance in finding work. The urban Vodou
temples are currently the closest thing to a social welfare system that exists in Haiti.
The differences between men’s and women’s lives in the cities have also left their
mark on the practice of urban Vodou. While in some parts of rural Haiti women can
gain recognition and prestige as manbo(priestesses), herbalists, or fanm saj(midwives),
nowhere in the countryside do they effectively challenge the spiritual hegemony of
the male. This is not the case in the cities, where there are probably as many women
as men in positions of religious leadership.
The urban Vodou temples run by men tend to mimic the patriarchal structure of
the rural extended families. The urban oungan is notorious for fathering many chil-
dren and recruiting desirable young women to be among his ounsi, brides of the gods,
the ritual chorus and general workforce of a Vodou temple.
3 He thus creates a highly
visible father role which he then operates out of in relation to all those who serve the
spirits under his tutelage. While the female manbo who heads a temple is not neces-
sarily more democratic in all of her relationships with those that serve the spirits in
her house, she does tend to be so in the ways that a mother’s role is normally less
authoritarian than that of a father. For example, many temples headed by women
function as day-care centers for the working mothers associated with them. In sum,
the woman-headed temple tends to reiterate the tone and atmosphere inside the
home, a place where women have usually been in charge. This is an atmosphere that
allows for more flexibility in human relationships than is found in the male-headed
temple, which recalls the more public and therefore more rigid social rules of the
entire extended family. This shift toward greater authority for women in urban
Vodou has undoubtedly had an effect on the nature of the care given to individuals
who turn to traditional religion to solve the many problems that urban life in Haiti
can bring.
Afro-Caribbean Spirituality 7
1403971625ts02.qxd  28-9-06  1:07 PM  Page 7


--- PAGE 23 ---
Whether the temple is headed by a man or a woman, it is clear that its appeal to
the urban population is rooted in its ability to recreate family. A song sung at the
beginning of Vodou ceremonies in Port-au-Prince illustrates this:
Lafanmi semble,
Semble nan.
Se Kreyòl nou yè,
Pa genyen Gine enkò.
The family is assembled,
Gathered in.
We are Creoles,
Who have Africa no longer.
The Vodou View of Person
In Vodou, persons are said to possess several “souls.” In fact, there is no generic
term in the Haitian Creole language that includes all of these spiritual entities or
energies, even though each possesses some of the characteristics of what Westerners
call soul. Furthermore, the word nam, derivative of the French word for soul, is
only one of the complex of forces that constitute a person. A person’s nam is usu-
ally understood as the animating force of the body. The most immediate effect of
death is the departure of the nam, which is sometimes said to linger for a short
period of time around the corpse or grave. The nam is an evanescent thing that
disappears soon after death.
By contrast the gwo bonanj , the big guardian angel, is capable of sustained
existence apart from the body it inhabits. One of the situations in which the person
is separated from his or her gwo bonanj occurs during the possession trance, which is
central to Vodou ritualizing. The struggle that marks the onset of possession is under-
stood as a struggle between a person’s gwo bonanj and the Vodou lwa (spirit), who
desires to “ride” that person and to use his or her body and voice to communicate
with the faithful. One who is thus ridden by the spirit is known as a chwal (horse) of
the spirit. Those who are possessed report that they lose consciousness after this ini-
tial struggle. The loss of consciousness and the resulting amnesia about what the
spirit said and did while riding the chwal is explained as due to the departure of the
gwo bonanj.
Similarly, it is the gwo bonanj that wanders from the body during sleep, even into
the land of the dead, thus allowing deceased persons or those living at a great distance
to appear in dreams. The wanderings of the big guardian angel during sleep are some-
times useful for information-gathering. For example, a mother in Haiti said she
learned from a dream that her daughter in New York had met with an accident and
broken her arm. In like fashion, when a person is uneasy, she may say that her gwo
bonanj is agitated. This is an undesirable state mainly because it robs the person of
sound sleep and therefore of dreams, which are an important vehicle for communi-
cation with the dispersed family, the ancestors, and the spirits.
Karen McCarthy Brown8
1403971625ts02.qxd  28-9-06  1:07 PM  Page 8


--- PAGE 24 ---
Finally, it is the gwo bonanj that must be ritually removed “from the head” of a
person shortly after death. The big guardian angel is then sent “under the water” to
dwell for a period of time until it (now referred to as a mò, one of the dead) is “called
up from the water,” installed in a clay pot known as a govi, and placed on the family
altar. The Vodou ceremony known as rele mò nan dlo, calling the dead from the water,
calls them from Gine, Africa, a watery land said to exist below the earth. The cere-
mony ideally takes place a year and a day following the death. Because it is an elabo-
rate and expensive ceremony, however, in practice families wait until there are several
of their dead whom they may retrieve at once. As a result the dead frequently emerge
complaining of cold, dampness, and neglect. In this ceremony, the dead speak
through a kind of ventriloquism possession and genuinely sound as if they come from
both far away and underwater. Their identity is confirmed by the intimate knowledge
of family life which they display. The spirits called up from the waters of Africa
inquire about family members and comment on problems within the group. Given
these various understandings of the nature and activity of the gwo bonanj, it seems fair
to conclude that this dimension of soul is both the consciousness and essential
personality of the individual.
The ti bonanj (little guardian angel), which each person also possesses, is much
more difficult to define. One urban manbo, or priestess, gave me two interesting
responses to questions about the nature of the ti bonanj. “When you look at your
shadow,” she said, “you will see that sometimes it has a dark center. That is the gwo
bonanj, but the paler shadow around the dark center is the ti bonanj.” When asked
what the little guardian angel does, she gave another concrete illustration: “When
you are walking a long way or carrying something very heavy and feel so tired that
you know you are not going to make it, it is the ti bonanj that takes over so you can
do what you have to do.” The ti bonanj is thus perhaps best described as a spiritual
reserve tank. It is an energy or presence within the person that is dimmer or deeper
than consciousness, but it is nevertheless there to be called upon in situations of stress
and depletion.
Much less routinely, Vodou oungan and manbo speak of another dimension of the
person called the zetwal or star. This is not an inner presence so much as it is a kind
of celestial parallel self. The concept of the zetwal is rooted in the belief that each per-
son is born with his or her fate already foreknown and unchangeable. The regular
movements of the stars and their recurring patterns mimic, perhaps even direct, the
larger contours of life in the human community. Whatever control an individual has
over his or her life thus comes in specific moments and short-run situations. Mizè
(suffering) may be held at bay only for a short time and chans (luck) only marginally
enhanced. The overall shape and direction of a life are determined by fate.
The nam, the gwo bonanj, the ti bonanj, and the zetwal are the constitutive parts
of a Haitian view of personhood that is clearly derivative of what ethnographers call
the “multiple soul complex” in West Africa. The fact that Vodou contains European
elements as well as African is also hinted at in this formulation. In addition to their
Catholicism, the French planter class of Haiti was known for its participation in a
variety of forms of marginal spirituality including Freemasonry and spiritualism. It
seems likely that the astrological flavor of the zetwal concept also owes its parentage
to this line of influence, even though the notion that individual persons are born with
Afro-Caribbean Spirituality 9
1403971625ts02.qxd  28-9-06  1:07 PM  Page 9


--- PAGE 25 ---
their fate already cast by the gods was a belief held by the Fon and to some extent also
by the Yoruba.4
While Vodou devotees understand the dead body (kòr kadav) of a person to be a
material substance separable from these various animating spiritual entities and
therefore subject to decay and ultimate dissolution, the body/soul or material/spiri-
tual split is not central to their understanding of personhood. As an indication of this
it is worth noting that there is no division within the Vodou view of person between
drives or appetites that come from the body—for example, hunger and sexuality—
and those that come from the spirit or mind. In fact, sexuality is perhaps the central
animating force in all of life. Much of Vodou ritualizing suggests that sexual and
spiritual energy come from the same source.
What complicates the understanding of personhood is the realization that indi-
viduals are not comprehensible apart from the Vodou spirits associated with them. It
is easiest to discuss this in the urban setting, which I know best. Here, each person is
said to have a mèt tet, master of the head. This is the main spirit served by that per-
son, and if the person is one who serves as a “horse” of the spirits, it will be the mèt
tet who most often possesses that person. T o a certain extent the personality of the
individual human being mirrors that of his or her mèt tet. For example, a man who
has Ogou as his mèt tet will be expected to exhibit some of the warrior spirit’s anger,
strictness, and perseverance in his everyday behavior. Yet he will also have been told
that Ogou is “too hot” to be served alone. The spirit of war and anger must be
balanced by others, for example, by a strong “sweet” spirit such as the ancient and
venerable snake spirit, Dambala.
In addition to a mèt tet, each individual has a smaller number of other spirits,
usually two or three, from whom he or she receives special protection. This complex
of spirits, which may consist of some that are known only in that family and others
that are recognized throughout Haiti, differs from individual to individual. It is
partly because of this that Vodou, though centrally concerned with morality, could
never produce a codified moral law that would apply equally to all persons. In Vodou,
an individual lives a moral life by faithfully serving the particular configuration of
spirits that “love” or “protect” that person. This includes following their advice,
advice that will be consistent with the personalities of the spirits. Thus it might be
said that the Vodou ethic is an intensely contextual one.
It is the urban devotee’s particular grouping of protective spirits that determines
the nature of ritual as well as moral obligations. Furthermore, it is important to note
that the choice of this penumbra of protective spirits is not for “the living” to make;
Vodou devotees insist that it is the spirits who choose the persons they love or pro-
tect. Yet, priests and priestesses do determine the choices the spirits have made, often
through divination.
A question may well be raised as to whether the Vodou spirits are truly distinct
and separate from the persons who serve them. This question is answered in para-
doxical ways within Vodou ritualizing. Beliefs surrounding possession trance and the
struggle of the gwo bonanj with the possessing spirit, as well as the insistence that the
person is chosen by the spirit and not vice versa, point to a clear distinction between
spirit and person. However, from the perspective of certain rituals such as those that
occur during initiation and after death, the individual person cannot be separated
Karen McCarthy Brown10
1403971625ts02.qxd  28-9-06  1:07 PM  Page 10


--- PAGE 26 ---
from the spirits that reside “in the head” or “on” the person, these being equally
common expressions among Vodou devotees. Initiation rituals simultaneously “feed
the spirits in the head” and establish a repository for them outside the person. This
repository is called a pò tet (head pot). After initiation it is placed on the Vodou family
altar and becomes the focus of rituals designed to cool, soothe, and strengthen the
person. Furthermore, when the spirit is removed from a person’s head at death,
this spirit is sometimes treated as if it were the gwo bonanj and sometimes as if it were
the lwa, the Vodou spirit, who was the mèt tet of the dead person. Similarly, when the
ancestor is called up from the waters and established on the family altar, the spirit is
called both by the name of the ancestor and by the name of the lwa. For example,
reference may be made to “Marie’s Ogou” or to “Pierre’s Dambala.” Thus there is also
a sense in which at least the head spirit is identified with the gwo bonanj, if not with
the individual in a larger sense.
In fifteen years of work on Haitian traditional religion, I have learned that
paradoxes of this sort are to be cherished rather than resolved, for it is invariably such
paradoxical statements that provide the greatest insight into the religious system we
call Vodou. If it is understood that within the Vodou worldview the individual is both
a separate self and an inseparable part of a family, then it can be grasped how the spir-
its who are part of that extended family can be both other than and merged with those
who serve them.
Rituals of Haitian Vodou
For some individuals, coexistence with their spirits presents no problems; life flows
more or less smoothly. It may be the case that someone within their family serves the
spirits and this is sufficient to fill the hungry bellies, slake the dry throats, and stroke
the wounded pride of the ancestors and the lwa. However, if one is not so fortunate
and life is not going well—and it often is not in a country such as Haiti—then
more is required. Vodou offers a series of ritual steps that escalate the intensity of the
individual’s involvement with the spirits. Each of these ritual steps is based on an
exchange. The person commits to service of one sort or another; in return the spirits
proffer relief and protection.
Some problems can be handled with a onetime or at least a short-term commit-
ment to the spirits. This type of commitment could be something as simple as light-
ing a candle before the image of a spirit, or it could be an elaborate and expensive
feast for several spirits, which would include dancing, drumming, and animal
sacrifice. Other problems require a more routinized and long-term relationship with
one or more spirits. Such life-time commitments vary from “marriage” to a spirit to
the decision to become a priest or priestess.
5
In the process of escalating their commitments to the Vodou spirits, devotees
accomplish two related things. First, they gradually increase the strength and stabil-
ity of their own gwo bonanj. For those who move to the upper levels of initiation this
means mastering the art of possession trance, which is the art of both letting go of the
gwo bonanj and bringing it back. Second, devotees gradually increase their control
Afro-Caribbean Spirituality 11
1403971625ts02.qxd  28-9-06  1:07 PM  Page 11


--- PAGE 27 ---
over the Vodou spirits as well. Men and women who advance to the grade of oungan
and manbo do so through a ceremony in which they “take the asson.”6 The asson is a
small, hollow gourd covered with a mesh of glass beads and snake vertebrae. This rat-
tle, which is the emblem of the Vodou priesthood, is not used to make music but to
signal key changes in the drum rhythms in a Vodou service, as well as to summon and
send away the lwa. When a lwa tries to seat itself on an inexperienced horse, the
struggle between the gwo bonanj and the spirit can become violent and even harmful
to the horse. It is in situations such as these that the spirit must be sent away. Thus,
within limits, Vodou priests and priestesses have power over the spirits. As one Vodou
priest put it: “The spirits don’t like the asson, but they give it to us anyway so we can
work with them.”
Although it is clear that overall the spirits have far greater powers than do the liv-
ing, the relationship between devotees and spirits is nevertheless characterized by rec-
iprocity and mutual dependence. The lwa, like the ancestors, depend on the living to
feed them. Hungry spirits are troublesome and destructive. The living, in turn,
depend on the protection and luck that only the spirits can guarantee. This relation-
ship is not unlike the one that exists between parents and children. While the greater
power and authority of the parents is unquestioned, parental care in Haiti is not
purely altruistic. In the rural areas children work from a young age and their work
soon becomes essential to the ongoing family enterprise. Play for children four or five
years old often consists of small fetching and carrying tasks; and all over Haiti, the
childless person is pitied mainly because there will be no one to take care of that indi-
vidual in old age. For those reared in monotheistic religious traditions, the notion
that the spirits are dependent on their devotees is an especially difficult one to grasp.
Yet comprehending this principle is essential, for without understanding that the
spirits need the living, it is all too easy to attribute the problems, illnesses, and gen-
eral harassment that the spirits at times dole out to the living as due to their
temperamental, or worse, evil nature.
Vodou is a blend of various African traditions with Catholicism. Although it can
be argued that Catholicism has been Africanized in Vodou, and that this is a far truer
statement than its reverse, this does not mean that the Catholic Church has no role
in the life of the 85 to 90 percent of Haitians who serve the spirits. Pilgrimages to var-
ious churches and attendance at Mass are integrated into many complicated Vodou
rituals. In addition, the church has taken over the major ceremonies of the life cycle.
Birth, where it is ritualized at all, is celebrated through baptism. Also, ideally every-
one should go through a First Communion. Pictures from this event are among a
family’s most treasured possessions. For economic reasons, most Haitians enter plasaj
(common-law) partnerships rather than have legal marriages. However, where there
is a wedding, it is understood that it should be a church wedding. The church also
buries the dead, although Vodou rituals are woven in and out of the wake, the
entombment (burial is aboveground in Haiti), and the memorial Mass that comes
nine days following the death.
Vodou ritual pervades the life of the great majority of Haitian people. For exam-
ple, candles are lighted and libations poured at countless family altars every day.
There are also large ceremonies that have a more social and celebratory air.
Among these are the sumptuous feasts for the spirits that occur with some frequency
Karen McCarthy Brown12
1403971625ts02.qxd  28-9-06  1:07 PM  Page 12


--- PAGE 28 ---
throughout the calendar year at large urban temples. These are a source of entertain-
ment and celebration for curious onlookers and invited guests as well as for the
members of that particular Vodou family. Even though all guests may not be offered
drinks and plates of food, it is a tradition that the doors of the Vodou temple are
closed to no one. Furthermore, the more people present at one of these events, the
more chance it has of being a success. The spirits will not come until the crowd is
byen eshofe, well heated up. When sweat is streaming down the bodies of the drum-
mers and they have found that vast reserve of energy on the other side of fatigue,
when their intricate polyrhythms drive the dancers to new heights of grace and spirit,
when the voices of the leader of songs and the ounsi chorus challenge one another in
an ascending spiral of statement and response, that is when the ceremony is byen
eshofe and that is when the lwa will mount their horses and ride.
Spirit Possession
Once the spirit is in charge of the horse, the crescendo of energy stops and people set-
tle in to watch the possession performance. The term “possession performance” is not
used here to indicate that there is anything false or contrived about these visits from
the spirits. Vodou priest and priestess alike condemn the occasional person in their
midst who may pran poz, act disingenuously as if possessed. The term is used rather
to indicate what has often been noticed about possession in the Vodou temple: it has
a theatrical quality. The characters of the major Vodou spirits are well known. Even
an outsider such as myself can identify the possessing spirit within moments of
its arrival because of certain stereotypical behavior as well as the ritual garb and
implements that the spirit requests. However, the Vodou priests and priestesses, the
ones usually possessed at these large feasts, improvise freely within the character range
of the spirit. Thus a lwa not only goes through standard ritual salutations and exhibits
certain forms of behavior that are seen virtually every time this spirit possesses some-
one, but the spirit also addresses particular persons and gives advice about specific
problems. The spirits hug, hold, and dance with the devotees. They give ritual bless-
ings and sometimes ritual chastisement, both appropriate to the situation. They sing.
They eat. They cry. At these large public events, the Vodou spirits process the prob-
lems of the community, fine-tuning human relationships. Sometimes an intimate
problem can be whispered into the ear of a sympathetic lwa, and the spirit will take
the devotee aside for a discreet and private audience. More frequently, these interac-
tions with the spirits become the occasion for an individual’s problems to be aired
(and healed) in the larger community context.
One specific example of this process will serve to make several points. There was a
oungan in Carrefour (a town on the coast road south and west of Port-au-Prince) who
had a reputation for being a strict and dour disciplinarian in his Vodou family.
Because she had angered him, he sent away a woman named Simone, the song leader
in his temple, and told her never to return. At a ceremony not long after, this oungan,
whose name was Cesaire, was possessed by the warrior spirit, Ogou. Ogou arrived in
a rage and immediately began to berate Cesaire (the very horse he was riding). Who
Afro-Caribbean Spirituality 13
1403971625ts02.qxd  28-9-06  1:07 PM  Page 13


--- PAGE 29 ---
did Cesaire think he was, Ogou asked, that he could send Simone out of the temple?
Simone was one of Ogou’s favorites, and besides, it was he, Ogou, who was in charge
of the temple, not Cesaire. The gathered faithful were instructed to convey this mes-
sage to the ill-mannered oungan without fail, and then the spirit departed, leaving the
body of Cesaire in a crumpled heap on the temple floor. When he had barely regained
his senses, the reluctant Cesaire was carried along in a procession of all the temple
dignitaries, complete with the brightly colored, sequined banners of the temple, right
to the home of Simone. They stood outside and sang Vodou songs of invitation and
reconciliation. After much coaxing, Simone agreed to come back to the temple, and,
accompanied by the full parade, she was ritually reintegrated into the Vodou family.
This example shows something of the complexity of the possession process in
which a lwa can chastise, even humiliate, his own horse. Yet, perhaps more signifi-
cantly, it also shows the key role of the community in the interpretation and applica-
tion of the wisdom of the spirits. Thus, the public airing of community problems and
issues within the Vodou temple is a means of enforcing social sanctions, mobilizing
the assistance of the community, and mending broken relationships. It is, in short, a
way of healing.
Yet there are vast areas of Vodou ritual that are concerned with healing in a more
direct way. These vary from the individual client-practitioner interactions (practices
that will be discussed below in a section on the types of caring used in Vodou healing)
to the expensive and elaborate cycles of initiation rituals.
Initiation
Vodou initiation ceremonies are never undertaken lightly or routinely. Almost always
it is trouble with the spirits, manifesting in problems in the individual’s life, that lead
a person to undergo initiation. In the temples of the Port-au-Prince area there are
four levels of initiation possible. Each level involves a period of seclusion that may
vary from three to twenty-one days, and most temples have a small interior room set
aside for such purposes. Persons tend to be initiated in small groups. The men and
women in these groups become “brothers” and “sisters” in a special way. Above all,
they are committed to helping each other with ritual duties. This is the case even
when the groups contain individuals who are seeking different grades of initiation.
All grades of initiation have public rituals that occur intermittently in the exterior
temple dancing area as well as rituals reserved for the already-initiated members of
the house that occur within the inner chamber.
The first level of initiation is called the lave tet(head-washing) and involves cooling
and soothing as well as feeding the spirits in a person’s head. The second level is kanzo,
a word that refers to a rite in which initiates are briefly removed from the initiation
chamber in order to undergo a ritual trial. In the semipublic part of the kanzo ritual,
small, hard dumplings are snatched from boiling pots and pressed into the palm of the
left hand and the sole of the left foot of the initiate. When this ceremony is completed,
the initiates are told: “Now you are kwit[cooked]; no one can eat you,” that is to say, no
one can do harm to you. They are also admonished: “Never say hot again, say strong!”
Karen McCarthy Brown14
1403971625ts02.qxd  28-9-06  1:07 PM  Page 14


--- PAGE 30 ---
The third level is called sou pwen, on the point. Pwen is a complex, multivocal
concept in Haitian Vodou, as it is in Haitian culture in general. Within the general
culture, “singing the point” or “sending the point” refers to a socially appropriate
means of indirect communication that is especially useful for conveying difficult
messages. For example, one young man in Haiti told me this story: he was courting a
young woman who came from a family as impoverished as his own. The girl’s mother
decided that the match offered neither one any chance of advancement, and yet she
was loathe to insult her daughter’s suitor. So when he visited, she went about her
household tasks singing a popular song, the refrain of which was “Dè mèg pa fri,”
(T wo lean [pieces of meat] do not fry). The young man got “the point” and broke off
his relationship. In and out of the temples, it is often Vodou songs that are used for
the purpose of singing the point. These songs have a sparse, even cryptic quality to
them that lends itself to communicating several different, sometimes contradictory,
meanings at once. The person who “sends a song” in the Vodou temple, that is, the
one who suggests the next song to be sung by the group, is not only following a
closely prescribed ritual order in which each important lwa is saluted in the proper
order with his or her own songs and rhythms, but quite frequently is also sending the
point, pwen, to a person or group of persons present at the ceremony. Such an obser-
vation both reveals the extent to which Vodou ritual intertwines with and comments
on the life of the community and suggests a preliminary definition for the trouble-
some word pwen. At a level of abstraction uncharacteristic of the way people who
serve the spirits speak, pwen may be said to mean the condensation or pith of some-
thing. At a concrete, ritual level pwen are charms or medicines composed of words,
objects, gestures, or some combination of the three. They may be drawn on the earth,
spoken, sung over a person, placed under the skin, or ingested; they may be buried at
the crossroads, in a cemetery, or in the courtyard of a house. When one is initiated
“on the point,” the reference is to the condensation of the power of a particular spirit
who has been diagnosed as the mèt tet.
The fourth and final level of initiation is the one that gives a person license to
begin practicing as a healer. It is called assògwe, literally, “with the asson,” the beaded
rattle that gives priests and priestesses some measure of leverage in the spirit realm.
In Haitian Creole, the verb kouche (to lie down, to sleep, to make love, to give
birth—less commonly, to die) is the general word used to describe initiation.
Entering the initiation chamber is like dying. Friends and family members cry as they
line up to kiss the initiates goodbye. Shortly after this genuinely emotional leave-
taking, the initiates are blindfolded and led through a dizzying dance of spirals and
turns before being taken into the small room where they will kouche. As in many
other sorts of initiation around the world, to kouche is to be forced by ritual means to
regress, to become a child again, to be fed and cared for as a child would be, only to
be brought rapidly back to adulthood, a new kind of adulthood, again by ritual
means. When the initiates leave the inner chamber after days of seclusion and ritual-
izing, they have their heads covered. Initiates must keep their heads covered for forty
days. Like newborn babies with vulnerable soft spots, new initiates must protect the
tops of their heads. The spirits within have been fed and are still changing and
strengthening day by day. On an altar inside, the initiates have left their pò tet (head
pots), residues of the internal externalized, the self objectified, the spirits concretized.
Afro-Caribbean Spirituality 15
1403971625ts02.qxd  28-9-06  1:07 PM  Page 15


--- PAGE 31 ---
These pò tet generally remain on the altar of the priest or priestess who performed the
initiation and who will be ever after the initiates’ spiritual mother or father. Thus,
through initiation rites, bonds among the living—as well as between the living and
the spirits—are reinforced.
The Vodou Spirits
In the preceding discussion, I have been using the term “spirit” in a generic sense, as
the Haitians often do, to refer to what are in fact three distinguishable groups: the
mò, the dead; the màwasa, the divine twins; and the mistè, the mysteries, more often
referred to as the lwa, or, using the term in a more specific sense, the espri, the spirits.
Generally speaking, the dead and the divine twins are more central to rural than to
urban Vodou. As the structure of the large extended families unravels, the sources
from which people seek wisdom and assistance change. In the cities, possessions by
specific powerful ancestors decline, while more energy is focused on possessions by
the major Vodou lwa, most of whom are known and venerated throughout Haiti. In
similar fashion, as children lose some importance for the work of the family, the
divine children, the màwasa, also lose some ritual significance. However, neither the
dead nor the màwasa disappear completely in the urban context.
The dead are still venerated in the cities. As was mentioned above, the lwa are
inherited in urban families, where they will be remembered for some time as the lwa
of a particular ancestor, for example, Marie’s Ogou. Also, in the urban context fam-
ily graves continue to be important, as do the annual celebrations for the dead that
occur on and near All Souls’ Day.
The màwasa also continue to have a role in urban Vodou. In addition to being
routinely saluted in most large dancing and drumming ceremonies, the divine twins
are given special attention in two contexts, both of which have to do with enhancing
the luck of a particular group or a particular enterprise. The first instance has to do
with making a promès (promise). This is done when resources do not permit the
immediate fulfillment of an obligation to the spirits. In such a case a small manje
màwasa, a meal for the divine twins, can be prepared. The dishes, favorites of chil-
dren, will be fed to the actual children in the group. When they take obvious pleas-
ure in the food this is taken as a sign that the spirits have agreed to accept the promise.
The second ritual in which the màwasa play a central role is the manje pov (feed-
ing of the poor). This ritual is performed by families, both biological ones and those
created around the urban Vodou temples. Ideally it is performed annually to ensure
the good fortune of the group. Large quantities of all sorts of food are prepared. A
small portion of this—a pot of soup, perhaps—along with coffee, soap, tobacco, and
small change, is then sent to a gathering place for the poor. The steps of a church or
the cemetery are likely places. These things are passed out to the poor along with an
invitation to come to the temple or the home later in the day for a feast. Before any
of those later assembled can eat from the overflowing pots prepared for the ceremo-
nial meal, the children of the poor (a group doubly identified as the socially vulnera-
ble) must first consume a separate manje màwasa.
Karen McCarthy Brown16
1403971625ts02.qxd  28-9-06  1:07 PM  Page 16


--- PAGE 32 ---
Within the realm of the spirits, the màwasa play a role parallel to that of children
in the social realm. They require more in terms of care and material goods than they
can give back in the same media of exchange. However, because children are closely
associated with the good fortune of a family as well as with its vulnerability (young-
sters are said to be the most likely to “catch” destructive spirits sent against a family
by its enemies), the exchange can be kept more or less balanced by the luck or bless-
ing that children can uniquely bestow.
The manje pov reveals the connection that is made within Haitian Vodou between
children and the poor. Both are socially vulnerable groups in need of care.
Furthermore, the poor, like children, are understood to be sources of blessing.
Almsgiving, particularly when on pilgrimage, is highly recommended in Vodou
circles. The identical rituals that end both the promès and the manje pov reinforce
the reading that helping children and the destitute brings good fortune. When the
respective meals are finished, the guests—in one case the family children, in the other
the poor, both children and adults—wash their hands in a basin containing water and
basil leaves. The donor of the meal then stands in the center, and all guests wipe their
hands on his or her clothing, face, arms, and legs.
By far the largest proportion of resources, time, and energy in the urban Vodou
context is expended on service to the lwa. These lwa are both related to and different
from their West African progenitors. The religious systems of the Fon and the
Yoruba, both of which made central contributions to Haitian Vodou, have complex
pantheons of spirits. These spirits have hegemony over a wide variety of life domains,
including natural phenomena such as thunder, wind, rain, and smallpox, as well as
cultural activities such as farming and hunting. When these rich spiritual systems
were transported to the Caribbean, their considerable power to make sense of the
world came to focus almost exclusively on the most problematic arena of life there,
the social arena. For example, Shopona, the powerful Yoruba figure associated with
smallpox, was completely forgotten. Others similarly associated with the powers of
nature were lost unless their skills and proclivities translated readily into the social
realm. In related fashion, many spirits were redefined in the New World setting. The
Yoruba Ogun (the Fon Gu), a patron of metalsmithing, hunting, and warfare, came
to be understood exclusively as a warrior in Haiti. This pervasive socialization of the
divine occurred when West Africans were brought to the New World, and it hap-
pened again in new ways when their descendants were forced from rural homelands
into the cities. Among the Gède (generalized spirits of the dead) recognized in Port-
au-Prince are an automobile mechanic, a dentist, and a Protestant missionary. And
Azaka, a lwa who is a peasant farmer, functions in his urban incarnations mainly as a
voice reminding the dispersed of the importance of maintaining contacts with the
extended family.
In the Haitian countryside (probably to a greater extent in former times than
now) the various lwa are organized into several nanchò (nations). The names of
these—for example, Kongo, Ibo, Wangol, Nago, Rada, Petro—almost all point to
specific areas or groups in the African homeland. In the cities this complex of spirit
nations has been synthesized into two major groupings, the Rada and the Petro.
Within Vodou lore and practice these two groups are understood as fundamentally
different, even oppositional. For example, mixing of the altars of the two pantheons
Afro-Caribbean Spirituality 17
1403971625ts02.qxd  28-9-06  1:07 PM  Page 17


--- PAGE 33 ---
is prohibited. Furthermore, even though both may be saluted in the course of a single
evening, clearly articulated ritual transitions create buffer zones between the two
groups.
The opposition between Rada and Petro can be best understood as a contrast
between the quite different modes of relationship that each group represents. The
Rada lwa are the “sweet” spirits. They are served with sweet foods and drink. The
ambiance of their possession performances is intimate and warm. Even those Rada
lwa who are awesome in their wisdom and power are treated with a respect that is
transparent to the affection that underlies it. Rada spirits are rasin (“root”) lwa. They
are also said to be frangine (African). They are, in short, family, and the mode in
which one serves them reflects this. While fidelity and caution are required in the
service of the Rada lwa, these spirits are not overly strict in their dealings with the liv-
ing. If a promised feast cannot be offered to them one year, they can be persuaded to
wait until the next. The Petro lwa by contrast are characterized as “hot” spirits. Their
possession performances often play at the border of violence and destructiveness. In
like fashion, the unfaithful or careless devotee does not escape punishment. Why
then would anyone serve the Petro lwa? Because they have access to realms of life that
the Rada spirits do not. The power of the Rada lwa derives from their wisdom,
including herbal knowledge. The power of the Petro lwa by contrast extends over, but
is not limited to, the arenas of money and commerce. The Petro lwa, whose icono-
graphic repertoire includes intricate and intense drum rhythms as well as police whis-
tles, whips, and knives, are the spiritual incarnation of the plantation owners
and their neocolonial equivalents—the mulatto elite who control the wealth of the
country and the American and European businesspeople who profit from the labor of
the poor. The opposition between Rada and Petro is thus aptly described as that
between family members and foreigners, or insiders and outsiders. Not incidentally,
the Petro lwa also chart a course for the person who would assert his or her individ-
ual needs over and against the demands of family. The two pantheons, Rada and
Petro, thus offer different rewards and are in turn characterized by different modes of
sociality. Relationships with spirits in both realms require reciprocity. However,
exchanges with the Rada spirits take place in a warm familial atmosphere character-
ized by compassion, while those with the Petro lwa operate according to impersonal
and inflexible rules and are thus pervaded with caution and anxiety.
The difficulty ethnographers have experienced in attempting to create a definitive
list of the Vodou lwa is well known. The reason for this difficulty is rather simple: no
such list is possible because the lwa are inherently mercurial. They are more accu-
rately described as ways of being in the world, subject to endless transmutation
through experience, than as beings per se. For example, the Haitians will say that
there is one Ogou; they will also say that there are seven or twenty-one. In fact, there
are probably many more than twenty-one that could be identified in the Port-au-
Prince region alone. Each is an extension and elaboration of the central character of
the warrior spirit Ogou. In his various manifestations Ogou plays across the full range
of the constructive and destructive uses of power and aggression. For example, there
is the politician Ogou Panama. There is the drunkard Ogou Yamson. There is Ogou
Fèray the general, and Ogou Badagri the heroic soldier. Moreover, the individual per-
sonalities of the lwa are not exactly mercurial but similarly multifaceted. A particular
Karen McCarthy Brown18
1403971625ts02.qxd  28-9-06  1:07 PM  Page 18


--- PAGE 34 ---
lwa can exhibit power, dispense wisdom, and give solace and practical advice. But the
same spirit can also—the particulars of his or her personality permitting—whine,
pout, needle, harass, and become wantonly destructive. It is impossible, therefore, to
group the Vodou spirits according to the moral categories of good and evil. Each
spirit, Petro as well as Rada, has both constructive and destructive dimensions, and
these change as the character of a lwa is applied to a particular life situation through
the medium of possession performance. The lwa thus do not so much set examples
for the living as they hold up mirrors that clarify certain aspects of the lives of those
who serve them.
Treatment in the Vodou System
Vodou priests and priestesses treat a wide variety of pwoblèm, “problems.” Clients
come to them for help with love, work, and family problems as well as with sickness.
The first determination that a Vodou healer must make is whether the problem
“comes from God.” If a problem is determined to have been sent by God, it is then
seen as “natural” in the sense of that which is meant to be, that which is unavoidable.
When Catholicism blended with African religious traditions to create Vodou, the
great West African sky gods, progenitors of human and divine beings alike, were
absorbed into Bondyè (God). Bondyè (literally, the “good god”) is the one and only
god and is clearly distinguishable from the lwa, who are sometimes said to be his
“angels.” A popular Haitian proverb emphasizes the message that is contained in the
name of god itself: “Bondyè bon” (God is good). As a result, if a problem, usually a
physical illness in this case, is understood as coming from Bondyè, then it works to
the greater good, even though this fact is unlikely to be apparent to the sufferer. No
priest or priestess will interfere in such a case.
However, if a problem is determined to come from what some Haitians call “super-
natural” causes, it is then thought to be appropriate for treatment within the Vodou
system. It is important to remember that Haitians do not live in a two-story universe.
God and the spirits are an intersecting dimension of life; they are not denizens of a sep-
arate realm. When they call a problem “supernatural,” it means two things: the prob-
lem is not part of the natural order, meaning part of what is fated to be, and it is likely
to have been caused by the spirits. Health problems that have a history of being resist-
ant to scientific medical treatment often end up in the Vodou temple, where that very
resistance is taken as a sign of the spirit-connected nature of the ailment. In fact, most
problems are diagnosed as supernatural in origin or, if not specifically caused by the
spirits, then at least falling within the province of their curative powers.
Once the preliminary determination is made that a particular problem is suitable
for treatment, the manbo or oungan sets out to discover more about its nature and
origins. Clients do not present themselves to Vodou healers with a detailed list of
their symptoms. According to tradition, nothing more is required than a statement
such as: “M’pa bon. M’pa genyen chans” (“I’m not well. I don’t have any luck”).
From this point, it is up to the priest or priestess to determine the nature of the prob-
lem, as well as its cause and cure. This is usually accomplished through divination.
Afro-Caribbean Spirituality 19
1403971625ts02.qxd  28-9-06  1:07 PM  Page 19


--- PAGE 35 ---
The most popular form of divination used in Port-au-Prince is card-reading.
However, gazing into a candle flame may be used or other more exotic techniques,
such as pouring a small amount of alcohol into the top of a human skull and then
reading the patterns made by the liquid moving along the cranial grooves—a very
graphic appeal to the wisdom of the ancestors! For card divination, an ordinary deck
is used with all cards below the seven removed. After lighting a candle and praying,
the manbo or oungan offers the cards to the client for cutting. These are then laid out
in four rows of eight in front of the healer. The whole process is repeated twice, once
to determine the best description of the problem and once to track down its
supernatural connections. After the first spread, the healer begins tapping the cards in
patterns dictated by his or her own inner perceptions. Occasionally a question will be
raised or a statement made. For example: “There is trouble in your house. I see
fighting.” The client is free to say yes or no without prejudice. Gradually, through a
series of such statements and responses, the contours of the problem reveal them-
selves. It should be emphasized that while this is clearly not a miraculous procedure
or even one requiring extrasensory perception, it nevertheless calls on the intuitive
skills of the practitioner and represents an important step in the curing. When the
problem is articulated through this gradual dialectical process, its definition may
well surprise even the client. I once witnessed a session in which a mother brought
her young daughter for help because the child would not eat, was losing her hair,
and had run away from home. In the course of settling on the appropriate descrip-
tion of the problem, the manbo uncovered something that was unknown to the
mother and unspoken before by the daughter: the girl’s stepfather was sexually
abusing her.
Once a full picture of the problem emerges, the healer then lays out the cards once
more to determine its cause or origin: “I see the spirits love you a lot. Ezili especially.
Did you promise you were going to do something for her and then not do it?” By this
means a complete diagnosis is made.
Diagnoses point to disruptions in relationships. Often the relation in question is
with the spirits themselves. Broken promises, lax or insufficient offerings, or refusal
of the spiritual vocation the lwa have chosen for a person can all be reasons for trou-
ble. Many manbo and oungan have dramatic stories to tell about their own efforts to
resist the desire of the lwa that they take the asson, that is, undergo initiation to the
priesthood. One woman was hospitalized three times and given last rites on two occa-
sions for an intestinal disorder, the cause of which medical doctors could never deter-
mine. (Eventually she obeyed the lwa, and thereafter she reported that she
experienced no further health problems.) Obligations incurred or promises broken
by family members generations back can emerge as the cause of the contemporary
individual’s troubles.
However, as was seen in the case of the sexually abused child, it is not always the
spirits who cause a problem. For example, the cards often reveal that someone is suf-
fering because of the “jealousy” of other persons. Jealousy is understood to be such a
strong emotion that the lives of its targets can be seriously disrupted. Within the
Vodou system the object of jealousy rarely escapes at least part of the burden of
blame. Such an attitude reflects a society in which it is expected that anyone who has
much should give much. Thus, a wealthy person is almost by definition thought to
Karen McCarthy Brown20
1403971625ts02.qxd  28-9-06  1:07 PM  Page 20


--- PAGE 36 ---
be stingy, and a very lucky person is suspected of having done “work with the left
hand.” A less serious but related diagnosis is that someone is suffering from “eyes.”
This mildly unsettling condition comes from the fact that too many people are pay-
ing attention to that individual. It may be that there is gossip circulating. With both
jealousy and eyes, as with several other diagnostic categories, the troubled relation-
ships are among the living. In such situations the spirits are called on for help, but
there is no sense in which they are seen as causing the problem.
Sorcery and Ethics
Disruptions in relations with the spirits cause serious problems, yet in many ways it
is an even more serious situation if, in the course of a “treatment,” it is discovered that
a person’s problems arise from the fact that another human being has done “work”
against them. The range of magical actions that fall under the category of “work” is
considerable. It may only be that a rejected lover has gone to the manbo or oungan for
a love charm, or it may be something more serious, such as an act of sorcery performed
by a vengeful neighbor.
For example, sorcery is frequently implicated when a diagnosis is made that a
woman has “fallen into perdition.” “Perdition” is a condition that befalls a pregnant
woman in which the child in her womb is “held” or “tied” to prevent it from grow-
ing. When a woman who has missed one or more menstrual periods and assumes her-
self to be pregnant experiences a discharge of blood, she suspects that she may have
“fallen into perdition.” In all pregnancies it is believed that the menstrual blood that
would ordinarily exit from the body each month is held in the womb where it serves
as nourishment for the child. In a state of perdition the nourishing blood bypasses the
fetus. The fetus, however, is not expelled but held inside the mother. Fetuses are
believed to be able to stay in a state of arrested growth for years until something is
done to “cut off” the perdition or “untie” the child. When that is accomplished the
monthly blood flow stops, and the child begins to do its “work” within the womb.
The infant born nine months later is the one who was conceived before the state of
perdition began. Falling into perdition can be caused by several things. It can be
caused if “cold” is allowed to enter the womb. It can be caused by restive lwa or ances-
tral spirits. However, work of the left hand, specifically sorcery, is the most frequent
diagnosis. All children, but especially the unborn, are said to be susceptible to being
“caught” by a work of sorcery directed against a family.
7
There is an underlying belief in what might be called an economy of energy in
Haitian attitudes toward sorcery or the work of the left hand. A rather flat-footed way
of articulating the content of this belief would be to say: nothing comes for free. For
example, there is a significant distinction made in the types of powers that a person
can call on for help in this life. There are first of all espri fami (family spirits), and then
there are pwe achte (literally, “points that have been purchased”). Most often residing
in some tangible object such as a stone or bottle (the “point”), these spirits are either
the souls of persons who died without family, ceremony, or burial, or they are the
free-floating spirits of another, often malevolent, sort.
Afro-Caribbean Spirituality 21
1403971625ts02.qxd  28-9-06  1:07 PM  Page 21


--- PAGE 37 ---
Serving family spirits entails obligations that may strain resources and energy;
however, the demands of family spirits theoretically never escalate beyond reason.
Within a given family the living and the spirits are interdependent in a way
that makes both parties exercise restraint. Powers that have been purchased are
another matter. While it is understood that they may be extremely effective, they
have neither history nor loyalty to curb their rapacious appetites. Consequently,
working with the left hand leads all too easily to an ascending spiral of obligations.
Stories are frequently told of manbo and oungan who turned to sorcery in a desperate
moment and then found it impossible to extricate themselves. First they lost
members of their family; finally they lost their own lives. This belief that a person
ultimately pays for what is gained through illegitimate means is one moral force
within Vodou that curbs the wanton practice of sorcery.
Another moral force is the belief that only in extreme circumstances may one use
sorcery to harm another, and only if one is absolutely just in doing so. For example,
there was a manbo who lost her home through the deception of a woman friend who
stole the title papers. The former friend actually went to court in an effort to claim
the house for herself. The manbo performed a very simple act of magic (there is a
widespread belief that the simplest ritual acts are the most powerful)
8 that involved
dropping a “point” or charm into a latrine. As a result of this, three people either fell
sick or died: the judge, the lawyer, and the erstwhile friend. When this incident was
discussed within the family, someone invariably noted that the manbo could do this
with no fear of reprisal from humans or spirits because she was so clearly in the right.
The house was hers.
Yet another belief that acts to curb destructive uses of spiritual power centers on
that part of Vodou associated with cemeteries. Although a version of this system oper-
ates within the cities, the pattern is clearest in the rural areas where cemeteries are still
family property. The first male to be buried in a cemetery is known as the Baron
Simityè, Baron of the Cemetery. When a wrong has been done to an individual or
family by someone from outside that group, a simple ritual performed in the cemetery
calls on Baron to send a mò, one of the souls of the dead, to avenge that wrong. The
Baron’s power can never be used, by definition, by one family member against another.
What complicates this discussion of morality and the uses of power within Vodou
is the fact that it is not always possible to keep the categories clear and distinct. What
is sorcery from one person’s perspective is no more than what was required for an
effective treatment from another’s point of view. For example, love magic may heal a
broken heart or soothe wounded pride, but it also necessarily involves the manipula-
tion of the will of another. Cemeteries in Haiti are littered with the evidence of this
common sort of “work.” Small male and female rag dolls bound face to face and
stood on their heads (inversion creates change) in a jar or drinking glass are evidence
of a work designed to bring about a reunion. The same dolls bound back to back
indicate that the dissolution of a troublesome relationship was the desired result. One
bound with its face to the back of the other is said to be in a position to “eat” the
other, that is, to take revenge. Such routine magic is within the repertoire of most
Vodou healers and does not involve trafficking with suspect or “purchased” spirits.
Understandably, most priests and priestesses claim to eschew the work of the left
hand. Equally understandably, rumors circulate that this one or that one “serves with
Karen McCarthy Brown22
1403971625ts02.qxd  28-9-06  1:07 PM  Page 22


--- PAGE 38 ---
both hands.” It is not unlikely that most sorcery rumors can be attributed to individ-
uals or groups in conflict wherein each party, knowing their own spirituality to be
rooted in family and tradition, can only assume that the practices of their enemies are
not so rooted.
Knowledge and Power
In the course of treating a troubled person, Vodou priests and priestesses call on a
variety of different types of knowledge and power. The word konesans (knowledge) is
used to refer to learned skills such as herbalism and divination as well as to what
might be called intuitive powers. The different degrees of initiation are seen as
increasing konesans. At least part of what is meant by this is sensitivity to a sense of
foreboding. The attuned person, the one with konesans, knows when to cancel a trip
or a business appointment. At a higher level of development it may be the gift of “see-
ing” what is wrong with people just by looking at them. (Although called seeing, one
manbo described its physical manifestation as a prickling in the scalp.) Many of the
most sought-after Vodou healers are said to have this gift.
In addition to their own developed talents, priests and priestesses also call on a
range of higher authorities in the healing process. Possession allows the healer access
to the awesome wisdom and power of the lwa, and in fact it is often one of the lwa
who prescribes the specifics of a cure. Quite detailed information about what should
be done to treat a particular case can also come in dreams. One manbo said that it is
usually her dead mother (a powerful manbo herself) appearing to her in dreams who
provides the solutions to her most difficult cases.
Dreams can also function in healing ways in the lives of ordinary devotees.
Dreams can give warnings about bad things to come, thus providing the means of
possibly avoiding sickness or anger, robbery or accident. Both the dead and the lwa
routinely appear in dreams to give warnings and advice. The spirits sometimes appear
in dreams in the same form as they are depicted on Vodou altars. Individual lwa have
been conflated with particular Catholic saints, and the inexpensive and popular chro-
molithographs of the saints have thus become the most common images of the spir-
its. However, it seems that even more frequently the lwa appear in dreams in disguise.
Each dreamer has his or her own code which must be applied to interpret the dream.
Often it is a friend who has a name or personal qualities reminiscent of the lwa’s who
comes to stand for that spirit in the dream world. Thus one manbo said: “Last night
I dreamed about Gerard. [Saint Gerard is the Catholic saint conflated with Gède, the
spirit of death.] Gerard asked me how my daughter was doing, if she was out of the
hospital yet. That is when I got scared for my daughter. I was afraid she might really
get sick because I know everytime I dream about Gerard, that’s Papa Gède.”
The care given by Vodou healers ranges from truly awesome displays of power to
tender solace. I know of one manbo who brought her severely depressed female client
into her home as part of the curing process. The woman had not spoken for nearly a
year following the loss of a child. This mute condition, well known in Haiti and
generally seen in young women, is considered especially difficult to treat. In the early
Afro-Caribbean Spirituality 23
1403971625ts02.qxd  28-9-06  1:07 PM  Page 23


--- PAGE 39 ---
stages of the treatment the manbo actually took the woman into her bed and held her
until she slept. Yet treatments can also involve humiliation (e.g., being sent to the
market to beg) and angry lectures from the spirits. In my experience, women healers
routinely use the full range of care, from the solacing to the jarring, that is possible
within the Vodou system. Male healers, by contrast, tend to remain authority figures
throughout the healing process.
From a more general perspective, the jarring or confrontational aspects of Vodou
healing are never separated from the overall context of familial care in which healing
takes place. In fact, to make the distinction is to miss the coherence of the system. An
image drawn from Haitian culture may make it easier to articulate this subtle point
about the tone or ambience of caring within Vodou. Haiti is a child-centered culture.
There are no events from which children are excluded. Yet the crying of infants and the
misbehavior of older children are not tolerated. Crying babies are grabbed and rather
roughly jostled into silence with unspoken messages that communicate at once the full
attention of the caretaker and that person’s unwillingness to tolerate the behavior. Older
children can be given a harsh reproof at one moment and then a quick hug and kiss soon
after. In a similar way traditional healers in Haiti can be possessed by an angry lwawith-
out having that anger shape their personal relationship to the person seeking the cure.
The Creole verb balanse (to balance) has a special significance in Vodou and in
healing within Vodou. When devotees take ritual objects off the altar they are instructed
to balanse, to swing the objects from side to side. This is thought to awaken or enliven
the objects and the spirits associated with them. The word can, however, be used in less
constructive contexts. For example, when death touches a family it is said to “balance
their house.” The sense that balance is a dynamic condition is revealing, as is the notion
that it comes out of opposition, whether that be the back-and-forth motion of the rit-
ual balanse or the harsher clash of death against life. Within the Vodou view of things
life is stirred up through opposition. This stirring and jarring, which can wound, is nev-
ertheless healing when the clash of opposites is wisely orchestrated by the Vodou healer.
One example of a specific problem and cure will illustrate the confrontational
dimension of Vodou healing. A young woman came to a manbo distraught, in fact
nearly hysterical, because her husband had left her. In one moment the woman said
she wanted her husband back; in the next she recounted a long history of his abuse.
Finally, with a shrug of impatience, the manbo said harshly: “Pran tèt ou!” (“Get
ahold of your head!”). Three ritual baths were prescribed to be administered, one
each week for the next three weeks. The first bath was made from warm milk in
which cinnamon sticks had been steeped. About four cups of the liquid were placed
in a small enamel basin and the woman was instructed to remove her clothes. Because
this was a good luck bath, the liquid was applied to the body from bottom to top,
starting at the feet and stroking upward. (The reverse would operate in a bath
designed to remove bad luck, a more serious condition.) The second bath was com-
posed of various liquors and perfumes. It was applied in a similar fashion, as was the
third and final glorious combination of champagne, roses, and perfume.
9 After each
treatment the woman was instructed to leave the infusion on her skin without
washing for three days. The first bath, she reported, made her smell of sour milk “like
a baby.” After it she took to her bed and cried for most of a week. She said that the
second bath, in which alcohol was the dominant ingredient, burned her eyes and
Karen McCarthy Brown24
1403971625ts02.qxd  28-9-06  1:07 PM  Page 24


--- PAGE 40 ---
genitals. The second ended the tears, but she was flooded with anger. She sought out
her former husband and screamed and yelled at him until the neighbors intervened.
She reported nothing remarkable from the third bath beyond the fact that she no
longer felt so unhappy. This sequence of baths took a woman’s ambivalence about the
man in her life and concretized it. The first and second baths shook loose contradictory
emotions; they jarred her into powerful and direct experiences of sadness and anger.
From the resulting dynamic “balance” came the possibility of the third bath, which
moved her beyond the extreme moods of the first two to a less precarious emotional
state, one in which she gradually was able to let go of the destructive relationship. These
baths, like so many of the Vodou treatments, can also be seen as a ritual regression, a
regression to infancy and then a movement back, or even as a ritual rebirth not entirely
unlike that which is accomplished through the initiation ceremonies.
Conclusion
“Moun fèt pou mouri,” people are born to die—the saying reveals the Haitian’s sense
that life is both short and painful. This verdict cannot change; it can only be
accepted. Yet in the midst of the struggle that is life it is possible to enhance one’s
chans (luck) and minimize the mizè (suffering). This is accomplished in two ways:
first, by respectful attention to the web of sustaining human relationships that defines
family, and second, through conscientious service to the spirits who are after all mem-
bers of one’s own extended family, even—from one perspective, at least—parts of
oneself. The spirits are served by the parent (fictive or actual) in the name of the fam-
ily. In order to serve the family well in this role, the priest or priestess must have
konesans: knowledge, intuition, insight into human and spiritual affairs. Such knowl-
edge is most often rooted in the oungan’s or manbo’s own experience of suffering. T o
kouche (lie down, sleep, give birth, die, and, specifically, to be initiated) is to take the
risk necessary to be healed oneself and through that process to enhance and focus
one’s power and knowledge in order to heal others. Once gained, konesans carries
with it a moral obligation that it be used justly and respectfully. Thus, the manbo or
oungan is one who knows how to eshofe, to raise the life energy in individuals and
groups, human and divine. Power thus mobilized can then be concentrated in pwe
(points) which are the concrete embodiments of relationships human and divine.
Problems properly articulated in the concrete can be healed. One can pick up the pwe
and balanse—turn the point upside down and bring about change that heals.
Notes
1. Claude Lévi-Strauss, chapter 1, “The Science of the Concrete,” in The Savage Mind
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1966), 1–33.
2. As will be seen below, there is a sense in which the dead continue to exist; however, none of
the living would consider this existence superior to his or her own. Thus immortality does
not function as a reward for sacrifices made in the present life.
Afro-Caribbean Spirituality 25
1403971625ts02.qxd  28-9-06  1:07 PM  Page 25


--- PAGE 41 ---
3. A partial qualification to this characterization exists in the large numbers of homosexual
priests who have genuine power and prestige within Vodou. This is somewhat surprising
given the extreme homophobia in Haitian culture. However, it is only a partial qualifica-
tion because many of these priests are more accurately described as bisexuals. They often
have traditional families.
4. See William Bascom, The Yoruba of Southwestern Nigeria (New York, 1969); also Melville
Herskovits, Dahomey: An Ancient West African Kingdom, 2 vols. (Evanston, IL: Northwestern
University Press, 1967).
5. Marriage to a Vodou spirit—a ritual complete with marriage license, an exchange of rings
(wherein the spirit is represented by his or her chwal), a wedding cake, and, on occasion,
champagne—is a ritual that does not demand that a person experience possession. It nev-
ertheless involves a life-long commitment to the spirit. One day a week is dedicated to the
spirit spouse. Special colors sacred to the lwa must be worn on that day, and the devotee
must sleep alone so that the spirit may appear in dreams.
6. “Taking the asson” as a path to gaining status as a priest or priestess is a ritual performed
mainly in the south of Haiti and in Port-au-Prince. In the northern part of the country
such status is conferred by virtue of family position or reputation as a healer. The initiation
rituals are costly for those who take the asson. It may be partly as a result of economic fac-
tors that individuals sometimes claim to have received priestly training in dreams, visions,
or periods of time spent “under the water.”
7. Gerald F . Murray, “Women in Perdition: Ritual Fertility Control in Haiti,” in Culture,
Natality and Family Planning, eds. John F . Marshall and Steven Polgar, 59–78 (Chapel Hill,
NC: University of North Carolina Press, 1976).
Murray points out that the socially useful part of this explanatory scheme is that, in pro-
viding the possibility of a pregnancy much longer than nine months, a woman can claim
the father of her child to be almost anyone with whom she has ever had sexual relations.
This in turn allows her to choose among fathers the one who is most likely to be able to give
meaningful support. Given the current social instability all over Haiti, finding men with
the means and temperament to be responsible fathers is one of the major problems faced by
women.
8. See Serge Larose, “The Meaning of Africa in Haitian Vodu,” in Symbols and Sentiments:
Cross-Cultural Studies in Symbolism , ed. Ioan Lewis, 85–116 (New York: Columbia
University Press, 1977).
9. The ingredients for Vodou treatments are paid for by the client. Fees for the healer beyond
the cost of materials are understood to be gifts, and theoretically it is up to the client to
decide how much he or she will offer. In practice, however, the range of what is appropri-
ate is usually well known to clients without their asking. It is worth noting that many of the
most sought-after healers are not prosperous persons. They adhere strictly to the tradition
that healing powers are not to be used for inordinate profit.
Karen McCarthy Brown26
1403971625ts02.qxd  28-9-06  1:07 PM  Page 26


--- PAGE 42 ---
Chapter 2
Vodou in Haiti: Way of Life and 
Mode of Survival
Claudine Michel
Si se pate bon Ginen sa-a,
nou tout ta peri deja . . .
If it were not for the Guinea lwa,
we would all have perished already
Ayibobo!!!
—Fleurant, Dancing Spirits, p. 155
This chapter originates in the movement of rediscovery and rehabilitation of religions
and modes of spirituality of indigenous peoples with a long history of subjugation
and whose beliefs have been dismissed continually as primitive if not downright evil.
Animism, fetishism, paganism, heathenism, and black magic are some of the terms
that have been used improperly in the West to describe the Haitian religion, which is
presented in the foreign press and the media as a religion of blood and sacrifice, as a
religion of sexual orgies and malevolence, thus resulting in the widely shared percep-
tion that the practice of Vodou equals sorcery and witchcraft.
1 This work is revision-
ist in that it recasts the values and principles inherent in the Vodou religion, in
particular its humanism and sense of communality, and emphasizes the complexities
behind the way these values are transmitted from one generation to the next in
Vodou communities. It also shows how this New World religion combines and
recombines the Africanisms from which it originates with its American and Creole
realities.
2
Vodou, presented in the West in opposition to true religion, does not, in effect
contrast with Western religions as much as the media would like us to believe. The
contrast is with the Christian churches and the established religions of the West, their
1403971625ts03.qxd  28-9-06  1:08 PM  Page 27


--- PAGE 43 ---
dogma, phenomenology, hierarchy, and monumental architecture. What is ironic is
that Haitians who are Vodou adepts perceive themselves as good Christians and see
no conflict between practicing Catholicism and being a member of a Vodou family
and community. These are two beliefs systems, two modes of functioning, two world-
views, which are separate yet interconnected by a common longing for the divine and
a never-ending search for a better life for followers and devotees.
A serious analysis of the Vodou religion as practiced in Haitian society and abroad
reveals that Vodou is a broadly encompassing worldview, a comprehensive system
that shapes the human experience of its adepts in their search for higher grounds and
purpose in life. Despite an apparent absence of a formal church and clergy, of written
dogma and other such publication or instructional material, the Vodou religion is
omnipresent, pervasive, strong, and performs key functions in all aspects of Haiti’s
social and political life. As such, the ancestral religion represents a key element of
Haitian consciousness and provides moral coherence through common cosmological
understandings.
Many of the monotheistic religions—Christianity, Islam, Judaism—are prescrip-
tive and accompanied by a book of law. From sacred texts, followers derive a corpus
of doctrines and extract general laws as measures of moral quality. Things are more
complex in Vodou, which offers few absolutes and generalities, only trends and the-
matic modalities of lived ethical life. However, the religious tenets of Vodou, though
not written in a sacred book, are not at all different from what is prescribed by the
Christian faith, Judaism, Shinto, Hinduism, or Buddhism, among other religions.
3
Like members of other persuasions, those who participate in Vodou life and rituals
believe in creating harmony, in keeping a balance, in cultivating virtues such as jus-
tice, beneficence, benevolence, patience, forgiveness, and cooperation, in respecting
elders, and instilling desirable values in children.
4
Vodou is not a system imposed from above; it is a democratic and functional reli-
gion, embedded in the vicissitudes of its followers’ daily existence, and in their strug-
gle for survival. In Vodou, as in African and other non-Western traditions, there is
complete unity of religion and life. Vodou is central to the Haitian experience and as
such cannot be abstracted from the day-to-day life of its followers. It is based on a
conception of reality that includes life’s goals, the forces that determine the fate of liv-
ing things, proper social organization, balanced interpersonal relations, and practices
that promote the welfare of the community of believers. Its devotees ask of it what
people have always asked of religions: a basis for daily living, remedy for ills, help in
times of hardships, satisfaction of needs, and hope. McCarthy Brown explains in her
book Mama Lola how Vodou is a “repository for wisdom accumulated by a people
who have lived through slavery, hunger, disease, repression, corruption, and violence—
all in excess.”
5 She further comments about Vodou’s functional attributes: “Vodou is
the system that they [Haitians] have devised to deal with the suffering that is life, a
system whose purpose is to minimize pain, avoid disaster, cushion loss, and
strengthen survivors and survival instincts.”
6
Above all, the Haitian religion is a practical faith whose primary concern is the
well-being of individuals and the welfare of the group. People turn to the spirits and
their ancestors to secure a better life for themselves and their community—that is, to
assure the survival of the self and of the group in this lifetime. Unlike other religions,
Claudine Michel28
1403971625ts03.qxd  28-9-06  1:08 PM  Page 28


--- PAGE 44 ---
Vodou does not have a concept of Eden or Heaven. Therefore, survival in this life-
time and healing for immediate well-being become an ongoing process that engages
Vodou adepts throughout their life and turns into the primary goal of their existence.
Vodou as a Religious/Philosophical Persuasion
Writing about Vodou7 and morality or Vodou as a form of humanism may appear
paradoxical when Voodoo8 suggests distorted images of superstitions, sorcery, blood
sacrifices and sexual orgies. Scholars such as Hurbon, Laguerre, Bellegarde-Smith,
Desmangles, Montilus, Fleurant, and others such as Thompson, Deren, Courlander,
or McCarthy Brown, for example, have attempted to penetrate Vodou’s true meaning
and recast the real significance of the religion. Using new epistemological founda-
tions and methodological approaches, their work aims at reconstructing and rehabil-
itating the essence of the Vodou religion, which in turn sheds light on those core
traditional values sustaining Haitian social and political institutions.
Vodou is the harmonious fusion of beliefs and rituals of West African origin,
which, having incorporated some Catholic practices, has come to be the religion of
the greater part of the peasants and the urban proletariat of the Republic of Haiti.
These are joined by members of the Haitian elite and some foreign nationals.
Courlander writes, “In short, it is a true religion which attempts to tie the unknown
to the known and establish order where there might otherwise be chaos. For those
who believe in Vodoun, no event or episode is a thing in itself. In birth and death,
good fortunes and bad, the Lwa
9 are somehow involved.” 10 Bellegarde-Smith’s
encompassing definition of Vodou11 sheds light on the true meaning of the religion.
He explains,
Vodun is a coherent and comprehensive system and worldview in which every person
and everything is sacred and must be treated accordingly. In Vodun, everything in the
world—be it plant, animal, or mineral—shares basically similar chemical, physical,
and/or genetic properties. This unity of all things translates into an overarching belief
in the sanctity of life, not so much for the thing as for the spirit of the thing. The cos-
mological unity in Vodun further translates into a vaunted African humanism in which
social institutions are elaborated and in which the living, the dead, and the unborn play
equally significant roles in an unbroken historical chain. Thus, all action, speech, and
behavior achieve paramount significance for the individual and the community of
which the individual is part.
Davis offers yet another useful definition, which again embodies the complex
interconnections between the scared and the mortal while also capturing the day-to-
day, functional aspects of the religion that regulate chaotic actions as well as moral
and ethical conduct in Haitian society.
12 He views Vodou as
a complex mystical world view, a system of beliefs concerning the relationship between
man, nature, and the supernatural forces of the universe. Vodoun cannot be abstracted
from the day to day life of the believers. In Haiti, as in Africa, there is no separation
Vodou in Haiti 29
1403971625ts03.qxd  28-9-06  1:08 PM  Page 29


--- PAGE 45 ---
between the sacred and the secular, between the holy and the profane, between material
and the spiritual. Every dance, every song, every action is but a particle of the
whole...V odoun not only embodies a set of spiritual concepts, it prescribes a way of
life, a philosophy, and a code of ethics that regulate social behavior.13
The followers of the ancestral cult refer to their religious beliefs and practices by the
phrase sèvi lwa yo—which can be best translated as “serving the spirits.”14 An adept of
Vodou simply says, “I serve the spirits,” which in itself is a revealing statement about
the nature of the religion, the importance of withdrawing the self and serving others,
and about the spiritual connections existing between living human beings, their
ancestors, and their Gods. Also, an understanding and knowledge of African religions
and philosophy allows one to read even more into such a phrase: it clearly connects
this religion of the New World to the African Ethos and Worldview. Harold
Courlander’s compelling commentary further exemplifies Vodou’s African connec-
tion, resilience, and pervasiveness:
Vodou permeates the land, and, in a sense, it springs from the land. It is not a system
imposed from above, but one which pushes out from below. It is a thing of the family,
a rich and complex inheritance from a man’s own ancestors. It is not the priests of
Vodoun who control and direct its course. They, like the lowest peasant simply
move about within it and make use of its resources. Vodou is strong and it cannot die
easily....Y o u  cannot destroy something with such deep genuine roots. You may warp
it, twist it, make it crawl along the ground instead of growing upright, but you cannot
kill it...  [especially] in light of the inner history of the race.
15
For Haitians, religion is life. Vodou permeates all aspects of their existence from
the highest forms of interactions with the divine to the most mundane and profane
matters. Vodouists bring their African/Creole spirits, their Lwa into all affairs and
consistently seek their influence. As Bellegarde-Smith explains, the Lwa “represent
the cosmic forces that are integral to the Haitian experience and yet transcend it.” 16
On a daily basis, the religious life of those who serve the spirits (sèvi Lwa yo) revolves
around a form of collective self-consciousness guided by their Lwa and the following
African-derived principles: holistic conception of life, human-centered orientation,
centrality of the community, honor and respect for elders, beneficence, forbearance,
forgiveness, and sense of justice, all manifestations of a new Creolized African
humanism. Robert Farris Thompson was indeed correct when he wrote that “vodun
was Africa reblended.”
17
Humanism in Haitian Vodou
All knowledge presupposes a fundamental holism grounded in the idea of oneness
and unity of all forces of nature, in the idea of interdependence and interconnectedness
of these forces, and in the premise of supremacy of totality over individuality. The
universe is a seamless cosmos where every force of nature has meaning and a connection
Claudine Michel30
1403971625ts03.qxd  28-9-06  1:08 PM  Page 30


--- PAGE 46 ---
with other entities. Creating dissonance in nature’s polyrhythms, disturbing the
harmonious flow of things, and bringing about division in the community are all acts
that represent moral transgression in the Vodou world. Due to the web of intercon-
nectedness, a person’s moral violations distract, disturb, and perturb the outer world
that ought to seek restoration of its harmonious state and rhythm. Morality for those
who serve the spirits is a constant effort to maintain social cohesion, harmony, and
balance. What is “right” in the Vodou world is not a function of abstract reasoning,
but is relative to what will achieve unity.
Human beings occupy a central cosmic position in Haitian spirituality that is
anthropocentric as well as humanist. Though people are not the “rulers” of creation,
they are at the center of it, which explains why Vodou’s paramount goal is to improve
living conditions on earth. The veneration of deities is purposeful and serves humans
through blessings extending from good health and well-being to marriage and love,
to work and finances, to rain and plentiful harvest, and to children who grow up to
be respectful of people and traditions. Human connection is the assumption in
the Haitian worldview: there is suppression of unique life history in favor of a
collective personhood from which energy is derived. Individuals become real only
through interactions, and “it is precisely in responsive and responsible relation to
others that one has the clearest and most steady sense of self.”
18
The paradigm “we are, therefore I am”19 expresses well the “societary” essence of the
Haitian community. It shows the ties that link members of the same community as
part of the human web. We are not only accountable for our individual acts, but
we are also responsible for people around us in that each of our actions and deeds
influences the balance of the outer world. There are major communal expectations in
the Vodou world and the extended family is the first unit where this communal sense
manifests itself. It is a highly valued institution that prepares the individual for
integration into the larger community. Ignoring family responsibilities, jeopardizing
communal interests, and neglecting the Lwa are serious moral offenses that trigger
the disapproval of the group and may endanger the care and protection of the spirits.
Morality in the absolute sense can never be placed above the welfare of the collectivity.
Customs and implicit rules regulate obligations and responsibilities toward the
collectivity and the entities that compose it. Allegiance, love, prayers, faithfulness,
respect, material support, as determined by seniority, status, and financial means, are
due to all members of the group under all circumstances. However, extreme respect
and honor are particularly accorded to the elders, the bearers of knowledge and
wisdom, the repository of experience. Respecting them, honoring them, and serving
them is inherent in the very essence of the religion. T o be virtuous is not only to
provide for the elderly, to give them care, food, money, clothing, but also to show
them love, respect, deference, and appreciation. Failure to give absolute respect to
elders may attract imbalance in the life of the person who has departed from the
traditional values of the society, bring about “bad luck” for her or his family and is
morally destructive for the entire community.
Though morality in the Vodou world is fluid, dynamic, and always contextual
as life itself, many other virtues are also valued for their potential to help develop
knowledge and wisdom among adepts of the Haitian religion and to support one
Vodou in Haiti 31
1403971625ts03.qxd  28-9-06  1:08 PM  Page 31


--- PAGE 47 ---
another. Among these traits are beneficence, forbearance, forgiveness, and a sense of
justice, described here using the model of “virtue theory” elaborated by Peter Paris in
his book The Spirituality of African Peoples .
20 He states, “Synonyms for beneficence
are many. They include hospitality, generosity, liberality, benevolence, magnanimity,
love. The beneficent person is a person of good will, one who joyfully extends hospi-
tality to all alike.”
21 About forbearance, Paris writes, “Because it helps people to
survive dehumanizing conditions, forbearance can be one of the most effective means
for preserving and promoting the goal of the community...A ctivities that serve the
pragmatic goal of survival are often the habits necessary for developing the virtue of
forbearance.”
22 He comments in regard to forgiveness, “African peoples seem to
exhibit such little racial hatred in return for the misery that they were forced to
endure. Even during the most intense periods of resistance to slavery, segregation,
colonialism, [or] apartheid, they have rarely been consumed by the spirit of hatred.”
23
On the final trait, justice, Paris remarks that “it is the supreme virtue because it is the
sum of all virtues...A s  with all virtues, African understandings of justice are regu-
lated by the demands of their ultimate goal, namely, the preservation and promotion
of community.”
24
The first section of this chapter shed light on the Vodou worldview and the moral
principles embedded in the religion. In a work studying the persistence of African
religions in the Americas, Barrett comments, “The slave master was able to claim the
body of the slave, but the worldview of the African was nurtured in his soul and this
soul was impregnable.”
25 He explains how religion was the motivating and unifying
force for the many different ethnic groups who found themselves in the New World26
and acknowledges Vodou’s “noble history” as a catalyst for the revolutionary accom-
plishments for which Haiti is known.
27 It is well documented that through their tra-
ditional religion and its worldview, Haitians survived oppression, found modes of
expressions, and re-created a modified African society and ethos, which have to some
extent Africanized the American continent. In what follows, the manners in which
these values are communicated will be discussed.
Teaching through Words and 
Images, Action and Deeds
In Western societies, people write and read books to learn about past experiences and
remember their ancestors. Those who serve the spirits are part of a world that appre-
hend historical, social, and religious experiences in a holistic manner, which then
takes form in a lively and meaningful fashion, via “oral performance” through family
memories, tales, metaphoric images, proverbs, songs, prayers, and various other spir-
itual and artistic expressions that represent an extremely rich repertory of practical
wisdom. Liveliness, relevance, and functionality take precedence over truthfulness,
clarity, and objectivity as paramount virtues.
Especially because 80 percent of the population cannot read, Haiti’s rich
oral/social performance tradition remains strong and ultimately necessary as a con-
veyor of the Haitian worldview and values. The indigenous tales, stories, proverbs,
Claudine Michel32
1403971625ts03.qxd  28-9-06  1:08 PM  Page 32


--- PAGE 48 ---
sayings, songs, and prayers acquire livelihood, as it is the case in all African traditions,
because they have a purpose and a meaning. What counts is not the songs, tales, or
words themselves, but it is their significance and relevancy to people’s lives and
immediate well-being.
However, despite the apparent importance of words and the oral medium for
value transmission in Haitian society, the spoken language has very little meaning
and practically no influence in itself; images, metaphors, contradictions, irony,
humor, and tone are what give life and significance to the message behind the words.
The “exercise of the art,” that is, the oral performance—how things are said, by whom,
to whom, under which circumstances, for what purpose—“actualizes” the words and
gives them life. The following passage of Karen McCarthy Brown further exemplifies
this notion of “words in action”:
Vodou is not a religion of words. Its wisdom does not lend itself to doctrinal formulation
in which the truths remain the same no matter who speaks them or when or where they
are spoken. The closest things there is in Vodou to theological discourse resides in the
songs, songs which have a cryptic tricksterism to them that makes for double-, triple- and
quadruple entendre. Not infrequently the various meanings are conflicting and contra-
dictory. In the Vodou ceremonies in which these songs are sung, it is the energy of the
drumming that creates a dynamic balance among the paradoxes contained in the
words.
28
In Vodou, like in other religious and secular popular manifestations found in
other areas of the world, the concept of “art for art’s sake” does not exist. Each word,
each object has a function—often a liberating function, one that channels energy and
empowers people against oppressive systems.
In the same fashion that wordsacquire meaning through action, deedsaccompanied
by words, songs, and music become more inclusive, more encompassing, and turn
into a compelling creative production that exerts a strong educational influence.
Typically, instructional strategies in Vodou involve the use of both words “acted out”
and cultural elements and values that find expression in spoken language, body
language, rituals, dramatizing, singing, and music. A person gives life to what is being
acted upon and cosmic energy is derived through usage and practice. Thus, Vodou
adepts are taught that a proverb, a song, a musical rhythm take life only when said,
recited, or cadenced in the movement of the dance. Gerdès Fleurant may well have
summarized this whole notion when he writes that “Vodoun...i s  a  danced religion.”
29
As a result, a rich tradition of teaching and learning has developed in Haiti,
encompassing uses of symbols, rituals, ceremonies, proverbs, wise sayings,
memorizing, apprenticeship, storytelling, observation, practicing, singing, dramatiz-
ing, and sometimes writing.
30 All these activities are both acts of learning and instruc-
tional strategies since, as Maya Deren observed, Haitians have neither the time, the
energy, nor the means for inconsequential activity. She remarks that in Haiti
“[religion] must do more than give moral sustenance;...must do more than provide
a reason for living, it must provide the means for living. It must serve the organism as
well as the psyche. It must serve as practical methodology, not as individual hope.
In consequence, the Haitian thinks of his religion in working terms.”
31 As
Vodou in Haiti 33
1403971625ts03.qxd  28-9-06  1:08 PM  Page 33


--- PAGE 49 ---
Leslie Desmangles stated,
Vodouisants cannot afford the self-surrender of mysticism, nor can they permit
themselves the luxury of an idealism that seeks to mask the miseries and frustrations of
their existence. Their needs are too immediate for that. Their religion must satisfy
actual needs rather than merely invite them to high-flown intellectual exercises of
theology.
32
Philosophizing, discoursing, or praying with no intended purpose are not strategies
typically used in Haiti’s ancestral religion. The various forms of ritualizing and rituals
all have a function. Vodou services represent an opportunity for the deities to share in
the life of the Vodou family and are always collective healing ceremonies. Fleurant
relates how the Vodou drummer TiBe explains moun chofe, that is, people get heated
up, “the community warms up and becomes whole.” Fleurant continues to describe
this moment of liberation for souls and bodies—this true moment of freedom
through communion of the devotees with their Lwa Ginen. He writes,
Thus, the dialogue of drummers, dancers, and singers, through the kase and vire, 33
permits the participants to meet the spirits in possession, a state that liberates the soul
and brings the community together in an eternal dance of freedom. And the people,
remembering old, old things, sing and dance in unison: “Si se pate bon Ginen sa-a, nou
tout ta peri deja” or, “if it were not for the Guinea lwa, we would all have perished
already.” Ayibobo!!!
34
The living enter in communication with the spirits and their ancestors to get
advice on matters of importance for the members of the group and to seek assistance
in all practical matters of life. In return for promised luck and protection for the family
and its land, small tangible gifts of food or other sacrifices are offered to the Lwa in
support and appreciation. These offerings strengthen the relationship between the
living and the dead and allow the spirits to exert their cosmic power partaking of
the very realm of human existence. In this respect, the down-to-earth names given to
some of the ceremonies are quite revealing: “ manje les anges [ritual feeding of the
spirits/the Lwa],” “manje marasa [ritual feeding of the spirit of the twins],” “ manje
pov [ritual feeding of the poor].”
In Vodou, a person is meant to derive energy from interactions with others, therefore,
all encounters with nature, with fellow humans, and with the spirits create opportu-
nities for understanding, for growth, and for healing. Considering that everything
has a soul, from the smallest grain of sand to the Cosmic Being, the dynamic force
infused in the teaching and the learning of all tasks and ideas, material and spiritual,
becomes a learning experience in itself. In Vodou, every dance, every song is a prayer;
every word and every act becomes a lesson. In other words, one learns everywhere and
at all times. More than actual “moral” principles, what is communicated inside and
outside Vodou families is a worldview,
35 a particular sensitivity and perspective on
life—the Vodou ethos—and various modes of survival to face the numerous oppressive
situations that have become a way of life for Haitians.
This chapter would have fulfilled two primary functions by aiming at the following
(1) providing knowledge about the nature of the Haitian religion, which is a religion
à part entière and about how Vodou is, in effect, a means of survival for the Haitian
Claudine Michel34
1403971625ts03.qxd  28-9-06  1:08 PM  Page 34


--- PAGE 50 ---
people; and (2) emphasizing the need to understand both the Africanisms from
which Haitian Vodou derives and its new Creole realities. The Vodou religion is in
constant dynamic evolution, unremittingly creating and re-creating an internal
modus operandi, blending African/Creole/Haitian elements and responding to the
ever-evolving needs of its devotees. It is important to understand, as Jacob Olupona
wrote about African traditional religions, that Vodou is not “just a house of cards that
collapsed at the instance of change, but that it has the potential to adapt to change on
its own, in response to changes taking place around it.”
36
Notes
1. The similarities between the following two definitions show that misrepresentation and
misinformation about the Haitian religion have not changed in thirty years. “A body of
primitive rites and practices, based on a belief in sorcery and the power of charms fetishes,
etc., found among natives of the West Indies and in the southern United States, and ulti-
mately of African origin,” (Webster’s New World Dictionary, 1964). “A primitive religion of
West African origin, found among Haitian and West Indian Negroes and the Negroes of
the southern United States, characterized by belief in sorcery and the use of charms,
fetishes, witchcraft” ( New Illustrated Webster’s Dictionary of the English Language , 1993).
Books such as The Magic Island (New York: Harcourt Brace, 1929) and others have been
reprinted and continue to shape the general public perception about Vodou. Also, let’s note
the deleterious influence of a plethora of films made for American consumption such as
Angel Heart or the Hollywood version of The Serpent and the Rainbow.
2. Charles H. Long, personal communication, Santa Barbara, CA, August 1996.
3. See Huston Smith, World’s Religions (New York: Harper San Francisco, 1994); David
Chidester, Patterns of Action: Religion and Ethics in a Comparative Perspective (California:
Wadsworth, 1987); R. Murray Thomas, ed., Oriental Theories of Human Development:
Scriptural and Popular Beliefs from Hinduism, Buddhism, Confucianism, Shinto and Islam
(New York: Peter Lang, 1988).
4. See Claudine Michel, “Tapping the Wisdom of the Ancestors: An Attempt to Recast Vodou
and Morality through the Voice of Mama Lola and Karen McCarthy Brown,” Research
Report No. 27, William Monroe T rotter Institute, University of Massachusetts, Boston,
1996; “Women’s Moral and Spiritual Leadership in Haitian Vodou: The Voice of Mama
Lola and Karen McCarthy Brown,” Journal of Feminist Studies in Religion 17, no. 2 (Fall
2001): 61–87.
5. Karen McCarthy Brown, Mama Lola. A Vodou Priestess in Brooklyn(Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1991), 98.
6. Ibid., 10.
7. Vodou is still the most commonly used spelling by those who write on the Haitian religion
though, increasingly, the more correct spelling Vodun is being introduced in scholarly pub-
lications. The word is believed to derive from two West African words, Vo and du, which
mean, according to some, introspection into the unknown, and to others, a form of rever-
ence toward the supreme being. Some spell it Vodoun instead of Vodun. Vaudou is still used
but mostly in France as Haitians tend to prefer Vodou.
8. In the United States, the word Voodoois used in a casual and derogatory manner to indicate
on the one hand anything from the deceptive to the downright evil (as discussed earlier)
and on the other hand anything magical or miraculous (this use of the term is recent).
Examples include Voodoo economics, Voodoo politics, Voodoo Mac.
Vodou in Haiti 35
1403971625ts03.qxd  28-9-06  1:08 PM  Page 35


--- PAGE 51 ---
9. Lwa or Loa(s) are the Vodou spirits of the Haitian pantheon. They serve as intermediaries
between the ultimate God, Bondye, and the humans. Each Lwa is an archetype of a moral
principle that he or she represents. Among the Lwa/spirits most frequently “served” and
invoked in ceremonies are the following: Dambala, supreme, oldest, most respected, rep-
resented by a snake; Aida Wedo, his wife; Legba, the spirit of the crossroads who must be
invoked to “open the gate” for the other Lwa; Ogou who does not tolerate injustice, but
who can be mean at times; Erzili, representing sexuality, lesbianism, motherhood; Azaka,
the peasant, the worker, the one who controls money; Baron Samedi and Gran Brigit,
guardians of the cemeteries; Gede, the spirit of death and sexuality.
10. Harold Courlander, The Drum and the Hoe (Berkeley: University of California Press,
1973), 12.
11. Patrick Bellegarde-Smith, The Breached Citadel (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1990), 13.
12. Though Wade Davis’s work offers at times valuable insights into the religion, his work is
considered controversial in a number of ways. Some wonder why he allowed Hollywood
to make the film The Serpent and the Rainbow, which is such a poor rendition of his book
The Serpent and the Rainbow (New York: Warner Books, 1985). Also, Passage of Darkness:
The Ethnobiology of a Haitian Zombie , raises questions—at least for some—about meth-
ods of data collection and the revelation of such shielded material to the general public.
13. Davis, Serpent and the Rainbow , 72–73.
14. Haitians do not say that they are Vodouists or that they follow or practice Vodou, they use
the Creole phrase “sèvi lwa,” which means to “serve the spirits.”
15. Courlander, Drum and the Hoe, 7.
16. Bellegarde-Smith, Breached Citadel, 22.
17. Robert Farris Thompson, Flash of the Spirit, African & Afro-American Art & Philosophy
(New York: Vintage Books, 1983), 164.
18. Karen McCarthy Brown, “Alourdes: A Case Study of Moral Leadership in Haitian
Vodou,” in Saints and Virtues, ed. J. S. Hawley, 162 (Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1987).
19. John Mbiti, African Religions and Philosophy (Nairobi, Kenya: East African Educational
Publishers, 1969; repr., 1992); Introduction to African Religion, 2nd ed. (Nairobi, Kenya:
East African Educational Publishers, 1992).
20. Peter J. Paris, The Spirituality of African Peoples: The Search for a Common Moral Discourse
(Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 1995). Specifically, his model of “virtue theory” can be
found on 130–156.
21. Ibid., 138.
22. Ibid., 141.
23. Ibid., 148.
24. Ibid., 152–153.
25. L. Barrett, “African Religions in The Americas: The ‘Islands in Between’,” in African
Religions. A Symposium, ed. N. S. Booth, 184 (New York: Nok Publishers, 1977).
26. It is reported that in Haiti alone over a hundred different ethnic groups found themselves
on the island and were able to unite only through the African re-created religion, Vodou,
which somewhat compensated for their losses (family, clan, land) and brought them closer
to Guinea—a word that in Haiti is used until today to refer to Africa in general, to a
paradisical vision of Africa that one finds, for instance, in many Haitian paintings, and to
what they see as the positive side of Vodou, the work done with the “right hand” (as
opposed to the work done with the “left hand,” the more destructive aspect of Vodou).
Vodouists will often say “ mwen sèvi Ginen” or “Ginen yo,” which roughly translates as I
serve the spirits, the Lwa from Guinea, Africa’s good deities.
Claudine Michel36
1403971625ts03.qxd  28-9-06  1:08 PM  Page 36


--- PAGE 52 ---
27. Barrett, “African Religions in The Americas,” 198.
28. Karen McCarthy Brown, “Plenty Confidence in Myself: The Initiation of a White
Woman Scholar into Haitian Vodou,” Journal of Feminist Studies in Religion , 3, no. 1
(Spring 1987): 74.
29. Gerdès Fleurant, Dancing Spirits: Rhythms and Rituals of Haitian Vodun, the Rada Rite
(Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1996), 10.
30. See Elleni T elda, “Indigenous African Education as a Means for Understanding the
Fullness of Life: Amara T raditional Education,” Journal of Black Studies 23, no. 1 (Fall
1992): 7.
31. Maya Deren, quoted in Leslie Desmangles, The Faces of the God. Vodou and Catholicism in
Haiti (Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press, 1992), 5.
32. Ibid., 5.
33. Kase in Yanvalou—a most important Vodou dance—means to bend one’s knees, to bend
one’s back as opposed to dancing upright. Vire is a Creole term, which means to turn
around.
34. Fleurant, Dancing Spirits, 155.
35. Claudine Michel, Aspects Moraux et Educatifs du Vodou Haïtien(Port-au-Prince, Haiti: Le
Natal, 1995).
36. Jacob Olupona, “Major Issues in the Study of African T raditional Religion,” in African
Traditional Religions in Contemporary Society , ed. Jacob Olupona, 32 (St. Paul, MN:
Paragon House, 1991), 32.
Vodou in Haiti 37
1403971625ts03.qxd  28-9-06  1:08 PM  Page 37


--- PAGE 53 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 54 ---
Chapter 3
African Interpretations of the
Christian Cross in Vodou
Leslie Gerald Desmangles
The contact between Dahomean religions and European Catholicism in Haiti during the
colonial period (1492–1804) resulted in a system of correspondences between these two
religions. Such correspondences can be seen in Vodun not only in the reinterpretation of
many Catholic saints but also in the reinterpretation of the Christian cross. Contrary to the
opinions of many scholars who claim that the use of the Christian cross in Vodun cere-
monies is Christian in character, this article points out that Vodunists do not interpret the
symbol of the cross in the context of Christian theology, but in the context of Dahomean
mythology.
Scholars who have written about Vodou, the folk-religion of Haiti, have called it a
syncretism, that is, an amalgam of various religious traditions (Price-Mars 1928;
Jahn 1961; Herskovits 1971). These traditions permeate the folk-beliefs and ritual
dances of the peasant masses of Haiti. The religious amalgam originated with the
arrival in the New World of slaves from West Africa as early as 1510.
In reading Moreau de Saint-Méry (Saint Méry 1797, vol. I:45–58), an eyewitness
of the slave trade, one finds an impressive list of the slaves and the descriptions of the
character of the tribes represented on Haitian soil. One might deduce from this list
that all of Africa contributed to the formation of Vodou. However, from other writ-
ings of the slave period, it is quite clear that the region of the Gold Coast, particularly
that of Dahomey, was the main provider of slaves. It is in this connection that Jaheinz
Jahn, paraphrasing from a portion of The Reports for Consideration of all Matters
Relating to Trade and Foreign Plantationswrites:
The reason why it was the religious conceptions of Dahomey in particular that came to
prevail in Haiti is apparent from a London report which tells us that ten to twelve thou-
sand slaves were exported yearly from the kingdom of Dahomey. The English exported
1403971625ts04.qxd  28-9-06  1:08 PM  Page 39


--- PAGE 55 ---
only seven to eight hundred of these, the Portuguese about three thousand and the
French the remainder, in other words more than six to eight thousand a year, who were
shipped to the French Antilles, above all to Saint-Domingue, as the principal French
colony of Haiti was then called. (Jahn 1961, 29–30)
Jahn’s thesis of the Dahomean influence in Haiti is reinforced by the following
facts. The first is linguistic in nature. Many of the words in the religious vocabulary
of Vodou are Dahomean and have remained uncontaminated by plantation life. T o
cite only a few, Rada, a word which designates one of the Vodou pantheons, is a con-
traction of Arada (or Alladah), the name of a Dahomean city. This pantheon includes
such loas (Vodou deities) as Legba, Damballah Whydah, Aida Whydah, Agwê, Sogbo
and Aizan, all of whom are deities of the sky pantheon in Dahomey. The
word Dahomey itself figures in the name of such Rada loas of fertility as Ezuli Fréda
Dahomey, where Fréda is probably a corruption of the word Whydah, an important
Dahomean seaport.
The word Vodou in both Dahomey and Haiti means the “company” or the “fam-
ily” of the gods. Furthermore, the source of the root hun-, which figures in the Vodou
terms houngan (Vodou Priest), hounsi (initiate), and hounfort (temple) is clear, for in
Dahomey it is synonymous with vodou. The origin of houngan and hounsi are perhaps
less clear than hounfort, for in Dahomey -gan in houngan means “priest” or “chief of
spirits” and -si in hounsi means “wife,” employed in the sense of the “wife of the deity”
or again a devotee. Thus, Haitian Vodou as a religion concerns itself with establish-
ing communication between the loas and their devotees.
The second fact which confirms the influence of Dahomean religion on Vodou is
a theological one. In Haiti, as in Dahomey, the deified ancestors are arranged in fam-
ilies. Much like Dahomeans, Haitians believe that when ceremonies are held in honor
of these ancestors, celebrants who experience spirit possession are the descendents of
those ancestors. Spirit possessions, as well as the complex ritual details which
accompany them, are also Dahomean in nature. For example, the drum rhythms and
musical instruments used to incite possessions, the counterclockwise direction of the
dances, the individual modes of behavior of persons possessed, are similar to those of
Dahomey.
If so much of Dahomean religion has been retained in Vodou, it is because a large
majority of slaves during the colonial period came from Dahomey. Although no one
is sure exactly of how many Dahomeans came to Haiti, the fact is that their religious
traditions dominated over those coming from other parts of Africa. Yet, as these slaves
accustomed themselves to their new environment, the religious traditions which they
brought with them came into contact with European Catholicism through the work
of many French missionaries. These missionaries came to the colony with a sincere
faith and pressing desire to reenact the miracle at Pentecost and to reach all men
regardless of their race. For in Christ, there was to be no “Jew nor Greek, neither slave
nor free.” Filled with the unquestionable devotion to evangelize the world, the
colonial church set in motion a number of events which were to leave their imprint
on Haitian culture. Slaves were not allowed to hold religious meetings; the beating of
the drums, and the religious and magical practices connected with Africa were made
crimes. Offenders were tortured and often punished by death. The severity of such
Leslie G. Desmangles40
1403971625ts04.qxd  28-9-06  1:08 PM  Page 40


--- PAGE 56 ---
laws as the 1685 Code Noir (Cabon 1930, 33ff), which ordered all masters to have
their slaves instructed and baptized “in the Catholic religion, apostolic and Roman”
within eight days after their arrival, drove African rituals underground, and resulted
in the nocturnal character of Vodou, a character which still persists today.
The hostility of the Roman clergy towards Vodou, coupled with the conviction
that they had to respond to the Gospel call to evangelize the world, caused the slaves
to overlay their African religious rites with a veneer of Roman Catholic rituals and
symbols. In the contact between Africa and Europe which occurred on Haitian soil,
and under the weight of the oppressive conditions of slavery, a process of accultura-
tion began to take place. In responding to culture contact, the African slaves
succeeded in achieving, contrary to the expectations of the European missionaries,
what scholars have termed a syncretism, a merging of African patterns with the
European religious traditions.
This religious syncretism developed into a system of correspondences between the
largely Dahomean elements and Roman Catholicism of Europe. Such correspon-
dences can be seen in several ways. First, the names of the saints were added to the
already established African pantheons of deities. Such correspondences were not
based upon the life of the saints, but upon certain symbolic accoutrements associated
with them which corresponded to those found in the myths about the African deities.
Thus, for example, the trickster deity Legba, who in Dahomean mythology is said to
guard the crossroads of destiny and the entrances to the temples, becomes St. Peter
because in Christian symbology St. Peter holds the key to the doors of heaven.
Damballah, the Dahomean snake deity, becomes St. Patrick because of the Catholic
legend about St. Patrick and the snakes in Ireland. Second, the correspondence
between African practices and Catholicism can be seen in the hierarchical organiza-
tion of the hounfort, where the behavior of the prêt’ savanne (bushpriest) behavior
corresponds to that of the Catholic priest in the Catholic ritual. The prêt’ savanne is
not the Vodou priest. His role is largely perfunctory in the hounfort. He brings to the
Vodou rituals elements of the Catholic liturgy by baptizing persons, by blessing rit-
ual paraphernalia, and by reciting prayers of the church whenever these are needed.
The prêt’ savanne is often an acolyte in the Catholic Church, one who has learned
enough of the liturgy to become a symbol of the church in all Vodou meetings. In
short, Vodouists see the prêt’ savanneas a tangential figure, one who touches both the
Roman Catholic Church and Vodou but is of central importance to neither. He is the
symbol of the religious correspondence between the two religious systems.
Third, the system of correspondence between African and Catholic traditions can
be seen in the use of Catholic objects such as the rosary, the chromolithographs of
saints, and particularly the Christian cross. In Haiti, it is not at all unusual to find on
the same pé (Vodou altar) Vodou ritual paraphernalia next to these Catholic objects.
However, the juxtaposition of these objects should not lead anyone to think that
Vodouists’ use of these Catholic objects resembles those prescribed by the church.
Just as the saints lose the personalities ascribed to them by Christian hagiology to
acquire those of Dahomean deities, so too the symbolism of these objects takes on
Dahomean characteristics. The Vodouists used them primarily as gardes (magical
charms) to protect them against malevolent magic. Vodouists say that since these
objects have been blessed by the Catholic priest, who is the direct representative of
African Interpretations of Christian Vodou Cross 41
1403971625ts04.qxd  28-9-06  1:08 PM  Page 41


--- PAGE 57 ---
God, the ruler of the universe and head of all the pantheons of loas, these objects
contain a great deal more power than those Vodou objects initiated simply to the
“service” of the loas. The most significant of these objects is the crucifix. Although
crucifixes appear on every pé, their uses in the Vodou rituals have little to do with
Christian iconology, but are interpreted in terms of Dahomean mythology. The cross
is the most important symbol in Vodou. It represents the crossroads of human des-
tiny as represented by Legba; it is the symbol of the avenue of communication
between the profane world of men and the sacred world of the loas. Moreover, like the
Dahomeans, Vodouists see in the cross the entire cosmos including its atmospheric,
telluric, and subtelluric zones. It also represents the four cardinal points of the
universe, points at which the loas are said to reside. In short, the cross is the central
symbol in Vodou. It is the basis for Vodouists’ Weltanschauung. They see it as the
supporting framework around which the universe is constructed.
In view of the correspondence between the crucifix and the cross in Vodou the
purpose of this paper is two-fold. It seeks by studying the use of the Christian cross in
some of the Vodou ceremonies to understand the nature of the cosmos as Haitians see
it. This understanding will permit some observations about Haitians’ attitudes
toward that cosmos. It will also show that, contrary to the opinions of many scholars
who have written about Vodou, Haitians do not interpret the cross symbol
in Christian terms, but, as with the saints of the church, in the light of African
mythology, particularly that of Dahomey.
The Cross: Its Uses and Interpretations in Vodou
Like that of the Dahomeans (and most Africans), the supernatural world of Haitians
is a rich, vast, and unexplored one. It is populated by more than one thousand loas,
who are believed to reside variously in the silk-cotton tree on the rocky and steep
footpaths on the mountain side, in the reposois (repositories)
1 in the courtyard of the
hounfort, in the humblest thatched-roof hut, in the public fountains or the rivers
where the people come to fetch water, or at the four cardinal points of the universe.
By and large, Vodouists say that the permanent residence of the loas is in “Dahomey
in Africa,” which is an “island below the sea,” more specifically in the mythological
city Ville-aux-Camps. The events which occur at Ville-aux-Camps are no living
person’s business, though everyone has conjectures about them. According to the sto-
ries gathered during the course of this research, few living persons have ever been
allowed to enter the city of the loas, those privileged few having been taken there
“accidentally” by the loas.
Although few Vodouists have ever “visited” Ville-aux-Camps, most believe that it
exists because they have established contact with it through the medium of the houn-
gan in the hounfort. The houngan makes this contact at the outset of a Vodou cere-
mony by invoking Legba, the loa of the crossroads. In Haiti, as well as in Dahomey,
the deities are said not to speak the same language as the human beings who serve
them. Legba is the divine medium through whom men’s requests and prayers can be
channeled to the respective loas. Legba is the interlocutor, the interpreter, the principle
Leslie G. Desmangles42
1403971625ts04.qxd  28-9-06  1:08 PM  Page 42


--- PAGE 58 ---
of crossing and of communication with the divine world. Legba is the Hermes of the
Vodou Olympus, the one who not only translates the supplications of men, but who
is also the protector of the divine community. He is said to guard the doors to the
gates of Ville-aux-Camps. During the Vodou ceremonies, he is invoked first because
Vodouists say that he opens the bayé (gate) that separates the loas from their serviteurs
(devotees). Legba is invoked in the rhythmic dances of the yanvalou
2 as follows:
Atibo Legba, open the gates (to Ville-aux-Camps) for me
Papa Legba, open the gates so that I might enter
When I will go (to Ville-aux-Camps) I will salute the loas
Vodun Legba, open the gates for me,
When I will go in, I will thank the loas.
As this song indicates, the invocation of Legba is an important part of the Vodou
ceremony. As the Société (devotees) dances and sings it, the houngan solemnly traces
Legba’s vèvè,3 an act which is said to open the gates to Ville-aux-Camps and thus to
permit the passage of the serviteurs’ supplications to the divine world. The focal image
of this vévé is Legba’s symbol, the cross. In its form, this cross resembles the Christian
cross but, in its significance, it is entirely African.
The symbol of the cross is central to Vodou’s ceremonies. Indeed, Vodouists revere
it wherever they encounter it: not only when it is traced on the pérystile’s4 floor, but
wherever they encounter it in their daily lives. For example, in what might be called
in this paper a rite of territorial passage, Vodouists who pass a sacred edifice
(a Catholic church, a school, or a hospital) usually cross themselves reverently. T o them,
the Christian cross which dominates the building symbolizes Legba, the medium
through which contact can be established with the world of the loas.
Because Vodouists usually appear to revere the Catholic cross and because the
cross image has such a symbolic significance in Vodou meetings, many Haitians as
well as foreign scholars who have written about Vodou have argued that Vodou
crosses are borrowings from Roman Catholicism. While it is true that the Catholic
crosses in Haiti may well have been invested with Vodou meaning, the cross symbol
in Vodou does not originate in Catholicism but in African mythology. In Dahomey,
for example, the universe is conceived as a sphere transected by two mutually
perpendicular and intersecting planes, which, perceived in a cross-section of the
sphere, represent the arms of a cross (Mercier 1954, 219–22, 224–25). These crossed
planes are conceived to provide the framework and supporting axes of the sphere. In
the myths, this cross resulted from the movement of Mawu (the Dahomean
Godhead) to the four cardinal points of the universe while she fashioned it. The
Dahomean creation myth compares the universe to two halves of a calabash whose
edges match perfectly. The plane along which the two halves are joined together
constitutes the plane of the horizon. Dahomean mythology also conceives of two
different crosses in relation to the plane of the horizon: first, it conceives of the four
cardinal points of an earth which stretches flat along the plane of the horizon; second,
it conceives of a vertical plane intersecting the mid-point of the horizontal plane, thus
forming a cross with the horizontal plane. Each end of that plane penetrates the walls
of the calabash. The endpoints of the cross on the horizontal plane which penetrates
African Interpretations of Christian Vodou Cross 43
1403971625ts04.qxd  28-9-06  1:08 PM  Page 43


--- PAGE 59 ---
the calabash represent the four cardinal points of the universe. Similarly, the end-points
of the cross which stretches flat on the surface of the earth mark the four cardinal points
of the earth: west, east, north, and south.
Dahomeans also believe that the calabash which constitutes the cosmic sphere is
surrounded by a large calabash welded in the same manner as the small one. Beyond
the larger calabash is the abode of the deities. The calabashes are separated by a large
body of rain water. Since the small calabash is mobile, it is said that the “little cal-
abash floats in the larger one” (Mercier 1954, 220). The small calabash contains the
visible world with its elements: earth, water, fire, and air. In both Dahomean and
Haitian mythologies, the earth is conceived to be a flat disk surrounded by and float-
ing on water. This is why, Dahomeans and Haitians say, one finds water when one
digs deeply into the earth.
According to Dahomean mythology, when Mawu Lisa arranged the universe from
pre-existing materials, she traveled throughout the universe and stopped at the “four
quarters of space,” which correspond to the four cardinal points of the earth. At each
halt, she gathered materials with which she formed each half of the calabash, solidi-
fying the dirt from which the earth is composed and determining the location of the
waters. The path of Mawu’s primordial movements formed a cross whose lines extend
from west to east and from north to south. Dahomeans say that when Mawu created
men, she distributed them at the four cardinal points of the universe. At each point,
she spent one day. On the first day, ajaxi, she fashioned men in the west; on the
second day, miõxi, she created men in the east; on the third day, odok¨ wi, she made
men in the north; and the fourth day, zobódo, she placed them in the south.
Dahomeans believe that each act of creation at the four cardinal points of the
universe resulted in the formation of four countries: Aja on ajaxi, oyo on miõxi, Ke on
odok¨ wiand H˚ on zobódo. Dahomeans believe that in the south, H˚ is Dahomey
because it was created last, and it is said to be “called to a noble destiny” (Mercier
1954, 224–25).
The cross represents the path not only of Mawu’s travels but of those of other
minor deities who were responsible for completing the act of creation. According to
the Dahomean story, Gu, the giver of civilization and art, retraced Mawu’s steps,
moving from west to east, and from north to south. A similar pattern occurred when
the different sibs were founded.
The Africanness of this symbol is made clear by the fact that the cross is significant
not only in Dahomean worldview but in other parts of Africa as well. Germaine
Dieterlen (1950) points out that the figure of the cross is an important symbol in the
Bambara worldview (Dieterlen 1930, 2–33). Among the Bambara the world is
believed to have been created by Faro. Unlike Mawu, Faro is not the arranger of the
world but its creator; he fashions it not out of pre-existing materials, but out of a
void, or glã (Dieterlen 1950, 2–3, footnote 5). The Bambara’s concept of the universe
is founded upon two basic cosmological principles: the eternal vibration of matter
and the movement of the universe as a whole. According to the myth of creation, the
original germ of the world came out of glã, or emptiness, enveloped by a sheath. In
the beginning, glã “spoke loudly” and the sound of its voice caused the germ to
vibrate and to move in the form of a cross. Out of this vibration the germinating prin-
ciples within glã produced its twin. From this primordial pair of “energy principles”
Leslie G. Desmangles44
1403971625ts04.qxd  28-9-06  1:08 PM  Page 44


--- PAGE 60 ---
flowed the entire universe. According to the myth, deities, human beings, animals, and
matter emerged out of glã and reached the uttermost confines of the universe. Faro,
the Godhead, later arranged them at the four corners of the universe. According to
Dieterlen, the Bambara based their worldview on two active principles: the phenom-
enon of twin-ness (the principle of efficient cause in matter and biological reproduc-
tion in the deities and men) deriving out of a primordial energy-force, and the sign
of the cross (connecting the four cardinal points of the universe), which establishes
cosmic order in the universe (cf. Griaule and Dieterlen 1954, 84).
The cross is thus the metaphysical axis around which the universe is constructed.
On the one hand, it holds the entire universe in equilibrium. On the other, it pro-
vides the path for the infinite extension of the universe by the continual progression
of matter. Dieterlen adds that among the Bambara the symbol of the cross appears on
most of the sacred ritual objects and on many of the cooking utensils. It is also drawn
on the ground at religious ceremonies and serves to frame a game of a quasi-ritualistic
nature called sumangolo. Sumangolo, observes Dieterlen, is a game to which “the
Bambaras of both sexes abandon themselves over” to contribute to what the Bambara
call “la marche du monde” (the way of the world) (Dieterlen 1950, 31–33).
An examination of the cross symbol in Vodou will make it clear that both its rit-
ual function and its theological significance derive from African mythology and not
from Roman Catholicism. Like the Dahomeans, Vodouists see in it a cosmographic
image which symbolizes their Weltanschauung. It is used in religious ceremonies
which establish contact between the world of men and that of the loas. The cross rep-
resents both the fact of communication between the two worlds and the nature of the
difference between their modes of reality. In the first of these symbolisms, the hori-
zontal line of the cross represents the world of the living, and the vertical line the
medium of communication with the abyss. In the second symbolism, the vertical line
represents the other world itself, its verticality indicating that the reality there is the
inverse of the reality in the world of the living. This latter symbolism becomes clear
when one realizes that in the Vodou worldview the metaphysical world of the loas is
not a vague and mystical one but a cosmic mirror which inverts the images of the
world of the living in reflecting them. The loas are often referred to as mirrored
images reflecting the deportment and the personalities of men. For example, when
the houngan addresses or calls upon them, he does so in terms which describe them
as reflectors of man: Loco-mirroi, Agassou-Dos-mirroi.
5 Moreover, during Vodou
ceremonies the mirroring of the image of the world of the living is also symbolized by
a number of ritual observances. When the houngan greets his laplace or assistant, the
two face each other holding each other’s hands and perform a number of turns—first
clockwise, then counterclockwise—to represent the sights of the profane world of
men as reflected in the cosmic mirror of the loas. A mother who comes to present the
new-born child to the loas holds him on her left arm. As already noted, the ritual
dance in the pérystile also revolves in a counterclockwise motion around the poteau
mitan (center pole).
Not only is the physical detail of the world inverted in the cosmic mirror of the
sacred world, but so too is the order of progression of time. The houngan who is
about to begin a ceremony often enters the pérystile by emerging out of the door of
the bagui (sacred chamber of the temple) in a backward motion (Deren 1970, 35).
African Interpretations of Christian Vodou Cross 45
1403971625ts04.qxd  28-9-06  1:08 PM  Page 45


--- PAGE 61 ---
This reverse movement symbolizes the retrogression through time to the first man, to
the unmanifested primordial man, and finally to Bon Dieu himself, the Godhead who
created the universe.
The opening of the Vodou ceremony represents the sudden halt of profane time.
The entire ceremony in which a large number of loas “mount”6 their serviteurs (devo-
tees) is the archetypal reconstruction of the cosmos ab origine , and as the deities
appear in succession, the serviteurs participate in the exploits of the creation of the
world executed by Bon Dieu who fashioned the universe as a reflection of his own
world. At the start of a Vodou ceremony, cosmogony is reactualized; the serviteur’s
possession symbolizes the recreation of the Vodou pantheons; the world of the living
is refashioned, and the individual, as well as his community, is born anew. The repe-
tition of the archetype represents the temporary suspension of profane time.
The principle of inversion and retrogression is fundamental to the Vodouist’s
mythology as well as to his rituals. Hence, in Vodou, the relationship between the cos-
mic mirror and the mundane reality which it reflects takes the cosmographic form of
the cross. In the cross, Vodouists see not only the earth’s surface as comprehended by the
four cardinal points of the universe, but also the intersection of the two worlds, the
world of men as symbolized by the horizontal line, and Ville-aux-Campsas represented
by the vertical. The foot of this vertical line plunges into the waters of the abyss to the
cosmic mirror where the loasreside. Here, on the island below the sea is Dahomey (or
Ville-aux-Camps), the legendary place of racial origin. The point of contact at which, in
Vodou ceremonies, the two lines intersect is the pivotal “zero-point” in the crossing of
two worlds. It is a point of contact at which profane existence, including time, stops and
sacred beings from the island below the sea invade the pérystile.
The cross is therefore the most important ritualistic symbol in Vodou. It appears
wherever communication or traffic between the two worlds occurs. The following
examples will indicate some idea of its pervasiveness in Haiti.
Perhaps the most glaring example is to be seen in the structure of the pérystile. In
Vodou, the pérystile is a microcosmic representation of the universe. The four poles
sustaining the structure symbolize the four cardinal points of the universe, covered by
an overarching roof which represents the cosmic vault above the earth. Like the hor-
izontal line of the cross, the floor of the pérystile symbolizes the world of man while
the vertical poteau mitan
7 represents the axis mundi, the avenue of communication
between the profane and the sacred world. Although the vertical reach of the poteau
mitan appears to be limited by the pérystile’s structure, mythologically its foot is con-
ceived to plunge into the cosmic mirror. The point at which the poteau mitan enters
the floor of the pérystile symbolizes the zero-point. In the physical structure of the
pérystile, the point of crossing is usually marked by a round platform built around the
poteau mitan. During ceremonies, the poteau mitan becomes charged with the power
of the loas. Hence, before tracing the vèvès the houngan touches the pole, a ritual act
which empowers him to summon the loas into the pérystile. Thereafter, like the
poteau mitan, the houngan’s body becomes in itself the source of power, a repetition
of the microcosmic symbol, a moving embodier of the vertical axis around which the
universe revolves.
The cross structure of the pérystile repeats itself in the geometric symbols, or vèvès,
which are central to the rituals. The drawing of these vèvès reflects the concept of
Leslie G. Desmangles46
1403971625ts04.qxd  28-9-06  1:08 PM  Page 46


--- PAGE 62 ---
inverted symmetry and is characterized by a series of motions involving doing-and-
undoing.8 As already noted, the vèvès are drawn on the floor of the pérystile by the
houngan at the beginning of every ceremony in order to invoke the loas to manifest
themselves in the bodies of their serviteurs during the ceremony. Since each loa has his
vèvè, the area where it is traced becomes consecrated to him. In drawing the vèvès, the
houngan traces the cross first. Holding some flour between the thumb and the fore-
finger of his right hand, he meticulously draws each line, applying the method of
doing-and-undoing. First, he sifts the flour, moving his hand from left to right and
then from right to left, from top to bottom and then from bottom to top. The draw-
ing of the cross completed, the houngan draws the various symbols which represent
the personality ascribed to the loa. Following the same pattern of doing-and-undoing,
each stroke of the hand, each circle drawn upon the cross or around it is indicative of
the forward and reverse, clockwise and counterclockwise motions of the world and its
reflection.
The complex representation of the deity’s personality appears to hang on the two
intersecting lines of the cross. Once finished, the vèvè appears to the worshipers as
both static and dynamic. As principal posts of a building support their trestle, the
lines of the cross provide a structure on which these images hang in equilibrium. But
also, like a revolving door, these geometric images seem to spin (in both clockwise
and counterclockwise motions) as if striving to throw off the images to the outer lim-
its of the earth’s surface. Both of these semblances are appropriate for, although the
lines actually lie flat on the floor of the pérystle, the Vodouists see the horizontal line
of the vèvès as representing the secular world, while the vertical line reaches the
cosmic realm of the loas, and plunges into the waters of the abyss.
9
Sometimes vèvès are elaborate and complicated symbols, the white lines of which
appear as fragile laces. This sense of fragility is heightened when one considers that
the slightest breeze can blow away the light flour which composes its lines (Deren
1970, 204). Yet, these fragile symbols communicate profound mythological signifi-
cance. For through the vertical line of the cross, the loas are summoned to visit their
serviteurs in the pérystile. The point at which the two lines intersect indicates the cen-
tral location at which human dialogues no longer follow the horizontal path of mun-
dane communication, but plunge sharply toward the world of the loas, burying with
them the words of the supplicative songs which accompany the tracing of the vèvès
and are forced downward. As if amplified in weight a thousand times, each grain of
flour which falls to the ground raps the sacred portals of the loas to signal them to
possess their serviteurs.
Possession indicates to the société that, in spite of the remoteness of his permanent
home, the loa is also one who comforts his serviteurs in the anxieties and the defeats
of their lives and that, at the root of the cosmos, goodness always endures. Even with
their poverty, their hunger, their failures, peasants know that they are rewarded by the
cosmic power of the loas, who are capable of bestowing on their serviteurs the hope of
a bright future. The intimate relationship that a possessed serviteur establishes with a
loa through the meditation of the vèvès accords him many benefits. The loa who
mounts a serviteur soothes his particular fears and helps him in his personal losses.
The presence of the loa in the body of a serviteur is a nonmaterial achievement
which symbolizes the unquestionable devotion of the loas to intervene in the profane
African Interpretations of Christian Vodou Cross 47
1403971625ts04.qxd  28-9-06  1:08 PM  Page 47


--- PAGE 63 ---
activities of men. During the period of possession, the serviteur, like the houngan
before him, embodies the cross symbol of the vèvès, the zero-point of contact between
the sacred and the profane world. He becomes a medium whose feet are planted in
the sacred mirror and whose body is the vertical line whereby the revitalizing forces
of the universe flow to the société.
When a loa invades the body of a serviteur, he greets the société with a series of
movements which reflect the same pattern of doing and undoing seen in the drawing
of the vèvès. The possessed serviteur greets the société with a double handshake, with
the right hand first and then the left. The crossing of the hands symbolizes the cross-
ing of two worlds—the right representing the horizontal line of the cross, the world
of men, and the left representing the vertical line of the deities. Because the left hand
of a possessed serviteur represents the intervention of Ville-aux-Camps in the world of
the living, Vodouists believe that it is charged with the psychic power of the loas.
When the left hand of a possessed serviteur grips the left hand of another, the power
of the loa which mounts the possessed serviteur is transmitted into the body of the
other to possess him. While the possessed holds another with his left hand the
power of the loa spins the other in a series of counterclockwise movements.
Summary
In examining the use of the cross in Vodou, we can isolate two main ideas: First, as
among the Bambara, the tracing of the vèvès at Vodou ceremonies can be interpreted
as the symbolic recreation of the universe. In this sense, by the intricate tracery of the
vèvès, and the intervention of the loas, Vodouists not only relive the cosmological
archetype in their retrogression through time, but by being possessed, they also relive
the recreation of the world. “Creation” for Vodouists is not a static event, but a
dynamic process which, as for the Bambara, is an ever-recurring “marche du monde.”
When Vodouists observe the universe, they see both man and the substances which
surround him as part of nature. In the context of this dynamic “marche du monde,”
Haitians also see two different categories of change in its operation: first, the degen-
erative changes in persons and in substances which eventually decay and die, and sec-
ond, certain patterns of recurrence—the cycle of generations, the cycle of seasons, the
recurrent movement of the astral bodies. These are the pervasive and persistent prin-
ciples upon which the universe operates. Vodouists see these principles as immortal
and, therefore, as belonging to an order of existence superior to matter. It is these
principles that they identify as the loas. Hence, to Vodouists, the cross is not only that
medium of communication between man and the loas, but it is the symbol through
which man can relate to the cosmological principles which the loas personalize.
Second, the Weltanschauung of Vodouists corresponds to that of the Dahomeans.
The universe envisioned by Vodouists can be described in two ways. On the one
hand, in a macrocosmic dimension, Vodouists conceive of space in the universe as
limited by four cardinal points. The points are connected by lines which take the
form of a cross, a metaphysical axis which supports the entire structure of the uni-
verse. On the other hand, in a microcosmic dimension, the pérystile is the symbol of
Leslie G. Desmangles48
1403971625ts04.qxd  28-9-06  1:08 PM  Page 48


--- PAGE 64 ---
the universe. The space within it is also limited by the four poles which support the
structure. The metaphysical line which joins these four poles crosses the floor of the
pérystile to form a horizontal cross, which is limited by the area of the pérystile.
Moreover, the vertical poteau mitan intersects the floor of the pérystile and mytholog-
ically supports the entire structure of the universe.
As the cosmic reflection of the world of man, Ville-aux-Camps is conceived by
Vodouists to be structured much like the pérystile, for the poteau mitan which trav-
erses the pérystile also traverses the sacred world of the loas. As already noted, during
the Vodou ceremonies, the vèvès and the bodies of possessed individuals become a
further microcosmic reduction of the poteau mitan . Hence, the cross symbol in
Vodou cannot be seen as representing a symbolic relationship between Roman
Catholicism and Vodou but indicates the retention of African religious elements on
Haitian soil. Indeed, for Vodouists, the Christian cross which dominates a Catholic
building indicates the zero-point at which the two worlds bisect one another. The
steeple of the church, for example, is analogous to the poteau mitan. Consequently,
when Vodouists pass in front of churches, they first cross themselves at mid-point to
symbolize their territorial passage through sacred ground. The paths trod by their feet
represent the horizontal plane, the profane world of men. Such territorial passage
must be completed without intermittent rest in order to permit both lines of the cross
to intersect one another. According to Vodouists, it is therefore a bad omen to stand
in front of churches to talk because Bon Dieu (the Godhead) may be angered and may
inflict illness and even death on them.
While it may be true that the African symbol of the cross among the slaves could
have disappeared (as did many aspects of African religion) if it had not been rein-
forced by the parallel Catholic symbol during the colonial period, still in response to
the early missionaries’ catechizing efforts, the slaves learned to interpret the Catholic
cross in terms of their own African religious traditions.
Notes
1. Rectangular area in the courtyard of the hounfort where the loas are said to reside momen-
tarily.
2. The yanvalou is a ritual dance form dedicated to the snake loa Damballah.
3. Cabbala-like geometric designs representing the function of the loas/lwa.
4. Section of the hounfort in which ceremonies are held. Each loa has a separate design. They
are traced at each ceremony usually before possession occurs. The origin of these designs
has not been clearly established although some students (Maximilien, Louis, Le Vaudou
haitien [Port-au-Prince: Imprimerie de l’Etat, 1954?]; Maya Deren, Divine Horsemen: The
Voodoo Gods in Haiti[New York: Delta, 1970]) of Vodun have conjectured about their pre-
Columbian Indian origin.
5. Literally “Agassou in the mirror’s surface, Loco in the mirror.”
6. In Vodou, the possessed person is compared to a horse. Vodounists say that he is ridden by
a loa.
7. The poteau mitan is a pole at the center of the pérystile. It serves as the central channel of
communication between the sacred world of the loas and ancestors and the profane world
African Interpretations of Christian Vodou Cross 49
1403971625ts04.qxd  28-9-06  1:08 PM  Page 49


--- PAGE 65 ---
of the living. During a ceremony, participants dance in a counterclockwise motion around
the poteau mitan.
8. As described below, doing-and-undoing refers to the manner in which the person drawing
the vèvès moves his hands from left to right, from right to left, from top to bottom, and
from bottom to top. Every movement is followed by its inverse.
9. Although the houngan traces the vèvès on the floor of the pérystile, mythologically it is not
horizontal but vertical.
References
Cabon, Père Adolphe. 1930. Notes sur l’histoire religieuse d’Haiti, de la révolution au concordat
1789–1860. Port-au-Prince: Imprimerie Compiègne.
Charlevois, Xavier de. 1730–1731. Histoire l’Ile espagnole ou S. Domingue . 2 vols. Paris:
Hippolyte Louis Guérin.
Deren, Maya. 1970. Divine horsemen: The Voodoo gods in Haiti. New York: Delta.
Desmangles, Leslie G. 1975. God in Haitian Vodun: A case in cultural symbiosis. PhD
dissertation, Philadelphia, T emple University.
Dieterlen, Germaine. 1950. Essai sur la religion Bambara . Paris: Presses universitaires de
France.
Griaule, M. and G. Dieterlen. 1954. The dogon. In African Worlds: Studies in the Cosmological
Ideas and Social Values of African Peoples , ed. Daryll Forde, 83–110. London: Oxford
University Press.
Herskovits, Melville. 1971. Life in a Haitian valley. New York: Doubleday.
Jahn, Jaheinz. 1961. Muntu: An outline of the new african culture. New York: Grove.
Maximilien, Louis. 1954? Le Vaudou haitien. Port-au-Prince: Imprimerie de l’Etat.
Mercier, P . 1954. The Fon of Dahomey. In African Worlds, ed. Daryll Forde, 210–234.
London: Oxford.
Price-Mars, Jean. 1928. Ainsi parla l’oncle. Port-au-Prince: Imprimerie Compiègne.
Saint-Méry, Moreau. 1797. Description topographique, civile et historique de la Partie française
de St. Domingue. 3 vols. Philadelphia (no publisher given).
Leslie G. Desmangles50
1403971625ts04.qxd  28-9-06  1:08 PM  Page 50


--- PAGE 66 ---
Chapter 4
The Song of Freedom: Vodou,
Conscientization, and Popular 
Culture in Haiti
Gerdès Fleurant
The themes of justice, liberation, peace, progress, and unity dominate the music of
the popular culture today in Haiti and its Diaspora, now renamed the T enth
Department. While the people of Haiti have been in the forefront of the world resist-
ance movement against colonialism and political oppression for the last two
centuries, and Haitians are known throughout the world as a fighting people (Charlie
Mingus, the great African-American jazz musician recorded in 1957 a composition
titled “Haitian Fight Song”), it is only in the past ten years that its popular music has
explicitly articulated the themes that in the 1970s were referred to as “Kilti libète” or
Freedom Culture. This movement that is not limited to music, for one finds its coun-
terparts in the dance, drama, literature, and the plastic arts, results in part from a long
accumulation and internalization of resistance patterns, and the world progressive
movement that came of age in the wake of the 1960s social consciousness revolution
spearheaded by the Civil Rights Movement in the United States. This chapter, an
exploration into the Haitian song of freedom from its roots in Bwa Kayiman to
Boukman Eksperyans and beyond, will focus on the role of music in African and
African-derived cultures, with specific emphasis on the Vodun. It will further high-
light the centrality of Haiti, its Vodun and music, in the contemporary world move-
ment of oppressed people’s cultural affirmation. Finally, the dialectical relation
between the various elements of the world movement of Conscientization (Freire
1972; Nkrumah 1970; Fanon 1959; John XXIII, 1958–1963; and U.S. Civil Rights)
will be elucidated to explain the role of the arts, music in particular, in the future
democratization of our planet’s socioeconomic/political structures, a movement I call
“Humanocentrism.”
1403971625ts05.qxd  29-9-06  7:08 PM  Page 51


--- PAGE 67 ---
Bwa Kayiman and the Haitian Revolution
The European encounter with the New World through the adventures of
Christopher Columbus and the search for new routes for commerce resulted in the
enslavement of millions of souls from Africa. Slavery, a practice that supported the
world economy for more than three centuries (1492–1888), reached its peak and at
the same time met with its demise at the hands of the African rebels, on the island of
Saint Domingue, the former nation of Haiti.
Saint Domingue, France’s prized colony in the Americas, flourished so well that by
1791, the date of the Haitian Revolution that began with the politico-religious con-
gress of Bwa Kayiman, it counted a population of 700,000 Africans, about 40,000
French persons, and an equal number of mulattos or freed persons, from the union
of the white men and Black women. According to James G. Leyburn, in 1789, two-
thirds of France’s commercial interests were centered in Saint Domingue, and the
territory’s combined export-import business was valued at more than $140,000,000.
The economic importance of the island is further reflected in the fact that “its sugar,
coffee, indigo and cotton supplied the home market and employed, in prosperous
years, more than 700 ocean-going vessels, with as many as 80,000 seamen”
(1966:15). The conflicts that resulted from such an accumulation of wealth produced
through forced labor accounted for the events, known in historical annals as the
Haitian Revolution, that shook the colony between 1791 and 1803. Indeed, the
enslaved Africans who were brought to the colony as early as 1512 to work in
the agricultural plantations, after a period of marronnage (guerilla warfare in the
mountains) and sustained organization, succeeded in overthrowing the hated system
of human slavery.
Central to the success of the Haitian Revolution was the faith of the captives
who revolted in their culture and way of life, the Vodun, a comprehensive
socioeconomic system of universal knowledge. Issued from Africa, a continent
whose culture and philosophical vision do riot in order to distinguish between the
sacred and the secular, the organizers of the revolt gathered in the area known as
Bwa Kayiman during the night of August 14, 1791, to consult the spirits of their
ancestors or the lwa of Vodun. It was there that they intoned their first revolu-
tionary hymns and danced their first liberative spiritual entities: Legba, Danabla,
Ezili, Ogoun, Simbi. It was there that they formulated a comprehensive approach
to the arts as a liberating factor in human affairs. It was there, at the Bwa Kayiman
religious congress, that they consecrated the role of culture as an indispensable
component of political action. Thus the roots of the song of freedom lie deep in
the memory of Bwa Kayiman and beyond, in Africa, the spiritual home of the
ancestors. T oday’s affirmation songs of Boukman Eksperyans, Boukan Ginen,
RAM (Roots Music Group), Foulah, and many other Haitian musical groups that
promote the traditional culture under the name of “mizik rasin” logically
embraced the spiritual experience of their forebears at Bwa Kayiman, and passed
through the cultural movements of rehabilitation such as Indigenism and
Negritude.
Gerdès Fleurant52
1403971625ts05.qxd  29-9-06  7:08 PM  Page 52


--- PAGE 68 ---
Indigenism and Negritude
The roots of the Haitian song of freedom also go back to the Indigenist movement of
the 1920s and Negritude of the 1930s. Indigenism emerged as a reaction to the first
American Occupation of Haiti (1915–1934), which crushed the Haitian elite’s aspi-
rations to Francophile status when American troops, mostly from the South of the
United States, discovered their aspirations; the elite was, in the words of William
Jennings Bryan, “niggers speaking French.” After the defeat in 1919 of Charlemagne
Péralte and the Cacos, the group of irregulars considered in Haitian history as nation-
alist freedom fighters that he led, the resistance shifted to the realm of the pen.
Haitian authors began to search for their African heritage through the study of folk-
lore and peasant life.
Indigenism was a pivotal movement in the history of Haiti that, from the colonial
period to independence in 1804 to the first American Occupation in 1915–1934,
consisted in a succession of fratricidal strives among different social groupings: Blacks
against mulattos, rich against poor, and Catholics or Protestants against Vodunists,
capped by a rejection of their African roots in favor of European affiliations.
Indigenism was pivotal not only in raising the consciousness of the Haitian elite as to
their African cultural heritage, but the movement also inspired the birth of
Negritude, its better known counterpart in the annals of Pan-Africanism, the
umbrella movement grounded in the concept of unity of aspirations of all peoples of
African descent. Aimé Césaire, the father of Negritude, attested to this when he
commented that Negritude was born in Haiti.
Indigenism influenced the Harlem Renaissance in the United States as well. It
may be appropriate to mention here the fact that Haiti, particularly the example of
the Haitian Revolution, was the single most important event in the history of the
Black World during all of the nineteenth century and part of the twentieth century.
Haiti inspired the three major slave revolts in the South of the United States led
by Gabriel Prosser in 1800, Denmark Vesey in 1822, and Nat T urner in 1831 (Hunt
1988:107–146). The cultural and literary movements, such as Indigenism, the
Harlem Renaissance, and Negritude can be better understood when placed in the
context of the larger struggle of people of African descent for both physical and men-
tal liberation. It is instructive to note that W . E. B. DuBois, one of the foremost intel-
lectuals and forefathers of Pan-Africanism, understood well the issues when, in his
book Souls of Black Folk (1969–1903), he cast the struggle in the following terms:
“[T]he problem of the twentieth century is the problem of the color line—the rela-
tion of the darker to the lighter races of men in Asia, Africa, in America and the
Islands of the sea” (54). DuBois’s incisive comment has already anticipated a central
component of the present day North/South debate, which calls attention not only to
the economic disparity between rich and poor nations, but also the fact that the
nations of the southern hemisphere are inhabited by darker hued people whose his-
tories are grounded in colonialism. T o DuBois, the unity of the struggle suggested a
conceptual framework that englobed the darker races of Africa, Asia, and the islands
of the Caribbean. And at the center of this “prise de conscience” were the people of
Song of Freedom 53
1403971625ts05.qxd  29-9-06  7:08 PM  Page 53


--- PAGE 69 ---
Haiti and their determination to liberate themselves from the shackles of colonialism.
Thus, it is no accident that one of the key works of Indigenism, Jacques Roumain’s
Gouverneurs de la Rosée (1944) was translated into English, under the title Masters of
the Dew (1978), by two celebrated poets and writers of the Harlem Renaissance,
Langston Hughes and Mercer Cook. Hughes and Cook were attracted to the libera-
tion and self-reliance theme that runs through the novel in which water as a symbol
of life figures prominently. Masters of the Dew consecrated the triumph of science
grounded in cultural practices over ignorance, greed, and hatred. Manuel, the hero of
the story, although a nonbeliever in Vodun, found himself dancing with all of his soul
at the ritual offered in honor of the lwa at his parents’ compound to celebrate his
return from 15 years of absence. His ability to find the water in a drought-stricken
village and to search for a way to get it to the people or, better, to teach the people to
get it for themselves (for he advised a konbit or cooperative work) put him in direct
opposition with the oppressive regional political establishment forces; so in the end
he was assassinated, in fact sacrificed one could say, but not before he laid the seed of
life in his wife and companion Annaise, a most tangible symbol of the continuity of
the race. Masters of the Dew symbolizes the determination of the common people to
fight together for their total liberation, and the book stands as proof that humanity’s
ontological vocation, in the words of Paulo Freire, is to be free. The literary aspira-
tions of the elite found its most eloquent expression in the 1946 bourgeois social
revolution, a culmination of the grievances of the past century where the peasant, the
urban proletariat, and the vodunist have remained unheeded. If Indigenism and
Negritude spawned a literary movement, “1946,” as it is known in Haitian history
gave birth to a cultural renaissance that found its way in music and dance, all
grounded in the traditional religion of the people, the Vodun.
The 1946 Bourgeois Social Revolution
The 1946 bourgeois social revolution was a logical continuation of the previous
movements that revindicated a better distribution of the nation’s resources among its
citizens. The first American Occupation (1915–1934), which occurred at a time
when the northern power practiced racial discrimination, left Haitian society with a
structure that favored the minority (mulatto) over the majority (darker skin people).
Thus the 1946 social movement, whose aim was the reversal of that state of affair,
championed to some extent the cause of the peasantry and the urban proletariat and
promoted the candidacies of President Dumarsais Estime and the populist Deputy
Daniel Fignolé, whose supporters were known as “rouleau compresseur” or bulldozer.
Intellectual Black leaders such as Lonmer-Denis, François Duvalier, Mesmin Gabriel,
René Piquion, and Jean-Baptiste Romain rose up to promote the ideologies of the
previous generation, also known as the “Griot School,” which they convened into
their own brand of Indigenism, better explained under the term of “Noirisme.”
Noirisme crudely pictured the Haitian social situation in terms of antagonism
between Blacks and mulattos without taking into account the dynamism of class, a
tendency that aimed to absolve the brutal oppressions of dictators like Paul E. Magloire
Gerdès Fleurant54
1403971625ts05.qxd  29-9-06  7:08 PM  Page 54


--- PAGE 70 ---
(1950–1956) and the infamous Duvaliers (1957–1986). Although the 1946 social
movement was fraught with internal contradictions, it nonetheless managed to
spawn a cultural renaissance in the arts, folklore, and music, a point worthy of our
attention.
The seeds of the cultural movement that flourished after the 1946 social revolu-
tion were sown as early as the 1930s and 1940s when musical groups promoted by
families led by patriarchs such as Felix Guignard, and Lincee and Fabre Duroseau,
emerged to play the Haitian meringue, based on the kongo rhythm whose roots are
lodged in the ritual setting. In reaction to the anti-superstitious campaign of the Elie
Lescot government that, in 1942, banned Vodun ceremonies, Mardi Gras and Rara
festivals, under the pretext that they were relics of savagery inherited from Africa, the
Jazz des Jeunes was founded in 1943 to promote the music and folklore of Haiti
through the use of its traditional rhythms like the yanvalou, ibo, and petro. The Jazz
des Jeunes, now an institution in Haitian popular music and culture, celebrated its
fiftieth anniversary in 1993. For a long time, they were one of the few groups that
played the traditional rhythms of Haiti, a distinction that won them the scorn of the
Fundamentalist Protestant missions.
Lina Mathon Blanchet, a classically trained pianist, played a significant role,
although inadvertently, in the promotion of Haitian folklore. According to African-
American dancer/choreographer Lavinia Williams Yarborough, it was a group of
German artists who suggested to Blanchet that the chorus she directed sing some
folkloric songs. She refused, hesitated, and then accepted and went on to produce
some “contes Haïtiens” with songs to the delight of the listeners. In 1941, Blanchet
brought her Legba Singers to Washington, DC, for the Pan-American Conference,
and later in 1951, she produced “Haïti Chante” again in Washington, DC (Williams
Yarborough 1964).
But two events, the end of World War II and the opening of the 1949 
Bi-Centennial Exhibition in Port-au-Prince, contributed to spark a tourist explosion,
so to speak, which in turn led to a renaissance in the arts and folklore of Haiti; in
1949, a brand new city was built on the seashore of the capital to celebrate the two
hundredth anniversary of the founding of Port-au-Prince. It was in this brand new
city that an open air theater, the “Theatre de Verdure” was located. The theater
became the center of the movement for the promotion and production of dance,
folklore, and traditional music of Haiti. Besides the Jazz des Jeunes, mentioned ear-
lier, a series of dance and musical troupes, with names like “Dambalah Dance
T roupe,” “Aida T roupe,” “Erzuli Dancers,” “Dantor Dancers,” and “Macaya Folk
Group,” emerged on the scene to perform the rhythms of the Vodun rites of Haiti
(Yarborough 1964). T o these, we must add the famous “Choeur Simidor” directed
by the late musician Ferrère Laguerre, and the well-known “Choeur Michel
Déjean.” In addition to the elegant kongo, itself the basis for most Haitian popular
music and dance, those artistic groups experimented with considerable success with
arrangements of rhythms like yanvalou, ibo, petro, and nago, all of them belonging
to the sacred repertoire of the people’s traditional religion. This period saw the rise
of the incomparable singer Lumane Casimir whose voice is yet to be equaled in the
annals of Haitian musical arts. Her renditions of songs like “Papa Gege Bel Gason,”
“Isit an Aym,” and many others, were the delight of tourists, politicians, and the
Song of Freedom 55
1403971625ts05.qxd  29-9-06  7:08 PM  Page 55


--- PAGE 71 ---
general public alike. Yet, like Billy Holliday and Mozart, Casimir died prematurely
in abject poverty and obscurity. Her memory is yet to be rehabilitated by a Haitian
government, and we are grateful to poet Jean-Claude Maroneau and singer Carole
“Maroule” Demesmin for their tribute to this seminal artist (Carole Maroulé,
Fleetwood CDM 1277 ca. 1983).
The 1950s and early 1960s brought about the use of folklore at official events
such as the famous May 18 school children parade, held at the Port-au-Prince com-
mon, known as the “Champs de Mars,” in commemoration of the creation of Haiti’s
flag on that date in 1803. Thousands of high school children danced along with their
monitors to the music of the late Antalcidas Murat, titled “Sur les Rives de
1’Arubonite,” composed in yanvalou and kongo franc rhythms. Murat was the
arranger and the musical genius behind the Jazz des Jeunes, and this writer’s first
music teacher, as well as that of a whole generation of Haitian musicians. Other
musical geniuses worthy of mention are guitarist Frantz Casséus, and singer/scholar
Emerante de Pradine who extensively use Vodun material as the basis for their musi-
cal selections. De Pradine, a member of the elite, shocked her entourage when she
openly embraced the Vodun in her singing. She went on, however, to record some
excellent songs with the Choeur Michel Déjean (1953) and, as important, to give
birth to Richard A. Morse, one of the founders and promoters of the 1990s Haitian
Root Music (to be discussed later).
Although the post-1946 artistic renaissance followed as a direct result of the
Indigenist movement, the emphasis was still folkloric, literary, and elitist, judging by
the names of many of its protagonists who were poets and writers. It is important,
however, to mention some of the most prominent, who, in fact, were the spring-
board for the more progressive movements of later decades: Lorimer Denis,
Emmanuel C. Paul, Lamartinière Honorat, Jean-Léon Destiné, Katherine Dunham,
Lma Mathon Blanchet, Robert Baussan, Dumarsais Estimé (president of Haiti,
1946–1950), Félix Morisseau-Leroy (the foremost advocate of Creole culture,
which he conceptualizes as Creolophony, in opposition to Francophony), Jean
Brierre, Théodore Beaubrun (Haiti’s foremost comedian and the father of Arnold,
Daniel, and Theodore Beaubrun of Boukman Eksperyans), Pierre Blain, Lavinia
Williams Yarborough, Emérante de Pradine, Alphonse Cimber (one of the leading
master drummers of Haitian ritual), Antoine Salgado, Roger E. Savain, Marcel
Sylvain, Renee St. Aude (one of the founders and powers behind the Jazz des Jeune),
Louinès Louisnis, Joe Archer, André Narcisse, and André Germain. Moreover, this
list is far from being complete, but it gives us an idea of the epoch and the orienta-
tion of the men and women who preceded the Rasin or Root Music Movement
of today.
C. L. R. James’s (author of The Black Jacobins) emphasis on a cumulative approach
to social revolution should clarify for us the importance and role of the intellectuals
in the evolution of the Haitian masses in their march to conscientization. The work
of the Indigenists, like Jean Price-Mars and Jacques Roumain, the founder of the
Bureau of Ethnology (1941), whose writings began to challenge some of the elite’s
preconceived notions about Haitian culture and Vodun, made it possible for 1946 to
occur and the generation of the 1970s to emerge with the concept of “Kilti libète”
(Freedom Culture).
Gerdès Fleurant56
1403971625ts05.qxd  29-9-06  7:08 PM  Page 56


--- PAGE 72 ---
The Freedom Culture of the 1970s
While the 1946 bourgeois social revolution occurred as a fulfillment of the ideologies
of the previous generation, in particular, Indigenism, the School of the Griots, and
the Negritude movement, the Freedom Culture of the 1970s emerged as a critique of
these movements. (The proponents of Freedom Culture, at the outset, endeavored to
distance themselves from what they deemed as literary movements.) They blamed
the Indigenists, particularly the Noiriste wing of the movement, for the use of the
Duvalier dynastic dictatorship. One leader of the movement exclaimed in response to
this writer’s mention of the intellectual productions of Indigenism: “it is Price-Mars
who is responsible for all the things that the Duvalierists are doing today!” (personal
communication, ca. 1976). Thus, we need to ask what was the philosophy of this
movement, who its ideologues were, and how their contributions favored the advent
of the present day Roots Music.
The “Freedom Culture,” a movement that emerged outside of the country and
purported to employ culture as a weapon to combat the social conditions of Haiti,
the Duvalier dictatorship in particular, followed in the wake of the demise of the stu-
dent movement inside the country in the 1960s. A student strike (in sympathy with
that of the teachers and the labor unions), which shocked the foundation of the gov-
ernment and at the same time changed the political alignments within the student
camp (due to the fact that many students rallied the Duvalier’s camp, and subse-
quently became notorious tonton makout [Uncle Knapsack], a situation that caused
the death, jailing, or exile of most of the opposition activists), was brutally repressed;
however, the university students formed some cultural groups to promote the folklore
of the nation, Karako bleu (blue denim), named after the denim shirt worn by the
peasant, being one of the best known. Although the students managed to stage, at the
French Institute and at other venues, some dramatic presentations, including a typi-
cal peasant wake, they could not last long. Many went into voluntary exile, and most
were encouraged to go to the Congo, which following its independence crisis, needed
Black role models for their youth and invited Haitians to work as teachers and in
other public functions. The decade of the 1960s was the incubator for the politico-
cultural movement of the next ten years.
The students and their elders (teachers, union members, political activists, and
labor leaders) were not immune to the major events of the 1960s, notably the Civil
Rights Movement in the United States and the Vietnam War. The progressive stance
of the short reign of Pope John XXIII (1960–1963), in net contrast to the policies
of his predecessor, favored the rise of a popular movement within the Catholic
Church, no small power in a country like Haiti. The concatenation of these cur-
rents contributed to a spirit of rebellion, a yearning for justice, of course, with no
obvious outlet for its venting, because the repressive structure of the country’s gov-
ernment prevented all manifestations of discontent. As in previous times, the strug-
gle shifted to the realm of the pen and paper, but this time it became clear that the
Haitian peasant had to be enlisted and, since he could not read, other means had
to be found to reach him. The use of folklore and the Creole language were then
incontrovertible. The motivation of the Freedom Culture of the 1970s can be
Song of Freedom 57
1403971625ts05.qxd  29-9-06  7:08 PM  Page 57


--- PAGE 73 ---
found in the realization of this important fact, arrived at after some painful
setbacks.
The death of Papa Doc in April 1971 and the succession of his 19-year-old son,
Jean-Claude Duvalier, was a turning point in the history of the opposition to the
regime of oppression. Most of the opposition leaders were living in exile (those, of
course, who had not been killed or jailed), either in Europe, Canada, or in the United
States. Many of them were Marxists, in principle, who began to discover the impor-
tant role of culture in the revolution. They reluctantly, in fact strategically, embraced
the more palatable aspects of the nationalist thesis, which promotes culture and color
as determinants in political conflicts. This meant that Vodun had to be included in
the equation, if one were to reach the masses of Haiti, in order to lead them to the
road of progress and civilization. Many Haitian Marxists, who upheld the Freedom
Culture approach, considered Vodun as a “primitive religion” that, as in the case of all
religions, may very well be a liability to the country’s advancement; yet, the promot-
ers of Freedom Culture embarked on a program that went to the very matrix of the
Haitian nation. They decided to use the music of Vodun as the basis for their com-
positions, rightly realizing the fact that some 85 percent of the population had been
using the songs of Vodun as their main learning vehicle. So, they changed the tradi-
tional words of the ritual chants and replaced them with their own. An example of
this is “Ayiti demen” (“Haiti T omorrow”); better known by its first line, “Le la libere,
Ayiti va bel o”; composed in Boston (around 1974) by poet Koralen Jean-Claude
Martineau of the group “Haiti Culturelle” on the tune of a well-known ritual song to
St. Jacques Majeur/Ogou-Feray; and arranged by this writer, who was at that time
the musical coordinator of the organization. They took a multimedia approach in
the sense that they used dance, drama, music, and painting as means to impart their
vision of the new Haiti. Were they fully aware of the centrality of the arts and culture
in human life and, particularly, in a society like that of Haiti? Until further research
is undertaken on this crucial issue, the answer to this question may have to wait. But,
nonetheless, the Freedom Culture adherents struck a gold mine and, in this regard,
were fundamentally different from any of the previous movements that purported to
“liberate” the downtrodden.
Given the repressive nature of the Duvalier era, it is clear that the Freedom
Culture could evolve only in exile. In fact, the movement rose in the major metro-
politan centers of North America, like New York and Boston in the United States,
and Montreal, where a substantial immigrant Haitian population lives. Three sister
organizations, affiliated with the Patriotic Action Movement, the Marxist political
wing of the opposition to Duvalier, were founded in the early 1970s to promote the
role of culture in the struggle. In New York, it was Soley leve (The Sun Rises), in
Boston Haiti Culturelle (Cultural Haiti), and in Montreal Vaccine (the bamboo
trumpet featured in the Rara, the ritual spring festival of the Haitian countryside). It
is important to mention that prior to and, to some extent, parallel to Soley leve, other
politico-cultural groups like Tambou Iibéte and Kwi dor operated in New York, all of
which contributed to advance the struggle for liberation through culture.
T wo central points of their program were the use and promotion of Creole, as the
language of the entire people, and the importance of the status of women, as an
indispensable complement in the struggle. They also promoted a reinterpretation of
Gerdès Fleurant58
1403971625ts05.qxd  29-9-06  7:08 PM  Page 58


--- PAGE 74 ---
Haitian history, including the contribution of the peasantry, the backbone of the
economy, the granary of the society, without whose labor few can eat. Songs such as
“Haitian Women, Thank you, you are the Giver of Life,” performed to the rhythm
of the contredanse and Peze kafe, the story of peasant abuse on the way to sell goods
to the market, played to a Kongo siye beat, illustrated these concerns of the movement.
The three sister organizations held joint events in each other’s respective cities in
order to raise funds and to reach out to the community. These events were multimedia
and included vignettes, dances, songs, and jokes. They translated into Creole Jacques
Roumain’s Masters of the Dew , which they staged to great acclaim in Boston,
Montreal, and New York. The translation of Roumain’s celebrated novel was a signif-
icant act, when we remember that the novel had been translated into 17 languages
(Michael Dash, Introduction to Masters of the Dew [Heinemann, 1978]), but never
into Creole, the language of the people who are the subject of this literary master-
piece. T o make sure that all Haitians had access to the message, they dramatized the
story in a fully staged performance, which included a Vodun ceremony with a live
rooster and battery of ritual drums.
They produced three recordings of Freedom Culture songs, with an assortment of
didactic poems by Koralen, of which the best known are “Kamelo” and “T elson,”
whose central theme is the notion of popular justice in the face of Duvalierist
oppression. The Freedom Culture activists circulated a number of cassette recordings
throughout the Diaspora, as the expatriate community was called in those days, and
some were even smuggled into Haiti. Thus, their contributions were felt far and wide
and their message of hope and resistance penetrated circles deep inside the Haitian
psyche. They vowed to change the artistic landscape to reflect their vision of a democratic
Haiti: they criticized the popular musical culture whose song lyrics contained
disparaging comments about women, like this one, “Fanm lan danse kou mabouya,”
(the woman dances like a fat lizard) referring to the lack of grace of a woman. The
women within the movement played a prominent role. They did not spare their men,
whom they often branded as “feudal” when the latter’s behavior warranted it.
Members of the Freedom Culture went to war against the trivialization of interper-
sonal relations found in so many of the popular songs of Haiti. They vowed to reha-
bilitate the woman, the center post, so to speak, of the Haitian family, and the peasant,
the pillar of the economy, and predicted that the Freedom Culture ideology would
soon come to replace the negative popular culture. They were visionaries who saw a
day when the message of the Freedom Culture would become the “common denomi-
nator” of Haitian culture and dominate the musical productions of the 1980s and
beyond.
While proponents of the Freedom Culture were working to raise consciousness
about the plight of the Haitians, another group of young people, those who could not
leave the country, used a different tactic, and they participated in Vodun rituals in the
Haitian countryside. Their involvement in Vodun was a rather inoffensive gesture,
since their actions were in accord with the Duvalier’s program of “authenticity,” which
included the promotion of Vodun. Using the songs and rhythms of the peristil, the
Vodun temple, which they went to learn at its source, they were about to begin a move-
ment that would join force with their counterparts abroad to produce a revolution in
the cultural arena of the 1980s and 1990s under the name of Rasin or Root Music.
Song of Freedom 59
1403971625ts05.qxd  29-9-06  7:08 PM  Page 59


--- PAGE 75 ---
The Rasin or Root Music
Although the Rasin Movement followed in the wake of the Freedom Culture, it is in
the Vodun “lakou” or compounds that we must search for the roots of the present day
progressive popular culture. The two movements did not evolve in total ignorance of
each other, but the repressive atmosphere of the Duvalier regime made it difficult for
their members to communicate, so the two currents developed independently, and
we can understand that most people did not know about them until after the depar-
ture of Duvalier in 1986. T oday’s “mizik rasin” is grounded in the sociocultural/musical
organization of Vodun, a system that requires some explanation, due to the tendency
of too many to demonize this faith of the Haitian people.
Vodun, the religion of the Haitian people, retained from Africa, and practiced
throughout the Americas under different names, is a comprehensive system of organ-
ization of the cumulative wisdom of humankind. In this sense, it is a science of
universal knowledge that includes, among other things, social, political, economic,
artistic, technological, and, more important, spiritual dimensions with roots deep in
the history of the universe. Vodun teaches that all information and resources must be
put to the service of the community for all to enjoy, regardless of their economic sta-
tus. Central in the philosophy of Vodun is the concept of justice and equity and the
obligation to serve the needs of the communal whole. The teaching of Vodun is trans-
mitted through the oral tradition by means of its songs and dances, accompanied by
a battery of three drums perfectly harmonized in a balanced symphony of movement,
sound, and sight, and orchestrated by the presiding lwa, or the spiritual entities that
the community serves. In Haiti, this accumulated knowledge has been preserved in
the “lakou,” or the agricultural compounds, the foundation on which the social
organization of the countryside rests. And it is there that the proponents of today’s
Root Music went to search for their heritage.
According to Wilfrid Lavaud a.k.a. Ti Do, one of the leading members of the
group Foulah (personal communication 1993), the proponents of the movement
traveled to the provinces every weekend, often at great risk, for they were always
under the watchful eyes of the tonton makout (Duvalier’s militia), to study the music
of Vodun in its natural milieu. They learned to play the rhythms of the Rada,
Kongo/Petwo, and other rites in “lakou” like Souvenance and Soucrie in the
Artibonite Valley, and others like Lakou Badjo, Lakou Malik, and Lakou Lan
Kanpech. They also took music lessons, and they began to transfer the traditional
beats to their guitars and other modern instruments. In their compositions, they
introduced the ritual drums and bamboo trumpets, known as “vaksin,” much as their
predecessors of the Freedom Culture did. While they tried to respect the integrity of
the music, they also experimented, at times quite successfully. They formed musical
groups that they named Foulah, the name of the mouthful of rum the priests
spray ritually over the participants at ceremonies, alternatively, the kerchief ritual
drummers and other Vodun adherents wear around their neck; “Boukman
Eksperyans,” the name of the Vodun at the Bwa Kayiman congress in 1791, an event
that changed the history of St.-Domingue, or again, “Boukan Ginen,” meaning the
flame of Africa. These groups, formed after the departure of Duvalier, emerged on the
Gerdès Fleurant60
1403971625ts05.qxd  29-9-06  7:08 PM  Page 60


--- PAGE 76 ---
scene during the late 1980s, and during the coup d’etat (1991–1994) the group
RAM, directed by Richard A. Morse, emerged to continue the consciousness-raising
work in Haiti, while the others mentioned above were forced to go into exile. Many
of their songs use the double entendre technique, a procedure well known in Vodun
to avoid the wrath of the military dictators. A good example is the song “Embargo”
that the military liked, but it meant much more than that, because one could assume
that it referred to the military’s grip over Haiti. Another song of RAM, “Ibo Lele,”
which employed the ibo rhythm as its constructive material, was used in Jonathan
Demme’s movie Philadelphia(1994), giving exposure to the new music of Haiti. The
Root Music groups achieved international fame with their recordings and concert
tours and carved out a niche for the new Haitian music in the world market.
The best known among these musical formations is Boukman Eksperyans,
founded in 1989. It should be said that some of its musicians left to form the no less
famous Boukan Ginen (1993). Thus, in a sense, the two groups share a number of
similarities, both in musical approach and philosophy. Boukman Eksperyans’s song
“Nou Pap Sa Bliye,” an ode to the spirit of Bwa Kayiman and dedicated to Lakou
Souvenance, and Boukan Ginen’s “Nati Kongo,” a song of remembrance, articulate
the message of unity, concern for Haiti’s impoverished peasants, and intolerance for
political corruption and neglect, which struck a chord with a community identity
and direction after a long period of political searching (Averill, 1990). The young
promoters of Root Music (Ti Do, Bonga, Richard A. Morse, the Beaubrun brothers
and sisters, Aboudja, Kompe Filo, Eddy François, Pierre-Rigaud Chery, Jimmy 
Jn-Felix, Carline, Manina, and Manze, to mention but a few) differ markedly from
their Freedom Culture forebears (although, veterans like Nikol Levy, the musical
director of Soley Leve, and Sò Ann perform with Foulah regularly); Guy Gilbert of
Vaccine and composer of the song “Sezon Papayon,” which he wrote in memory of
his brother Delano, whom he thought had died in jail, is now the Haitian Consul in
Montreal; and Jean-Claude Martineau of Haiti Culturelle in Boston served as
President Aristide’s spokesperson, in the sense they have come to terms with the all
encompassing philosophy of Vodun. The Freedom Culture adherents were less con-
cerned with the content of Haitian culture because many of them, in their Marxist or
petit bourgeois orientation, saw the culture as being backward, and therefore some-
thing to be transcended or transformed. How convincing they were in their commit-
ment to equality is open to question. Thus, it is not surprising that a few of them
jumped ship and joined the Duvalier regime in its waning days, and some even went
on to serve the various military regimes of Avril and Cedras. The present day Root
Music protagonists, having done their homework, came rightly to see Vodun as an
expression of African culture, “a mother-lode that must be mined” (Bernice Reagon
Johnson, lecture at T ufts University, ca. 1983). In this sense, they were poised to har-
ness the spiritual energy and goodwill embodied in the age of consciousness spawned
by the Civil Rights Movement and its aftermath in the United States, the struggle for
African liberation on the continents and the rise of the wretched of the earth.
The music of Rasin emerged at a time when a good part of the world seemed ready
to embrace progressive humanism, spawned by the world music movement, a trend I
call Humanocentrism a philosophical approach that goes beyond the oppositional
concepts of Afrocentrism and Eurocentrism to assert the centrality of the person, the
Song of Freedom 61
1403971625ts05.qxd  29-9-06  7:08 PM  Page 61


--- PAGE 77 ---
Homo sapiens, regardless of ethnicity, class, gender, or lifestyles, in all human and
artistic endeavors. In this sense, the Rasin Movement of the 1990s benefited from
this favorable climate in which the reggae of Jamaica; the “Bloco Afro” of Brazil
(Olodum, Ara-Ketu, and others); and the “Mezcla” of Cuba (Lázaro Ros and the
Muniquitos), themselves preceded by the “New Song” of Venezuela and the
Dominican Republic, were all evolving. Central in all these movements of cultural
affirmation and liberation is Haiti, whose gesture in Bwa Kayiman in 1791 and
Gonaives, the site of the Declaration of Independence in 1804, struck the imagina-
tion of the world. Thus the themes treated in the songs of the Root Music Movement
meet not only the aspirations of the Haitian people for dignity, peace, and justice, but
they also strike a resounding chord throughout the world progressive community.
Conclusion
Vodun, as a comprehensive system of universal knowledge, with its emphasis on the
artistic and spiritual components of life, summarizes the very soul of the Haitian
people; in effect, it is in the arts of the popular culture, the music, the dance, the
songs, the paintings, the richly decorated flags, and other ritual objects, now pro-
fusely produced for the outside market, that the religion’s contribution is most evi-
dent. The arcs of the popular culture, the folklore of Haiti, grounded in the African
past and eloquently expressed in the songs, are a tribute to the people’s aspiration to
freedom. T raditionally, Vodun songs are poems of affirmation, whose themes cover
the whole spectrum from the didactic and the utilitarian to the revolutionary, from
the contemplative to the sublime, and from the transcendent to the recreational.
And, it is not surprising that the song of freedom, the Vodun song, would inspire a
popular movement of conscientization whose career is treated in this chapter. The
coming together of the Freedom Culture and Rasin or Root Music movements,
resulting from a long awaited apprehension of the true heritage of their ancestors
from Africa, as expressed in the literary concepts of Indigenism, Negritude, the
Harlem Renaissance in the United States, and the artistic productions spawning from
the 1946 bourgeois social revolution, is breaking new ground on the road to qualita-
tive social revolution, the progressive humanization of world culture, or in one word,
Humanocentrism. The fruits of these artistic and literary currents are already felt in
the works of an illustrious crop of individual musicians such as Farah Juste, Myriam
Dorismé, SÒ Ann, Barbara Guillaume, Carol Maroulé, Manno Charlemagne, 
Jn-Claude Eugène, and groups such as Antidote, Phantom, Rara Machine, Missiles,
and Zin, which make it a point to promote and disseminate the message of hope, free-
dom, justice, equality, peace, progress, and unity. The prediction of the proponents of
Freedom Culture in the 1970s that their philosophy would become the common
denominator for Haiti’s music is about to be realized, for there are few popular music
groups today that do not include in their repertoire a composition or two based on
the conceptions of the song of freedom. The result of all of this is that the Haitian
population, regardless of its high illiteracy rate, is among the most politicized in the
world. And now, we only need to put it all in a meaningful educational form, 
Gerdès Fleurant62
1403971625ts05.qxd  29-9-06  7:08 PM  Page 62


--- PAGE 78 ---
a package, one may be tempted to say, that mines this mother lode systematically in
a way that serves the material and spiritual needs of the Haitian as well as that of his
sisters and brothers throughout the world.
Selective Bibliography
*Averill, Gage, 1990. One Day for the Hunter, One Day for the Prey: Popular Music and Power
in Haiti. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Césaire, Aimé. 1971. Discourse on Colonialism. New York: Monthly Review Press.
DuBois, W . E. B. 1969 [1903]. Souls of Black Folks. New York: New American Library.
Fanon, Frantz. 1959. The Wretched of the Earth. New York: Grove Press.
Fleurant, Gerdès. 1989. Caste, Class, and Status Quo in Haiti. In Ethnic Conflict and Power: A
Cross-National Perspective, ed. Gelfand and Lee, 178–193. New York: John Wiley.
Freire, Paolo. 1972. Pedagogy of the Oppressed. New York: Herder and Herder.
Hunt, Alfred N. 1988. Haiti’s Influence on Antebellum America: Slumbering Volcano in the
Caribbean. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press.
James, C. L. R. 1963. The Black Jacobins: T oussaint L ’Ouverture and the San Domingo
Revolution. New York: Vintage Books.
Leyburn, James G. 1966. The Haitian People. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Manuel, Peter. 1988. Popular Musics of the Non-Western World . New York: Oxford
University Press.
Nkrumah, Kwame. 1970. Consciencism: Philosophy and Ideology of DeColonization and
Development with Particular Reference to the African Revolution. New York: Monthly Review
Press.
Price-Mars, Jean. 1928. Ainsi Parla l’Oncle. Paris: Impr. de Compiege.
Roumain, Jacques. 1978. Masters of the Dew. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Williams Yarborough, Lavinia. 1964. Haiti-Dance. Frankfurt am Main: Bronners Drückerei.
Selected Discography
Ayibobo. Cine Disc, Port-au-Prince, 1993.
Boukman Eksperyans. Vodou Adjae. Mango Records, NY 1991.
Boukan Ginen. Joun a Rive. Cine Disc, Port-au-Prince, 1993.
Carole Maroulé. Fleetwood, CDM 1277 (ca. 1983).
Charlie Mingus. The Best of Charles Mingus. Atlantic Records, SDI 555, 1970. RAM.
Sò Ann. Gad. our Zetoik, Marc Records. NY JDJ 1839–1.
Soley Leve. Chansons et Poiries Patriotiques. Haiti, Soley SOS 001 1973, vol. I; Peyi an Mouin,
SL-1947A. Vol. II; Ayiti Demain Pete Kafe, 1976, Vol. III.
Song of Freedom 63
1403971625ts05.qxd  29-9-06  7:08 PM  Page 63


--- PAGE 79 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 80 ---
Chapter 5
Yon Moso Twal Nan Bwa(A Piece 
of Cloth on Wood): The Drapo Vodou 
in Myths of Origin
Anna Wexler
T out sa m ap di ou, se yon istorik li ye. Gen pou ale nan kòmansman pou rive sou drapo
a...M anbo Ayizan Potko se gwo rèn Vodou—se li vin parèt avèk Vodou. T out Lwa yo
rete la avèk li men yo potko eklere. Yo pa konne kilès yo ye, kisa pou yo fè. Sa se lontan
lontan. Yo tout rete kay Manbo Ayizan paske se li ki pi gwo, semanman tout oungan se
li ki responsab pou gade moun nan djevo e ki konnen tout règleman pou sèvi mistè.
L ap kouche moun, l ap trète moun, li gen sa k pou pile fèy, sa k pou okipe moun.
Kounye a Papa Loko ki responsab ason konmanse revolte. Papa Danbala, li kite kay
Manbo Ayizan tou e li rete nan palmist kote li vin tounen koulèv. Agwe Tawoyo tounen
pwason, li konmande lamè. Ezili Freda se menm pawof la. Li vin abite a lame. Se yon
dam ki renmen anpil bijou, pafen. Kouzen li menm leu li te rete kay Manbo Ayizan, li
te konn netwaye tab. Zaka, li te konn fè jaden. Li te ale tou, li fè kilti pa li, li travay latè.
Chak Lwa ki revolte vin responsab yon bagay, li senbolize yon bagay. Yo defile kay
Manbo Ayizan youn pa youn. Kounye a Papa Sobo di bon, m pral fè drapo. Li pran on
moso bwa, li mete yon ti twal ladan, li di bon, l ap gen drapo pou siyale tout Lwa yo.
Kounye a se li menm ki responsab drapo, se li ki mèt drapo. Li fè yon drapo blan, yon
drapo wouj...lape, viktwa. Gen yon jenn ti gason ki rete avèk Manbo Ayizan tou.
Sobo soti avèk ti jenn nomn nan, kounye a li di/li sè Laplas la kay ou yé. Li soti avèk ti
nèg la Laplas ia. Kounye a Papa Sobo pran drapo, ak li e pi chak pran plas yo. Sobo soti
avèk Bade tou, ti frè li, yo tout soti ansanm ak drapo/a. Drapo a vin rele Sobo e Bade.
Everything I’m going to tell you, it’s a history. You must go to the beginning to get
to the flags...M anbo Ayizan is the great queen of Vodou—she was the first to present
Vodou. All the lwa[spirits] lived with her but they were not yet enlightened. They didn’t
know who they were, what they were supposed to do. It was long long ago. They all
lived in Manbo Ayizan’s house because she was the most powerful, the mother of all
the oungan [priests] who was responsible for watching over everyone in the initiation
1403971625ts06.qxd  28-9-06  1:09 PM  Page 65


--- PAGE 81 ---
chamber and knew all the rules for serving the spirits. She initiated people, she treated
people, she had what was needed to crush leaves, to take care of people. Then Papa Loko
who is responsible for the ason [rattle] began to revolt. Papa Danbala, he also left
Manbo Ayizan’s house and stayed in a palm tree where he turned into a snake. Agwe
Tawoyo turned into a fish, he commands the sea. Ezili Freda was in the same group. She
came to live in the sea, she is a woman who loves jewelry, perfume. Kouzen himself
when he lived in Manbo Ayizan’s house he used to clean tables; Zaka he used to work
in the fields. He left too, he tends his own crops now, he works the earth. Each lwa who
revolted became responsible for something, symbolized something. They filed out of
Manbo Ayizan’s house one by one. Then Papa Sobo said, “Good, I am going to make a
flag.” He took a piece of wood, he put a little cloth on it, he said, “Good, there is going
to be a flag for signaling all the Lwa.” Now he’s the one responsible for the flag, the mas-
ter of the flag. He made one white flag, one red flag...peace, victor y...There was a
young man who also lived with Manbo Ayizan. Sobo left with the young man and then
told him, “You are the laplas of the house now.” He left with the young person, the
laplas, and then Papa Sobo took the flag, each took their place. He left with Bade too,
his younger brother, they all left together with the flag. The flag came to be called Sobo
and Bade.
1
Shortly after our first meeting in Miami in 1991, the Vodou flagmaker Clotaire
Bazile introduced me to his spiritual history of the form with these words: “Gen pou ale
nan fon pou rive sou afe drapo a” (One must go to the bottom of things to get to the
history of flags). In 1993, toward the end of my doctoral research that focused on his
ritual artistry, he finished his account of the origin of the flag as transcribed above. With
his characteristically acute sense of timing, he chose to complete it when I could hear it
as more than an exotic narrative; when I could see Sobo’s bit of cloth wave as the origi-
nal signal for the Lwa , at the threshold of form, of visibility, when the spirits first
emerged into particularized being, for us and then, repeatedly, through us. In the inter-
vening years, I had encountered drapo(flags) in multiple ritual contexts and in diverse
narratives of their sources. Through this deepening but circuitous inquiry, I eventually
returned nan fon, and finally I prepared to receive the concluding moments of the flag’s
genesis from Clotaire. There areother origin myths. Much of the recent scholarly liter-
ature on the drapo Vodou is focused on the question of sources contributing to the
visual form of the flag and the ritual protocol that the kò drapo (flag corps), including
the pòt drapo(flagbearers) and the laplas(ritual assistant and swordbearer), enact. Taken
as a whole, these accounts, drawing variously on multiple African and European
military and religious influences, constitute a prismatic narrative of creolization, of the
simultaneous transformation of sources, in which one face of the elusive and multiva-
lent form cannot be exposed without revealing another. These accounts too may begin
with “yon moso twal nan bwa” but may be held aloft in other struggles.
In The Four Moments of the Sun (Thompson and Cornet 1981) Robert Farris
Thompson, the first to map African genealogies, linked the S-shaped cross-guards
sometimes found near the pointed tips of the staves of Haitian ritual flags to a Kongo
gesture: the “crossroads pose—right hand up to heaven, left hand parallel to the
horizon line” (171). This gesture, found on Kongo niombo or reliquary figures and
on the handguards of royal swords used for executions in ancient Kongo, is said
to mark “the boundaries between two worlds” (172) and to appear on the Haitian
Anna Wexler66
1403971625ts06.qxd  28-9-06  1:09 PM  Page 66


--- PAGE 82 ---
ritual flag that signals the spirits and marks the limits of ritual space in a possible
creolized restatement of this theme. Nkusa minpa, the Kongo practice of unfurling
and waving cloth to open the entrance to the spiritual world, is also described as an
antecedant to the ritually mediating role of the liminal drapo Vodou. Thompson
reemphasizes this link based on the sacred activity of cloth in both cultural contexts
in Flash of the Spirit , where his major discussion of Vodou flags occurs under the
heading of “Kongo Influences on Haitian Sacred Art” (1983:179). The glitter of
beaded figures of the lwa on the drapo is said to “suggest the presence of spirit” (186)
just as bits of mirror and other reflective materials on Kongo minkisi (“power figure”)
are described as indicating “the flash and arrest of the spirit” (118). However, the
S-shaped cross-guard on the flag stave has moved from Kongo gestural resonances to
Dahomean military/religious associations in the gubasa or sword of the martial deity
Gu. Thompson suggests that the S on the Vodou flagstaff reverses that of the hand-
guard on the saber held by St. James, identified as Sen Jak, the chief of the Haitian
Ogou, in the Catholic chromolithograph, thus linking swords and flags in a creolized
extension of the spiritual assertion associated with the Dahomean gubasa and the Fon
warrior god who wields it.
In the more recent Face of the Gods (1993), which contains his major writings on
the sacred flag in the African-inspired religions of the Atlantic world, Thompson
expands on his sense of the Kongo contribution to this form as it developed in Cuban
Regla de Mayombe altars, Brazilian tree/flag altars for the spirit T empo, and
Suriname maroon shrines. Though not discussed at any length, the spirit signaling,
danced Vodou drapo is linked to the latter, more stationary flag/altar expressions and
hence to Thompson’s interpretations of their Kongo antecedents:
Flags are important ritual presences in Haiti as in Suriname and Cuba...Their func-
tion seems cognate with that of the banderas mystically moving prendas in Cuba, of the
flags that announce the presence of T empo in Brazil, and of faaka pau and faaka tiki
standing to mark the spots where spirit can be praised among the maroons of Suriname.
In Haiti, flags come off the T-form hoists they ride in Suriname, or off the staffs of
T empo or the closet walls of minkisi in the Cuban Bronx and join the faithful in the
dance. (1993:294)
Discussing Kongo tombs as altars, Thompson explains that mpeeve, the Ki-Kongo
word for flag, also means “ ‘wind, breeze, spirit’ ” (22) and that the flags placed on the
ends of tombs indicate the movement of the dead as “spirit in the wind” (22). “Spirit,
moving in cloth,” he writes further, “pinpoints in space a Kongo altar” (72–73) and is
also linked to the ngangaor priest trembling in ecstasy. This association of the flag with
the activation and movement of invisible spiritual forces is basic to his reading of
African Atlantic flag/altar forms as Kongo-inspired. For example, in his discussion of
altars for the spirit Sarabanda in the Kongo-influenced Cuban tradition of Regla de
Mayombe, he describes a red banderaor flag on the wall behind a prenda(sacred caul-
dron) as deepening Kongo resonances and “allowing it (the prenda-author) to move
through time and space” (68). Felipe Garcia Villamil, a Cuban mayomberoliving in the
Bronx, is quoted as saying “ ‘Prenda no camino si no hay bandera’ (Without a flag, the
prenda won’t move)” (qtd. in Thompson, 1993:68).
Yon Moso T wal Nan Bwa 67
1403971625ts06.qxd  28-9-06  1:09 PM  Page 67


--- PAGE 83 ---
Kongo flag traditions, in addition to flag-surmounted Muslim marabout graves
and Mande/Akan tree altars, are also invoked in Thompson’s writing on Samaaka
ancestral flag altars, faaka pau or “ ‘staff with a flag’ ” (1993:129). He associates this
form—flags on trees or suspended from tall poles on a platform in the air with a lad-
der leading up to it—with nsunga or Kongo banners attached to long poles held dur-
ing funeral processionals and used to signal the dead. It is interesting to note that
similar forms have been documented (though rarely) in connection with Haitian
Vodou. For example, one of the photos accompanying the New Library of America
edition of Zora Neal Hurston’s T ell My Horse(1995), based on her research in Haiti
in 1936–1937, is labeled “Offering to Congo Savanne,” a group of Lwa in the Kongo
pantheon. Several flags, most of them white, are suspended from what seems to be
rope twisted up the trunk of a tree. Beside it there appears to be a ladder reaching up
to the level of the flags. In En Haïti by the French planter Eugène Aubin, published
in 1910, photographs documenting the beginning of a procession to celebrate a serv-
ice for the Lwa Agwe in Grand Saline include plain cloth banners (a few in white, one
vertical swallow-tailed flag in dark translucent material) suspended from long sta-
tionary poles outside the ounfò of ougan Ti-Plaisir. In the foreground of one photo-
graph, a ounsi (temple) carries a flag—a piece of dark translucent cloth on a short
stick—a more familiar, basic version of the mobile Vodou flag.
In Patrick Polk’s essay, “Sacred Banners and the Divine Cavalry Charge,” in the
exhibit catalogue Sacred Arts of Haitian Vodou(Cosentino 1995), the S-shaped cross-
guards found on the staves of some drapo Vodou are situated explicitly in Haitian
colonial and postcolonial military history and linked to similar features found on
European-style military standards and swords. Emphasizing the impact of European
flags on indigenous forms in sub-Saharan Africa, including Fante, Dahomean, and
Kongo traditions, Polk goes on to explore the influence of specific kinds of French
colonial flags (especially Napoleonic regimental colors and Royalist and Republican
banners)—their adoption by insurgent troops and the postrevolutionary Haitian mil-
itary, their status as authorizing and sacralizing objects, and the ceremonial protocol
associated with them—on the form and ritual choreography of the drapo Vodou.
As Polk (1995) and Yonker (1991) have pointed out, elements of their ritual
deployment, such as the prescribed movements of flag escorts, pairing of flags and
swords, crossing flags over the heads of honored participants, extending the tips of
the flags and the hilt of the sword to be kissed and dipping in salutation, as well as the
circular runs around the poto mitan (the center post of the peristil or Vodou temple),
quite obviously reflect the impact of the military reviews and salutes carried out by
the colonial forces. Although, as Polk documents, there is evidence that flags belong-
ing to Vodou societies were in use by the mid-1800s, to my knowledge the details of
their actual deployment in ceremonies during this period have not been systemati-
cally researched. The earliest references I have located to flags being used to lead pro-
cessions for the Lwa and to salute members of the ritual hierarchy and honored guests
are those contained in the writings of Eugène Aubin, mentioned above, which are
based on observations made at the turn of the century. Described by Métraux (1972)
as an accurate observer of Vodou, he documents ceremonies in LaPlaine and
Carrefour in which the ounsi unfurled drapo and, accompanied by the laplas, saluted
dignitaries. In the latter locale, they led a manbo as she made libations under the trees
Anna Wexler68
1403971625ts06.qxd  28-9-06  1:09 PM  Page 68


--- PAGE 84 ---
sacred to the Lwaaround the courtyard. When visitors entered following this procession,
the ounsi placed the tips of the flag staves on their shoulders. In Aubin’s photo of a
procession for Agwe in Grand Saline, also mentioned above, the ounsi in the fore-
ground holding a flag of transparent, dark cloth appears to be waiting to lead a group
of sèvitè gathering in the background.
In Polk’s account, the sacred associations of the Vodou flag draw on the “aura of
divine power” (1995:336) with which the French embued their flags as embodiments
of colonial authority in St.-Domingue and with which they sacralized their regiments.
As he points out, military flags were customarily blessed before being carried by the
regiments and were kept in churches when not being used. Included in Haïti et ses
Peintres by the Haitian art historian Michel Philippe Lerebours (1989) are reproduc-
tions of two paintings that (unintentionally) document the complementarity of the
sacralized military/national and Vodou flag that Polk suggests. One work entitled “La
Bénédiction des Drapeaux” (undated) attributed to Louis Rigaud, who became rec-
ognized as a painter in the late nineteenth century, depicts a pair of flags, including
the national flag of Haiti, being presented by Haitian troops for consecration to a
French Catholic priest. In the other, more contemporary work, “Bénédiction des
Drapeaux par la Maitresse de l’Eau” (undated), by the painter Gérard Valcin
(1927–1988), the sacralizing agent is a divinity, the mermaid Lwa Lasyrenn.
Although it is difficult to make out the details of this painting in the reproduction,
one can detect a ounsi standing in the water and holding out a flag (or perhaps a pair
of flags) for blessing by the female water spirit who sits on a ceremonial bark in a
stream in front of a waterfall. A number of ounsi and other participants also stand in
the water in an attitude of prayer.
A quintessential expression of the fusion of religious and political power in
Haitian history, the Vodou flag and its ritual, in Polk’s reading, ceremonially reenact
the transformation of European military symbols, technology, and discipline into the
revolutionary weapons of enslaved Africans and their descendants and re-create their
victory. Connections between revolutionary heroes, the first flag of the nation, and
the Vodou flag are evident in the iconographic emblems and activities of the Ogou,
especially Ogou Feray and Sen Jak, whose image accompanied by his flag from the
chromolithograph of St. James the Major frequently appears on drapo Vodou. As
Desmangles (1992) suggests, these Lwa are associated with the Haitian generals and
soldiers who defeated the French as well as the guerilla forces, the Cacos, who fought
the Marines during the American Occupation of Haiti (1914–1934). Karen Brown
writes that “[t]he military-political complex has provided the primary niche for Ogou
in Haiti” (1989:71). A painting by Senèque Obin entitled “J. J. Dessalines”
(c. 1960)—the Haitian Revolutionary general and first Haitian head of state—makes
the links between Ogou, Dessalines, and the first flag of Haiti explicit. As Stebich
(1978), in whose book Haitian Art the painting is reproduced, explains, the red color
of his uniform as well as his pose in the painting evoke Ogou. The red and blue flag
he holds is the flag of the new republic he created in 1803 by tearing the white stripe
off the French tricolor, enacting the defeat and expulsion of the colonists (T rouillot
1990). Legendary accounts of this moment abound. According to Odette
Mennesson-Rigaud (1958), people still discuss whether the flag was created by
Dessalines under a repozwa (tree housing a spirit) near a ounfò in Merote, in blue and
Yon Moso T wal Nan Bwa 69
1403971625ts06.qxd  28-9-06  1:09 PM  Page 69


--- PAGE 85 ---
red for the Ogou he served, or in a meeting house in Arcahaie. In her book, Haiti,
History, and the Gods, Joan Dayan (1995) writes that people in Léogane told her that
Dessalines was possessed by Ogou when he cut the white stripe off the French flag.
In a ceremony for Ogou Feray described by Milo Marcelin (1950) in Mythlogie Vodou
the Lwa is presented with two flags, the flag of the Vodou sosyete and one in blue and
red, the colors of the nation, and as Marcelin explains, of the spirit.
In the mythic resonances between the first flag of the nation and the Vodou flag,
the narrative of transformed sources surrounding the ritual drapo restates the unity of
spiritual and political rebellion integral to the birth of the first Black republic in the
New World through the legendary origins of its most emblematic military/religious
form. Whatever the truth status of Bois Caïman, the Vodou ceremony and political
rallying event of 1791 believed to have launched the Haitian Revolution (see Mintz
and T rouillot 1995), it is clear that the religion was a vital tributary to the slaves’
resistance to and eventual military defeat of the colonists.
Not to be neglected in this facet of the prismatic origin narrative of the drapo
Vodou is the monumental treatise on the occult political/religious significations of
the Haitian national flag by Dr. Arthur Holly a.k.a. Her-Ra-Ma-El, self-described as
“Esoteriste Haïtien” and, according to Magdaline Shannon (1983), a scholar
respected by his contemporaries in the Haitian elite for his knowledge of the esoteric
dimensions of Vodou. In a letter to his brother, then president of the Ligue du
Drapeau, which prefaces this volume, Holly states his intent to reveal the “valeur
occulte du Drapeau haïtien” (the occult meaning of the Haitian Flag) (1928:14).
Entitled Dra-Po, Etude Esotérique de Égrégore Africain, Traditionnel, Social, et
National d’Haiti, this book was published in Port-au-Prince in 1928, the same year as
Ainsi parla l’oncle by Jean Price-Mars. The latter, a groundbreaking work of Haitian
Indigénisme (the valorization of Haiti’s African heritage), sought to valorize Vodou as
a source of national pride and unity, partly by linking it to African religious tradi-
tions, and to counter a particularly virulent wave of racism defamation of the popu-
lar religion spurred by the American Occupation (Murphy, 1990). According to Milo
Rigaud (1953), Holly’s oeuvre represented a continuation of the efforts of Price-Mars
and his colleagues. However, his construction of African sources is an occult project,
tracing hidden meanings within the symbolic codes of Vodou to initiatory Ethiopian
and Egyptian traditions, including ancient Chaldean astronomy, in an effort to
dignify the popular religion and combat racist images of its practices as cannibalistic
and obscene.
In Dra-Po, occult readings of the Haitian flag, its predecessors and its variant
post-independence forms assertively fuse esoteric African genealogies of Vodou and
theocratic versions of Haitian history with the cultural nationalism of the period.
The flag, “un fragment de l’esprit, de l’âme, du corps de la Nation” (a fragment of
the spirit, of the soul, of the body of the Nation) (1928:19), does not symbolize as
much as enact the spiritual/political evolution of the Nation. According to Holly,
even the colors chosen for the flags of the colonial troops were directly inspired by
“des Invisibles qui sont les Protecteurs naturels de la race africaine” (the Invisibles
who are the natural Protectors of the african race) (23) who were “mises en activité”
(put into action) (24) by the colors representing them and thus able to “contrarier”
(thwart) and “paralyser” (paralyze) the enemy from behind the lines. The red and
Anna Wexler70
1403971625ts06.qxd  28-9-06  1:09 PM  Page 70


--- PAGE 86 ---
blue bicolor created by Dessalines is said to have invoked the occult powers of Mars
and Jupiter or “Ho-Gou phérail” (Ogou Feray), who, like other Lwa, represents a
cosmic law or force augmented by advances in science and other achievements of
human reason. Holly proposes to convene his readers under “l’ombre du DRA-PO”
(the shade of the flag) (36) in order to penetrate into the realm of national heroes and
ancestors, reclaim Vodou from its detractors, and revive the “l’âme nationale”
(national soul) from the lethargy induced by the ethical and political disarray of the
period—a clear reference to the humiliating impact of the American Occupation. On
the revolutionary battlefields, around the peristil, and in the occult configurations of
the text, the flag invokes and activates the spirits that unify and sustain the nation and
its citizens in the face of continuous threats to physical and moral survival. Whether
one reads from origin myths of the national flag to the Vodou flag, or the reverse, the
distance between them effectively disappears in Holly’s treatise.
For Louis Maximilien, whose classic work Le Vodou Haitien(1945) is dedicated to
Price-Mars and extends the tradition of sympathetic, ethnographically informed por-
trayal of the popular religion, Vodou is “un culte du drapeau” (a cult of the flag)
(144). By this he means that the patriotic character of the religion, embodied in the
consecrated Vodou flag, is based on respect for and defense of the land considered to
be the sacred ground of the ancestral Lwa and not just the object of secular claims. In
his view, the military dimension of the ceremonies also refers to the vital support of
the Lwa during battle or at other times of mortal danger. The spirits who may
“chantent, dansent et crient, quand ils bambochent” (sing, dance and cry when they
carouse) (145) can become instantly concentrated and aggressive when called upon
to aid a vodouist in crisis. It is interesting to note that the Haitian novelist Marie
Chauvet (1960), who cites Maximilien as an ethnographic source for descriptions of
Vodou rituals in her novel Fond de Nègres (see chapter 2 of her book), evokes associ-
ations between the flag of Ogou and the reclaiming of peasant lands in the dreams of
Papa Beauville. The red flag becomes an agent of cleansing and refertilizing the earth
whose sale and misuse (including the chopping down of sacred trees) has angered the
ancestral Lwa.
The contributions of French Catholicism are the least explored among the major
tributaries constituting the multifaceted origin narrative of the form and ritual func-
tions of the Vodou drapo. European military sources for the Haitian ritual drapo, as
Polk (1995) indicates, include Catholic rites of sacralization by which banners were
blessed by priests before being carried by the colonial regiments. The consecration of
Vodou flags, and all other objects intended for ritual use, referred to as baptism or
batèm, formally resembles the Catholic practice with a prêt savann or bush priest
often officiating, described by Desmangles as a “symbol” (1992:89), but not an offi-
cial representative of the Catholic Church, who assists oungan and manbo (especially
in urban areas) with aspects of Vodou ritual requiring Catholic liturgy. Prayers are
recited, holy water is sprinkled on the object, and a non vanyan or ritual name chosen
by attending godparents is given to the object (Métraux 1972).
In The Faces of the Gods , the Haitian scholar Leslie Desmangles argues that
baptism in Vodou is fundamentally shaped by West African rather than Catholic
conceptions because it is used “to denote a means whereby divine power is instilled in
a person, an edifice, or an object” (1992:90). Lionel Hogu
2 has also described the
Yon Moso T wal Nan Bwa 71
1403971625ts06.qxd  28-9-06  1:09 PM  Page 71


--- PAGE 87 ---
common Catholic practice of baptizing objects and dwellings in Haiti in these terms,
as effecting the infusion of the protective and generative power of God into a house,
for example, which may be baptized by a priest at the request of the prospective
inhabitants before they move in. Catholic baptismal rites in Haiti, like other sacra-
ments of the Church, evidence the long-term transformative impact of the religious
cultures of enslaved Africans and their descendants who adapted them to their own
needs (see Dayan 1995), whether in the Church or the peristil, a New World mani-
festation of a process dating from the fifteenth century when Portuguese missions
were first established in West and Central Africa (Sanneh 1983; Thornton 1992).
Vodou rites of baptism, then, do more than borrow superficial gestures from a
Catholic practice that has itself been deeply shaped by African religions and their
transmutations in Haiti.
Even in its most abbreviated form, the baptism of drapo intended for ritual use
profoundly alters their status as objects. Clotaire once referred to Vodou flags made
for sale, including the most elaborate and expensive versions, as “nothing” compared
to those that have been consecrated. According to the flagmaker Edgar Jean-Louis,
unbaptized flags “pa gen nanm” (don’t have soul, energy), unlike consecrated drapo
that can acquire even “plis nanm” (more soul) “fò s” (force), and “kouraj” (courage) by
participating in ceremonies. Even when faded, torn, and bloodstained, the sacralized
flag, especially those that have been involved in many rituals, are more highly valued
by Jean-Louis than the most glorious unbaptized commercial flag.
3
Sacralizing the flags may involve more elaborate and intense rituals like those under-
gone during the second level of Vodou initiation known as kanzo(initiation), described
by Brown as a “rite of fire designed to transform suffering into power” (1991:351) in
which initiates must handle dumplings pulled from boiling pots called zen. Jean-Louis
used the terms baptize and kanzo interchangeably for the process of consecrating the
flags. In the version of this ceremony he described, a mixture of oil and fèy (leaves) are
prepared in a pot. As a mixture burns and the flames leap up, the flag is passed through
them. On the final day of the three day ritual, lasting from Friday until Sunday, a dance
is held to celebrate and formally present the flag to the Lwafor whom it is intended.
4 For
the flagmakers Monique and Pollone Colin, to kanzoa flag is to give it “plis fòs” (more
force) than the prêt savann can confer through baptism. In their version, the flag is
sequestered in the djevo (initiation chamber) for up to eight days and made to koucheor
lie down, like human candidates, on the sign of the Lwa to whom it is dedicated. There
it rests on a special bed surrounded by a white curtain until “ou leve li” (you get it up)
and then “ou resevwa drap a” (you receive the flag) with a meal consisting of chicken
killed for the occasion, rice, plantains, yams, spaghetti, and kola that is placed beside the
flag for the Lwa within it to consume. After the meal, the flag is put to bed again and
brought out of the djevothe following day ready to assume its public ritual functions.
5
Sacralizing flags through kanzo rites does resemble those means used by the Fon and
their neighbors in Benin and T ogo to activate bocio sculptures for spiritual work
(including heat, sacrifice, food, and invocation of deities) (Blier 1995) more than the
Catholic ceremony of baptism.
The most important link between Catholic tradition and the ritual form and
functions of the Vodou drapo is explored in LeGrace Benson’s (1996, 1997) work on
Catholic processional banners. In 1989 she observed striking similarities between the
Anna Wexler72
1403971625ts06.qxd  28-9-06  1:09 PM  Page 72


--- PAGE 88 ---
use of these banners in a Catholic ceremony known as a Pardon in a pilgrimage parish
in Brittany and the ritual protocol of the Vodou flag. Brought out of a sanctuary in
Locronon, where Pardons occur at six-year intervals, banners and crucifixes saluted
the four cardinal points in the square in front of the church and were then kissed at
each situation, ritual gestures commonly enacted in the ceremonial presentation of
the Vodou drapo. As in Vodou services, these aspects of flag protocol have a distinct
military valence. Later the banners were carried out into the town and surrounding
fields in a sacralizing procession that stopped for prayers and hymns at each station.
Relating this circuit to the ritual perambulations of Vodou flags outside the temples
(and to military parades) LeGrace Benson writes beautifully,
The intent and content of the procession may have been quite different from the pro-
cessions of vodou banners into the surroundings of the houmfo [temple] during special
services, but, like the parades from the President’s or General’s T e Deum in the cathe-
dral out to the Champs de Mars, the poetry is the same: the drapo/drapeau proclaim the
dominion of those who carry them and of their holy figure.” (1996:7)
According to Benson, such services and processionals may have been transplanted
to Haiti by Breton priests, who constituted about 70 percent of the clergy active in
Haiti between 1804 and the 1860 Concordat with the Vatican, particularly in cere-
monies dedicated to St. Anne, a popular focus of veneration in Brittany and Haiti. In
addition to elements of shared ritual protocol, Benson notes significant visual
crossovers between Catholic banners and Vodou drapo—the image of a saint in the
center as well as the Sacred Heart of Mary and of Jesus transmuted into the heart vèvè
used on flags to represent the Ezilis, deities of love.
T o search for the sacred Vodou flag in its entangled histories was to arrive nan fon
through violently disjunctive yet merging, circuitous routes, to repeatedly encounter
its genesis as a “moso twal nan bwa” (mentioned earlier) in the unfathomable limi-
nality of a form that unfurls in one world only to invoke another. Whether across bat-
tlefields, religions, continents, or material and immaterial realms of being, the ritual
flag signals the interpenetration of domains.
However, the perpetually elusive, emergent character of the sacred drapo became
more directly evident to me in the initial public ceremony of a kanzo (initiation) cycle
that I witnessed in Port-au-Prince in July, 1993. As in Clotaire’s origin myth (at least
initially), Manbo Ayizan, the Lwawho protects and purifies initiates during their rites
of passage in the kanzo cycle, presided. As the ceremony unfolded, the flags became
active and stationery markers of liminality intimately involved in the dynamic of the
candidates’ death and rebirth into spiritually articulated beings.
The initial salutes, runs, and mock battles between the flagbearers and the laplas
were surprisingly flat. Perhaps because the pòt drapo appeared reluctant, nervous, and
not quite sure of their movements, this ritual sequence seemed more pro forma than
visually stunning and activating. I was also jaded by reading accounts that necessarily
isolated the flag presentation for purposes of description and interpretation, possibly
heightening the spectacle of their initial, choreographed routines. No one standing
around me seemed particularly attentive while it was unfolding, and I had to resist
conversation in order to focus on what the trio was doing after the flagbearers twirled,
Yon Moso T wal Nan Bwa 73
1403971625ts06.qxd  28-9-06  1:09 PM  Page 73


--- PAGE 89 ---
releasing the sequined flags for the Lwa Sen Jak and Danbala, which had been
covering their shoulders. What I had anticipated as a major spectacle seemed thor-
oughly absorbed into the whole: the hundreds of people pressing into the peristil,
many of whom were dressed in white so spotless that it seemed to shimmer; the
sound of their voices in talk or in songs, responding to the insistent drums and ampli-
fied by the microphones carried by the oungenikon (song leader) and hanging from
the roof beams; and the darkness outside the peristil where the nocturnal promise of
the military regime’s random and selective violence heightened the sense of collective
refuge within the temporarily illuminated enclosure whose boundaries the drapo now
marked and consecrated.
But perhaps I simply forgot the impact of the first appearance of the flags in the
emotional richness of the ceremony that grew almost unbearably intense as the group
of candidates for initiation became the focus of ritual attention. This was a service to
“antre yo nan djevo a” (enter them into the initiation chamber), to publicly sacralize
them for a two-week period of seclusion and to bid them farewell not only because of
their impending removal from the community but because their transformation
would be fundamental. During this period, they would kouche (lie down) inside the
djevo until their public emergence for the boule zen (burning of the pots) ceremony
in the kanzo cycle. As Karen Brown explains,
In Haitian Creole, the verb kouche (to lie down, to sleep, to make love, to give birth—
less commonly to die) is the general word used to describe initiation. Entering the ini-
tiation chamber is like dying. Friends and family members cry as they line up to kiss the
initiates goodbye....A s  i n  many other sorts of initiation around the world, to kouche
is to be forced by ritual means to regress, to become a child again, to be fed and cared
for as a child would be, only to be brought rapidly back to adulthood, a new kind of
adulthood, again by ritual means. (1989:272)
The initial presentation of the drapo marked the conclusion of the ritual sequence
known as chire ayizan (shredding of palm leaves) and the salutation of the Rada Lwa
who were called in succession by the songs and rum rhythms appropriate to each (see
Fleurant 1996) after the flags were temporarily withdrawn. During the chire ayizan,
a palm branch was lifted by the presiding manbo from a chair covered with a white
sheet and positioned on the vèvè (ritual emblem) for Ayizan. After being presented to
the four directions, its leaves were shredded by a group of ounsi who danced it around
the poto mitan and into the djevo where the novices would be sequestered. The
fringed palm leaf or ayizan is an emblem of the patronage of the Lwa Manbo Ayizan.
The faces of the initiates would be covered with palm fringe when they later emerged
from seclusion in the concluding ceremony of the cycle. Following the chire ayizan
and the salutations, mock battles, and runs of the kò drapo, the flags were leaned
against each side of the door to the djevo for the Ogou or warrior spirits, partially
unfurled and pointing away from each other, with the sword of the laplasstuck into the
wall between them above the door. It was explained to me that this configuration was a
salute to Sen Jak, whose vèvè it mirrored in action.
The flags were carried into the center of the peristil again as the novices were
brought out from under a white sheet beneath which they had been led from one of
Anna Wexler74
1403971625ts06.qxd  28-9-06  1:09 PM  Page 74


--- PAGE 90 ---
the altar rooms and positioned in a line, each one held from behind by a oungan or
manbo attending them. As the kò drapo performed an abbreviated version of their ini-
tial routines, I was able to see the five initiates as they emerged. It was a pivotal
moment for me because I saw the reality of the spiritual death and rebirth undergone
in initiation already presaged in their faces, my first real exposure to the public cere-
monial expression of Vodou. Four of them, young women probably in their twenties
with their hair closely cropped, wore simple shirts made from coarse light grey and
brown cotton. The fifth, a man who appeared slightly older, wore a sleeveless white
shirt over loose pants tied with a string. Though they had not even begun to undergo
the intense (and secret) rite of transformation inside the djevo, they already seemed to
have shed their personalities and become vulnerable to the point of annihilation or
transfiguration—both possibilities were visible in their faces where the anguish of
approaching extinction seemed to yield a sudden, unsettled radiance shadowed in the
next instant by returning fear and the will to resist. The oungan and manbo behind
them continued to guide them gently or forcibly as they alternated between periods
of total submission and fierce resistance. They twirled them repeatedly to the left and
then to the right, periodically pressing them down to curtsey or kiss the ground in the
sequence of movements used to salute a ritual superior.
After heralding the emergence of the novices, the pòt drapo rolled up the flags but
continued to carry them during the remainder of the ceremony, blending into each
ritual event. They became constant presences rather than dramatic markers, often
remaining close to the novices like the manbo and oungan, attending them and mir-
roring their seriousness. Also, in their furled condition, they seemed to evoke the sta-
tus of the initiates as embryonic spiritual beings. The pòt drapo accompanied a manbo
who emerged from the altar room carrying kanzo necklaces—long strands of multi-
colored beads—which she crossed over the backs and chests of the oungan and manbo
and others present who had already passed through this level of initiation. The flags
then rejoined the novices who stood in a line as one by one they were slowly sacral-
ized. Marie Yolande, the presiding manbo, who normally moves at an unhurried,
deliberate pace as if nothing could disturb her internal rhythm, seemed to proceed in
an even slower mode as she traced an asterisk like star or pwen in flour on the top of
each initiate’s head, placed a sheet over it, and then shook the ason (sacred Vodou rat-
tle) above it. The five seemed remote, almost beyond contact, and the peristil grew
quiet as the moment to bid them farewell approached. Those around me began to
cry, and I joined them, feeling an awe akin to grief at the immensity of the transfor-
mation the initiates had to undergo on their path toward spiritual maturity, a
transformation that had already visibly begun.
After they were embraced and kissed by the manbo and others present, the five
were blindfolded. Those who had been guiding them stood between them, and all of
them joined hands with one pòt drapo at each end. The line then whipped around,
circling the poto mitan and flying back and forth across the peristil. The initiates
began to lose their balance and then struggle wildly as if simultaneously resisting a
spirit trying to mount them and their impending captivity. An ougan fought to keep
the young man among them from breaking loose from the line. The pòt drapo took
up positions on each side of the door to the djevo holding the furled flags upright.
Arms and legs flying, the initiates were pushed one by one inside.
Yon Moso T wal Nan Bwa 75
1403971625ts06.qxd  28-9-06  1:09 PM  Page 75


--- PAGE 91 ---
Multiple origin narratives of the drapo Vodou converged simultaneously in this
intensely transforming ceremony. I saw the military/political protocols referencing
French colonial history and the battles and heroes of Haitian Independence cele-
brated in the ritual deployment of the flag for Sen Jak, the Catholic processional
modes suggested by the initial salutes and choreographed routines, as well as by the
flags at either end of the line of initiates, and, throughout the ceremony, the spiritu-
ally activating power of flags as both stationary and mobile forms, a legacy of Kongo
practices. But it was the furled flags as basic liminal markers of the regressed, inchoate
yet radiant state of the initiates that evoked the most primal, and finally, for me, the
most moving of all the origin myths—the “moso twal nan bwa,” signaling our capacity
to embody spirit, to continuously transform.
Notes
The following chapter draws on research conducted for my doctoral dissertation, “For the
Flower of Ginen: the Artistry of Clotaire Bazile, a Haitian Vodou Flagmaker,” Harvard
University, 1998. For other published essays or interviews based on my work with Clotaire
Bazile, see “ ‘I Am Going to See Where My Oungan Is,” in Sacred Possessions: Vodou, Santería
and Obeah in the Caribbean (Wexler 1997); special section on Clotaire Bazile in Callaloo
(Wexler 1997); and “Fictional Oungan: In the Long Shadow of the Fetish,” in Research in
African Literatures (Wexler 2001). My deep gratitude to Clotaire Bazile, Paulette Marotière,
and Alix Dabady for making the insights about the ritual flag expressed here possible and to
the art historian LeGrace Benson for her devoted and inspired scholarship on Catholic and
other religious/historical influences on the sacred drapo.
1. Thanks to Lionel Hogu for his invaluable help as a research assistant with the translation/
interpretation of this passage, as well as multiple other interviews and ethnographic
materials that formed my dissertation.
2. Lionel Hogu, personal communication, October 18, 1996.
3. Interview with Edgar Jean-Louis, Port-au-Prince, March 2, 1993. Edgar made these
remarks during a discussion about why he thinks tourists and collectors seek out seasoned
ritual flags and are willing to pay more for them than the commercial version. His state-
ments probably reflect his appreciations of the spiritual resonance of these objects rather
than what drives most collectors.
4. Edgar Jean-Louis, interview, Port-au-Prince, March 2, 1993.
5. Monique and Pollone Colin, interview, Port-au-Prince, March 4, 1993.
References
Benson, LeGrace. 1996. Some Breton and Muslim Antecedants of Vodou Drapo. In Sacred
and Ceremonial T extiles: Proceedings of the Fifth Biennial Symposium of the T extile Society of
America. Chicago, IL: Art Institute of Chicago.
Bleier, Suzanne Preston. 1995.African Vodun.Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Brown, Karen McCarthy. 1989. Systematic Remembering, Systematic Forgetting: Ogou in
Haiti. In Africa’s Ogun, ed. S. Barnes. Bloomington: Indiana Univeristy Press.
Anna Wexler76
1403971625ts06.qxd  28-9-06  1:09 PM  Page 76


--- PAGE 92 ---
——. 1991. Mama Lola: A Vodou Priestess in Brooklyn. Brooklyn, CA: University of California
Press.
Chauvet, Marie. 1960. Fon des Négres. Port-au-Prince, Haiti: Edition Henri Deschamps.
Cosentino, Donald J., ed. 1995. Sacred Arts of Haitian Vodou . Los Angeles: UCLA Fowler
Museum of Cultural History.
Dayan, Joan. 1995. Haiti, History, and the Gods. Berkley, CA: University of California Press.
Desmangles, Leslie G. 1992. The Faces of the Gods: Vodou and Roman Catholicism in Haiti .
Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press. 
Fleurant, Gerdes. 1996. Dancing Spirits: Rhythms and Rituals of Haitian Vodun, the Rada rite.
Contributions to the Study of Music and Dance, no. 42. Westport, CT: Greenwood.
Holly, Arthur. 1928. Dra-Po, Etude Esoterique de Egregore Africain, Traditionnel, Social, et
National de Haiti. Port-au-Prince: Imprimerie Nemours T elhomme.
Hurston, Zora Neale. 1995. T ell My Horse: Vodou and Life in Haiti and Jamaica . New York:
Library of America.
Marcelin, Milo. 1950. Mythologie vodou, Puerto ... de la música folklórica de Cuba. La Habana:
Ministerio de Educación.
Maximilien, Louis. 1945. Le Vodou Haitien. Port-au-Prince, 1945.
Mennesson-Rigaud, Odette. 1958. Le Role du Vaudou dans Indépendence d’Haiti. Présence
Africaine, 18/19 (February/March).
Métraux, Alfred. 1972. Vodoo in Haiti. Repr., New York: Pantheon, 1989.
Michel Philippe Lerebours. 1989. Haiti et ses Peintres de 1840 à 1980: Souffrances et Espoires
d’un Peuple. Port-au-Prince: Imprimeur.
Mintz, Sidney, and Michel-Rolph T rouillot. 1995. The Social History of Haitian Vodou. In
Sacred Arts of Haitian Vodou , ed. Donald J. Consentino. Los Angeles: UCLA Fowler
Museum of Cultural History.
Polk, Patrick. 1995. Sacred Banners and the Divine Cavalry Charge. In Sacred Arts of Haitian
Vodou, ed. Donald J. Cosentino. Los Angeles: UCLA Fowler Museum of Cultural History.
Rigaud, Milo. 1953. Secrets of Voodoo. Paris: Editons Niclaus.
Sanneh, Lamin. 1983. West African Christianity: The Religious Impact. Maryknoll, NY: Orbis
Books.
Shannon, Magdaline. 1983. Introduction to Price-Mars, J. In So Spoke the Uncle . T rans.
Magdaline Shannon. Washington, DC: Three Continents Press.
Stebich, Ute, ed. 1978. Haitian Art. New York: Brooklyn Museum.
Thompson, Robert Farris. 1993. Face of the Gods: Arts and Altars of Africa and the African
Americas. New York: Museum for African Arts.
Thompson, Robert Farris, and Joseph Cornet. 1981. The Four Moments of the Sun .
Washington: National Gallery of Art.
––––––. 1983. Flash of the Spirit. New York: Vintage Books.
Thornton, John. 1992. Africa and Africans in the Making of the Atlantic World, 1400–1680 .
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
T rouillot, Michel-Rolph. 1990. Haiti, State Against Nation: The Origins and Legacy of
Duvalierism. New York: Monthly Review Press.
Yonker, Dellores. 1991. Sequinned Surfaces: Vodoun Flags from Haiti. Northridge, CA: Art
Galleries California State University, Northridge.
Yon Moso T wal Nan Bwa 77
1403971625ts06.qxd  28-9-06  1:09 PM  Page 77


--- PAGE 93 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 94 ---
Chapter 6
“The Jew” in the Haitian Imagination: 
Pre-Modern Anti-Judaism in the
Postmodern Caribbean
Elizabeth A. McAlister
Europe and the Jews: A Mythological Blueprint 
for Demonization
Each year in Haiti the Holy Week of Easter sets the stage for spiritual dramas of
remembrance, performed in carnivalesque street theater throughout the country.
While Catholics reenact the Passion of Jesus and enter with him into his tribulation
and resurrection, some practitioners of the Afro-Haitian religion called Vodou organ-
ize enormous musical parades called Raras and take to the streets for the spiritual
warfare that becomes possible when the angels and saints remove to the underworld,
along with Jesus, on Good Friday. The cast of characters who have a hand in the
week’s events include the deities of Vodou—especially Baron Simitye, the Vodou
“Lord of the Dead”—the zonbi (recently dead) who are his wards, and also Jesus, the
two thieves crucified with him, a couple of Haitian army officers who secretly wit-
nessed the resurrection, Pontius Pilate and the Romans, Judas, and “the Jews.” The
week’s ritual events combine the plots and personae of the Christian narrative with
the cosmology of various African religions and rehash them in local ritual dramas
whose elements draw from the entire history of the Atlantic world, from the
European Middle Ages to the contemporary condition of global capitalism in the
Americas.
1
The Haitian Lenten Rara season remembers a certain history of the Americas.
Said by Haitians from the town of Leogane to be “an Indian festival,” the Raras pro-
vide a fleeting yearly remembrance of the 250,000 Tainos who died in the first two
years after Christobal Colon’s (Christopher Columbus) fateful 1492 arrival in Haiti,
1403971625ts07.qxd  28-9-06  1:09 PM  Page 79


--- PAGE 95 ---
known as Aiyti-Kiskeya, the “mountainous land.”2 But this is only the first of many
fragmented historical memories. Harnessing the spiritual power of the deities in
the Petwo, Lemba, and Kongo branches of Vodou, the Raras also recall and activate
religious principles from the African kingdom of Kongo that flourished in the
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. The festival carries Creole memories also, layers of
American-side history. Rara parades come to their climactic finish in Easter week pre-
cisely because Holy Week was mandated (in 1685, under the Code Noir) to provide
a respite from labor for enslaved Africans of the colony. Slavery and the distinctions
between freedom and servitude are themes in the Raras and in Vodou, as they are in
the Christian story.
3
Besides remembrances of the Indians, the Africans, and the enslaved Creoles,
however, Haitian Holy Week is also an heir to the anti-Judaism of medieval European
popular thought. After all, Christobal Colon and the early colonists were products of
the religious worldview of the late Middle Ages, when the Inquisition was in full
force. In a telling coincidence of history, Colon set sail for what he would call the
outro mondo (other world) in August of 1492, only three days after the final depar-
ture of the Jews from Spain.
4 This was the era during which Spain expelled its entire
Jewish population, and the Inquisition reserved special tribunals for any anusim, or
conversos, converted Jews, who were suspected of “Judaiizing.” 5 As figures to be
manipulated, demonized, or embraced, “the Jews” are marked as the original “Other”
of Europe, the very first object of Christendom’s projection, marginalization and
demonization. Europe’s demonization of Jews became a mythological blueprint for
the encounter with Native peoples and Africans in the Americas.
Easter week in Haiti tells many histories, then, but it is this last one that interests
us here: the demonization by European Christianity of two groups—Jews and black
Africans. This work is about how some black Africans (Haitians) have inherited,
used, and manipulated European Christian anti-Judaism. I will suggest here that
many of the negative images of Vodou draw from and elaborate upon medieval
European images of Jews. These flexible popular tropes hinge on the figure of the
devil and link the devil first with “the Jews” and then, in colonial Saint-Domingue,
with the Africans and Afro-Creole Vodouists.
6
An anthropologist who specializes in Haiti, I was studying the Rara festivals
throughout Haiti and came upon a series of obscure rituals and conceptions revolv-
ing around notions of “the Jews.” In contemporary Haiti, local dramas replay the
Christian ritual cycle of death and resurrection at Holy Week and represent the
symbolic presence of Judas and of “the Jews.” The way their present-day descendants
portray and perform “the Jew,” however, tells a complicated and ambiguous story.
The story is not simply about a one-directional process of “Othering” and demo-
nizing a conquered people. I am also interested in the agency of the disenfranchised,
in their expressions, reactions, and representations. Some present-day practitioners of
Vodou manipulate the inherited, demonized images of “the Jew” in both alarming
and creative ways. In the course of Easter week, “Jews” are demonized and burned in
effigy by some—but they are also honored and claimed by others as forefathers and
founders of the Rara bands. Various Rara leaders embrace the identity of “the Jew”
and claim a sort of mystical Jewish ancestry. In accepting the label of “Jew,” these
Rara leaders might be understood as taking on a mantle of denigration as a kind of
Elizabeth A. McAlister80
1403971625ts07.qxd  28-9-06  1:09 PM  Page 80


--- PAGE 96 ---
psychic resistance. In carving out a symbolic territory as “Jews,” they symbolically
oppose the powers that historically have sought to exploit them—the Haitian
Catholic elite.
Through the image of Jews in the Haitian imagination, we can interpret the process
of domination that married Christianization and anti-Semitism to a process of racial-
ized capitalist expansion in the Americas. The imaginary reserved for European
“demonic” Jews is portable and easily transferred into the Indian and African peoples
of the Atlantic world. But myths, by their nature, create imminent and shifting imag-
inaries, less easily controlled by orthodoxy. Exploited peoples embraced the image of
the Jew and creatively performed oppositional dramas in which they critique the
morality of Christianity and their own place in the class structure.
Postmodern Peasants: Rara and Class in Haiti
The entire Lenten season is politically charged for Haitian society as the annual
period in which peasant-class people are sanctioned by tradition to parade and sing.
Rara begins right after Carnival on Ash Wednesday and builds throughout Lent until
Easter weekend. Occurring in multiple localities, Rara’s Easter week parades represent
the largest popular gatherings of Haitian pèp-la, (the people, the folk). Groups of
fifteen to several hundred people play drums and bamboo horns, dance along the
roads, and stop traffic for miles in order to perform rituals for Vodou deities at cross-
roads, bridges, and cemeteries. Rara underscores the opposition of Vodou and
Catholicism because of Rara’s boisterous public presence during the period of Lent, a
Catholic time of solemnity and self-deprivation.
Given the drastic disparity of wealth in Haiti, the appearance of thousands of
peasant-class people in public space is inherently a deeply charged moment, consid-
ered “dangerous” both culturally and politically by dominant groups. For members of
the educated enfranchised classes, hundreds of noisy people celebrating in the streets
conjure an image of their nightmarish fantasies about mass popular uprising. As a
large-scale popular festival, Rara is structurally oppositional to the dominant classes
who make up the Haitian enfranchised minority: the literate, moneyed classes in
their various aspects, who have historically depended on the Haitian army and U.S.
support to maintain power.
It has long been routine to speak of Haiti as being a “divided society” comprised
of two major classes: the rural “peasants” and the French-identified “elite.” This cliché
oversimplifies a complex historical process and the resulting heterogeneities of the
various class actors in that country. The opposition also obscures the intimacy that
characterizes the contact between the powerful and those they dominate.
7 It does,
however, refer to a definite and blatant divide in Haitian society: between a politically
and economically enfranchised minority and a disenfranchised, exploited majority.
The root of Haitian inequality began in colonial plantation slavery and subsequent
devastating economic policies after independence in 1804. Agricultural goods pro-
duced with the simplest technology by a growing peasantry were and still are taxed at
customs houses and provide the bulk of government revenues. This basic scenario of
“The Jew” in the Haitian Imagination 81
1403971625ts07.qxd  28-9-06  1:09 PM  Page 81


--- PAGE 97 ---
an overtaxed, unrepresented nonliterate peasantry exploited by an urban bourgeoisie
remains unchanged to the current time. An estimated .8 percent of the Haitian
population currently owns 44.8 percent of the wealth.
8
The classes who have historically performed Rara and who still make up the
majority of Rara participants are the mass of the black peasantry and, recently, the
urban poor. Not unlike other peoples of the so-called developing world, their essen-
tially premodern peasant condition now lies embedded in the postmodern context of
global capital. The Haitian nation-state is a virtually powerless entity on the interna-
tional stage, and the peasantry and urban poor are caught in a system that constitutes
them as the lowest link in a globalized capitalism. Perhaps the most crucial factor in
upward mobility today is access to family and resources from lòt bò dlo (the other side
of the water)—New York, Miami, or other points in the Haitian diaspora. Haitian
transmigrants send home an estimated $100 million a year to families and small busi-
nesses.
9 Following the realities of transnationalism, Rara parades are also dotted with
djaspora (literally, “diasporas”) the returning townspeople from abroad who come to
participate in the festival during precious vacation weeks off from work.
“Heat up the Rara”: Mystical Contracts 
and Community
Most Rara bands are affiliated with ounfo(temples) of Afro-Haitian religion, as well as
with secret societies called Bizango and Shanpwel. Rara can be read as an annual ritual
period when the spiritual work of the ounfois taken into public space. In this sense, Rara
is a peripheral branch of Afro-Haitian religion known nowadays as Vodou. This religious
culture of the Haitian majority consists of a fluid, inherited, oral tradition of relation-
ships with deities from various African societies, as well as relationships with ancestors.
The major historical contributors to the creolized system called Vodou were the
cultures of Dahomey, Yoruba, and Kongo, with pockets and influences from numer-
ous other ethnic groups among the enslaved Africans who began to arrive in
Hispaniola as early as 1512. When the French gained control of the territory in 1697,
the French style of Catholicism of the later colony was superimposed onto the
Spanish Catholicism of the early period. The Africans re-created their beliefs and
practices in a complex process of creolization, embracing parts of Catholicism as well
as elements of Freemasonry, French occultism, and African Islam.
10
Vodou is concerned most fundamentally with the healing arts, in physical, psy-
chological, and spiritual realms. Anthropologist Karen McCarthy Brown convinc-
ingly argues for the centrality of healing to Vodou and that healing must in turn be
understood in terms of a cultural definition of personhood. As individuals are
defined by their relationships both to ancestors and to those living in the community,
illness is always approached through a careful consideration of imbalance in relation-
ships. T reatment is effected by attending to the webs of relationships that define a
person in the Haitian context. The spiritual work of Vodou has to do with chofe
(“heating”) life energy and restoring it to balance.
11 There is also an established set of
practices related to the forcible manipulation of relationships with others. Vodouists
Elizabeth A. McAlister82
1403971625ts07.qxd  28-9-06  1:09 PM  Page 82


--- PAGE 98 ---
and anthropologists alike distinguish between a fran Ginen (literally, “true African”)
moral system and the immoral practices of the boko (sorcerer).12
Rara bands parade through public thoroughfares using music, song, small bon-
fires, and other ritual techniques of Vodou, in order to chofe relationships with Vodou
lwa (deities) who protect and direct the bands. Most Rara bands are under the
patronage of a Vodou lwa, and participation in a band is a form of spiritual service.
Bands visit local cemeteries and serenade the ancestors, sometimes enticing any inter-
ested zonbi (souls) of the recently dead to join the Rara in a spiritual attachment that
will chofe the drummers and mystically work to kraze (crash) other neighborhood
bands. Rara bands think of themselves as small armies, out on maneuvers to perform
mystical work and carve out territory. The bands are often angaje, or under a mysti-
cal contract to parade for seven years in a row. This serious spiritual engagement
strengthens the relationship of the whole community with the lwa of Vodou and
enhances good fortune and health.
13
Bwile Jwif: “Burning the Jew” in Effigy
It was Holy Thursday night in 1993, and my research team and I were out recording
and filming a Rara band in the narrow back-streets of Port-au-Prince. We were danc-
ing along down the dark hilly streets at a good clip, on our way to a small cemetery
to try to get some zonbi to chofe (heat up) the band for the season’s climax on Easter.
We stopped while the band paid a musical salute to the invisible guardian of the
cemetery gates in Vodou. I looked up and noticed a straw dummy sitting on the roof
of the house across the street. It was a “Jew.”
He was sitting in a chair in the open air, on top of this one-story tin-roofed house.
Made of straw and dressed in blue jeans, a shirt, suit jacket, and sneakers, this “Jew”
wore a tie and had a pen sticking out of his shirt pocket. His legs were crossed, and
over them sat what looked to be a laptop computer fashioned out of cardboard.
A cord seemed to run from the computer down into a briefcase that sat by his chair.
I asked around for the mèt Jwif-la, its owner. An older man missing a few teeth
came forward, offering a calloused, muscular handshake that revealed a life of hard
physical labor. He was from the countryside in the South of the island, a migrant to
Port-au-Prince. I found myself in the ridiculous position of having to complement
him on his work. “Nice Jew you’ve got there,” I said, “Ou gen yon bèl Jwif la, wi.” “Oh
yes, we leave it up for the Rara band to pass by. T omorrow afternoon we’ll burn it,”
he said. “Aha...w e l l...g r e a t... ”  said my research partners and I, flaring our eyes
at each other. I guess nobody told the guy that Jean-Claude Duvalier banned the
practice in the 1970s, around the time of a rush of tourism and foreign industrial
investment. I bet other people still do it, here and there.
The Easter ritual of burning “the Jew” or burning “Judas” in effigy was practiced
until recently by all classes in Haiti. There were many local variations, but usually by
Maundy Thursday an effigy was erected in some central location, and at 3:00 on
Good Friday it was burned by the local community.
14 This was done in a ritual retal-
iation against Judas, who betrayed Jesus, or against “the Jews” who “killed Jesus.”
“The Jew” in the Haitian Imagination 83
1403971625ts07.qxd  28-9-06  1:09 PM  Page 83


--- PAGE 99 ---
The symbol of the Jew surfaced around Easter among all classes in most regions
of Haiti. Local peasant communities enacted this carnivalesque theater and so did
wealthy plantation households. Thérèse Roumer, a writer from the provincial city
of Jérémie, remembered the Juifs errants, the “wandering Jews” of her childhood.
Her father owned expansive tracts of land in the region and maintained a large
family home. A “Jew” was erected at the beginning of Lent. He had stuffed pants
and shirt, with a pillow for a head, and he sat in a chair on the veranda by the front
door. The idea, said Madam Roumer, was to kick the Jew whenever you went in or
out of the door, “say any bad words you had,” and scold him for killing Jesus. On
the Saturday morning before Easter all of the children from town would find
wooden sticks, come to the house to beat him, and then burn him up in a bon-
fire.
15 Children were exhorted by the grownups to “pray for the conversion of the
Jews.”16 The family would then go off to church for some holy water and wash
down the verandah. 17
Most of those interviewed remembered that the Jew in effigy was part of a child’s
game, in which the “Jew” represented Judas himself and was hidden by the adults in
the neighborhood. William Seabrook, whose book The Magic Island has sustained
many critical blows since its publication in 1929, wrote this tongue-in-cheek
account, worth reproducing in its entirety:
On the last bright Easter morning which I spent in Port-au-Prince—this was only a year
ago—the Champs de Mars, a fashionable park adjacent to the presidential palace and
new government buildings, resembled an untidied battlefield on which scenes of whole-
sale carnage had been recently enacted.
It was impossible to drive through it without swerving to avoid mangled torsos; it
was impossible to stroll through it without stepping aside to avoid arms, legs, heads, and
other detached fragments of human anatomies.
It was impossible also to refrain from smiling, for these mangled remains were not
gory; they exuded nothing more dreadful than sawdust, straw and cotton batting. They
were, in fact, life-sized effigies of Judas and Pontius Pilate’s soldiers—done to death
annually by naive mobs bent on avenging at this somewhat late day an event which
occurred in Palestine during the reign of Tiberius.
...I  had made the acquaintance, so to speak, of one Judas before he betrayed our
Lord and fled to the woods. All the little community had contributed toward his
construction. He sat propped in a chair outside the doorway. They had stuffed an old
coat, a shirt, and a long pair of trousers with straw, fastened old shoes and cotton gloves,
also stuffed, to the legs and arms, and had made ingeniously a head of cloth, stuffed
with rags, with the face painted on it and a pipe stuck in its mouth. They introduced
me to this creature very politely. They were rather proud of him. He was Monsieur
Judas, and I was expected to shake hands with him. You see—or perhaps you will not
see unless you can recall the transcendental logic which controlled the make-believe
games you used to play in childhood—that Judas had not yet betrayed Jesus. He was,
therefore, an honored guest in their house, as Peter or Paul might have been.
And so their righteous wrath will be all the more justified when they learn on
Saturday morning that Judas has turned traitor. Then it is that all the neighbors, armed
and shouting, the men with machetes and cocomacaque bludgeons, the women with
knives, even more bloodthirsty in their vociferations, invade the habitation where Judas
has been a guest, demanding, “Qui bo’ li?” (Where is the traitor hiding?)
Elizabeth A. McAlister84
1403971625ts07.qxd  28-9-06  1:09 PM  Page 84


--- PAGE 100 ---
Under the bed they peer, if there is a bed; behind doors, in closets—I happened to
witness this ceremony in a city suburb, where they do have beds and closets—while
members of the household aid in the search and make excited suggestions. But nowhere
can Judas be found. It seems that he has fled. (What has really occurred is that the head
of the house has carried him off during the night and hidden him, usually in some jun-
gle ravine or thicket close on the city’s edge. Judas usually takes to the forest as any man
would, fleeing for his life. But this is not always predictable. A Judas has been known to
hide in a boat, in a public garage yard, even under the bandstand in that Champs de
Mars whither so many of them, wherever found, are dragged for execution.)
So tracking Judas becomes a really exciting game. A group collects, shouting, beat-
ing drums, marching in the streets, racing up side-alleys; meeting other groups, each
intent on finding the Judas planted by its own neighborhood, but nothing loath to find
some other Judas and rend him to pieces en passant. Crowds may be heard also crashing
and beating through the jungle hillsides. It is rather like an Easter-egg hunt on a huge
and somewhat mad scale.
18
Other cultures practice the tradition of burning Judas in effigy at Easter week,
notably in Mexico and other parts of Latin America.19 The practice may stem from the
liturgical dramas, or “evangelizing rituals,” practiced by early Jesuit missionaries to the
Americas. The Jesuits are known to have staged elaborate dramas in the communities
where they worked, playing out scenes from Jesus’ life.
20 Passion Plays spread the idea
of Jews as “Christ-killers.” According to this ritual logic, Judas, who betrayed Jesus, is
conflated with “the Jews” who “mistreated Jesus,” making all Jews into “Judases.”
21
The supposed role that the Jews played in the Crucifixion, as described in the New
T estament, embellished in legend, and portrayed on the stage, was familiar to both
cleric and layman. It was a good starting point for moral teaching.
The idea that “the Jews killed Jesus” is rooted, of course, in the New T estament, which
can be read as a polemic that displays the anti-Judaism of the early Church. Sander
Gilman has argued that the negative image of the difference of the Jew found in the
Gospels (and especially, we might note, the figure of Judas) became the central referent
for all definitions of difference in the West.
22 During the medieval period European
Christianity produced the image of “the demonic Jew,” an inhuman creature working
directly for Satan. Joshua T rachtenberg writes in his classic work The Devil and the Jews
that “the two inexorable enemies of Jesus, then, in Christian legend, were the devil and
the Jew, and it was inevitable that the legend should establish a causal relation between
them.”
23 By the medieval period the devil was cast as the master of the Jews, directing
them in a diabolical plot to destroy Christendom.
In the medieval Passion Plays that set the tone for the popular Christianity of
Christobal Colon’s Europe and the colonial Jesuit missions, the Jews are handed the
entire weight of blame for Jesus’ death, and Pontius Pilate and the Roman participants
in the narrative fade into the background.
24 Medieval European Mystery Plays were
popular liturgical dramas, reenacting various scenes from scripture. They grew into vil-
lage festivals performed in marketplaces and guildhalls, taking on the “secular, boister-
ous, disorderly and exuberant life of the folk.”
25 In Le Mystere de la Passion, a
fourteenth-century French play depicting the Crucifixion, the Jews are the villains of
the piece, egged on by devils. In the climax the devils instigate Judas to betray his
master
, and they howl with glee when they are successful.26 The idea of Jews as demonic
“The Jew” in the Haitian Imagination 85
1403971625ts07.qxd  28-9-06  1:09 PM  Page 85


--- PAGE 101 ---
“Christ-killers” is enhanced throughout the medieval period, forming a central theme
of anti-Judaism that will authorize the persecution of Jews during the Inquisition.
The clergy of the Spanish period, like the French that followed them, were small
in number and faced the overwhelming project of establishing and maintaining
Christianity. It is likely that the Jesuit, Dominican, and Franciscan missionaries in
Hispaniola made use of the theatrical tactics deployed by their colleagues in New
Spain to convert the Native Americans. In that colony, large-scale popular dramas
were modeled after the Mystery Plays of Spain and France, depicting the winners and
losers in the Christian story and making clear parallels to the colonists and the con-
quered. Judas, “the Jews,” Jesus, and the apostles made for casts of characters that
would illustrate the larger drama of power relations at the start of the colonial enter-
prise.
27 The Christian story and theatrical public rituals generated narratives meant to
authorize and display the technologies—chains and whips—of servitude. European
Christendom dramatically set itself up as a sole civilizing force against the barbaric
and demonic forces of Jews, Native Indians, and Africans.
28
The historical antecedents of the Haitian bwile jwif(“Jew burning”) rituals may well
be in these sorts of Passion Plays that referenced the events of the Spanish Inquisition.
In the late fifteenth and sixteenth centuries—as the Spanish were establishing the slave
trade to the colonies— conversos believed to have secretly practiced Judaism were
sentenced to be burned alive in Spain. Jews in hiding were sentenced in absentia and
burned in effigy.
29 These auto-da-fé practices were likely the model upon which the
Latin American rituals are based. Although the Inquisition was never organized
in Hispaniola, the Easter effigy burnings are most likely rooted in Inquisition
symbolism and its attendant public ritual terror.
30
Other bits of cultural flotsam and jetsam may have trickled down from
Inquisition history. The lwa Papa Gede, in his own code language, calls the pig
“Jwif.” Surely Papa Gede is remembering one of the most common caricatures of the
Jew in the Middle Ages, the notorious figure of the Judensau, in which a sow feeds her
Jewish offspring with the devil looking on.
31 Perhaps the expression is an inverted
survival of the fifteenth-century term for the Spanish conversos, who were called
marranos (swine; pig) after the Christians conquered the Moors.32
Anti-Jewish sentiment was an implicit part of the ruling process of the French
colony of Saint-Domingue. The Church itself was among the largest of the slave-
owning landholders in the colony, and it won an advantage with the establishment of
the Code Noir.
33 This edict by King Louis XIV mandated the planter class to baptize
and Christianize the slaves, just as it simultaneously outlawed the exercise of any reli-
gion other than Catholicism. The Jesuits, working as an order before the 1704 official
establishment of their mission, manifested a marked dislike of Jews and their religion.
In 1669 they appealed to the Crown representative to take actions against “tavern keep-
ers, undesirable women and Jews.”
34 In 1683 the Church induced King Louis XIV to
expel all Jews from the colony and to impose a religious test on new immigrants.35
It would have been only logical, then, for the colonial clergy to take the image of
the Jews as an evil, anti-Christian force and hold them up in comparison with early
forms of Vodou—the real threat to Christianity in the colony. Although the
Christianization of the Africans in colonial Saint-Domingue was a halfhearted and
badly organized enterprise, enslaved people were mandated by the Code Noir to be
Elizabeth A. McAlister86
1403971625ts07.qxd  28-9-06  1:09 PM  Page 86


--- PAGE 102 ---
baptized, and they sporadically attended mass, married, and were directed in cate-
chism.36 In their efforts to control the enslaved, the clergy preached Paul’s letters to
the Ephesians and other biblical passages exhorting slaves to obey their masters. 37
Most of their practical worries revolved around the “superstition” of the Africans,
their magical abilities, and their knowledge of poison, for greater than the fear of
diabolism was the more imminent threat of uprising and rebellion. Numerous regu-
lations were passed in the colonial period and after, making various religious and
magical practices illegal. Underlying anti-Vodou sentiment was the notion that the
Africans, like the Jews before them, were acting in consort with the devil.
The litany of charges that were leveled against Jews in medieval Europe were
transferred wholesale onto the Vodouist. The list of devilish crimes that were attrib-
uted to European Jews was an elaborate series of evil activities aimed at destroying
Christendom. Jews were accused of a range of magical crimes, from superstition,
sorcery, and desecration of the host, all the way to ritual murder, the drinking of
Christian blood, the eating of human flesh, and poisonings.
38 It is striking that this
list is replicated in the colony, targeting Africans and Creoles of Saint-Domingue.
Like the marranos—converted Jews constantly under suspicion of “Judaizing”—
African converts to Christianity were suspected of sorcery. Joan Dayan writes of the
late eighteenth century, “It seemed as if the more Christian you claimed to be, the
more certainly you could be accused of conniving with the devil.”
39 A decree passed
in 1761 complained that slaves’ religious meetings at night in churches and their cat-
echizing in houses and plantations were actually veiled opportunities for prostitution
and marronage. Slaves who had taken on roles of “cantors, vergers, churchwardens,
and preachers” were charged with “contamination” of sacred relics with “idolatrous”
intentions.
40 Africans requested to be baptized over and over, believing in the mysti-
cal properties of the rite, or wishing to attend the accompanying feast.41
The legal codes from the colony to the present criminalize numerous practices of
sorcery, linking the devil with the Africans and Creoles. A decree passed in 1758, for
example, prohibited the use of “garde-corpsor makandals.”
42 Still in use today as pwen
(literally “points”), these “body-guards” were objects infused with spiritual force,
directed to protect their wearers. Makandal was also the name of the famous maroon
leader in the Haitian revolution. An adept botanist as well as a revolutionary,
Makandal was convicted of instigating a campaign of poisoning planters’ wells in
1757, during which more than 6,000 whites were poisoned.
43 Besides being labeled
superstitious, sorcerers, poisoners, and false Christians, Africans and Creoles were
accused of stealing and desecrating the host, drinking blood, and cannibalism, charges
that rounded out and replicated the litany of anti-Christian charges against Jews.
Satan’s Slaves: Vodouists in the 
Catholic Imaginary
Throughout Haitian history, the Catholic clergy and the enfranchised classes have
cast Vodou as a cult of Satan, a complex of African superstitions to be purged from the
beliefs of the Haitian majority. In cycles of violent repression, Vodou practitioners
“The Jew” in the Haitian Imagination 87
1403971625ts07.qxd  28-9-06  1:09 PM  Page 87


--- PAGE 103 ---
have been jailed, tortured, and killed, and sacred objects have been burned. Using the
image of slavery so salient to a population once enslaved and perpetually negotiating
its sovereignty, the Church’s antisuperstition campaigns targeted Vodouists as slaves
of Satan, who is himself working to contaminate and destroy Christianity. Consider
this rhetoric from a Haitian catechism of the antisuperstition campaigns of the
1940s:
—Who is the principal slave of Satan?
The principal slave of Satan is the oungan. [Vodou priest]
—What names do the oungan give to Satan?
The names the oungans give to Satan are the lwa, the angels, the saints, the 
dead, the twins.
—Why do the oungan take the names of the angels, the saints, and the 
dead, for Satan?
The oungan give the names angels, the saints, and the dead, to Satan to, deceive us
more easily.
—Do we have the right to mix with the slaves of Satan?
No, because they are evil-doers and liars like Satan.
44
In Haitian cultural politics, Catholicism has positioned itself against Vodou as an
official, European, legitimate, orthodox tradition associated with ruling power and
authority. Vodou occupies an oppositional space which is Creole, home-grown,
unorthodox, diverse, and by extension illegitimate, impure, evil, and satanic.
Politically, then, the two traditions have been constructed as polar opposites. The
Lenten period becomes an interesting and tense time during which Catholic and
Vodou practices clash. The performance of Rara during Lent, within the Roman
Catholic yearly calendar, reveals its historical evolution as a festival celebrated in a
world dominated by Catholicism. The Rara festival unfolded in an Afro-Creole
cultural space juxtaposed against a Catholic order, and its performance each year
underscores the political oppositions between the two symbolic systems.
The political uses each tradition makes of the other is only the most public face of
culture, however, and obscures the complex interactions between the traditions, the
ways they combine themselves, and the ways individual people combine them in
practice. Focusing on their political opposition obscures the dialectic figuring and
reconfiguring inherent in historical processes of creolization. Writing on Afro-Cuban
religion, David H. Brown points out that “An overemphasis on ‘religion,’ the binary
positioning of ‘African’ and ‘European/Catholic’ systems, and the stark racial opposi-
tion of ‘white’ and ‘black’ limits our comprehension of the multiplicity of experi-
ences, influences, and roles Afro-Americans chose in complex Caribbean creole
societies. ‘African’ and ‘European’ interacted less as static capsules than as historical
processes.”
45
American cultures evolved through processes of creolization, wherein cultural
tropes and symbols shift and reconfigure themselves within unequal power relations.
Both the Afro-Haitian religion and the Catholicism that evolved in Haiti were con-
structed in dialectical relation to each other. T o a significant degree, Vodou and
Catholicism each has incorporated the other into its philosophies and practices. Each
tradition is constitutive and revealing of the other.
Elizabeth A. McAlister88
1403971625ts07.qxd  28-9-06  1:09 PM  Page 88


--- PAGE 104 ---
Cultural complexes that evolve in unequal relations of power take on a process
similar to the culture wars between “high” and “low” culture articulated by Stallybrass
and White:
A recurrent pattern emerges: the “top” attempts to reject and eliminate the “bottom” for
reasons of prestige and status, only to discover, not only that it is in some way frequently
dependent upon the low-Other...but also that the top includes that low symbolically,
as a primary eroticized constituent of its own fantasy life. The result is a mobile, con-
flictual fusion of power, fear, and desire in the construction of subjectivity; a psycho-
logical dependence upon precisely those others which are being rigorously opposed and
excluded at the social level.
46
Institutional Catholicism depends on its opposition to Vodou, for it is its position
against what is impure and illegitimate that strengthens Catholic virtue in Haiti. In
the Christian story, the trope of the Jew is used by the enfranchised classes as a kind
of fantasy “low-Other” that authorizes Catholic bourgeois superiority. The equation
of non-Christians with Jews gave bourgeois Haitians one more cultural difference
between themselves and the nonliterate Vodouists. Besides being dark-skinned, non-
literate, Creole-speaking peasants, they also were pagans, and anti-Christians.
Symbolically, they were Jews. Haitian Catholics came to depend, in a sense, on the
trope of the Vodouist-Jew as a force to oppose and exclude, a way to define the
Catholic self through a negative referent.
The myths and rituals that surface at Easter yield particularly illustrative readings for
the way in which both “high” and “low” culture groups reach for symbols and embrace,
perform, and transform them in the ongoing process of negotiating power. The per-
formances of Easter myths range from the strictest Catholic mass to the popular Easter
rituals sanctioned by Catholicism, all the way to the oppositional readings of Rara bands.
Theologically, Easter is the most important holiday in the Catholic calendar, cele-
brated in Haiti both in official church mass and in popular rituals. One of the Easter
traditions practiced by all classes is the reenactment, after church on Good Friday, of Les
Chemins de la Croix, the stations of the cross. For this Passion Play a series of ritual sta-
tions are set in place, and barefoot pilgrims, some dressed in burlap, visit each station,
fasting, without water, reciting prayers before each spot. A local man plays the role of
Jesus, and other actors portray other figures in the story. The Passion Play was honed as
a genre in medieval Europe, and this somber drama drawn from the four gospels still
enacts itself in numerous locations on Good Friday all over the Christian world.
47
At the same time that Catholics engage in these Easter rituals, Rara bands are busy
parading through public thoroughfares. In fact, some Raras deliberately plan to walk
past churches on Sunday to annoy the Christians. In 1993 a priest in Pont Sonde
ended mass with the admonishment, “Don’t go in the Rara,” worried he might lose
some parishioners to this “devil’s dance.” In the imaginary of the Haitian bourgeoisie,
Vodouists have been cast as evil slaves in Satan’s army. As anti-Christians, they
became symbolic Jews.
“If you go in the Rara, you are a Jew.”
A Rara band called “Ya Sezi” (“They will be surprised”) walked for miles all day on
the Good Friday of 1993, along the banks of the Artibonite River. They were on their
“The Jew” in the Haitian Imagination 89
1403971625ts07.qxd  28-9-06  1:09 PM  Page 89


--- PAGE 105 ---
way to the compound of Papa Dieupe, a wealthy landowner in the region, and also the
“Emperor” of a Shanpwèl society. My team and I had chosen Papa Dieupè’s as the best
place to be for Rara; we figured we could comfortably stay put in one place and watch
the bands come to salute the “big man.”
Ya Sezi’s entrance was spectacular for a sleepy country day. We could hear the
banbou blowing for miles, and children would run through and breathlessly announce
that the band was coming to salute the Emperor. They came up the path, and did the
ritual salutes for the Vodou spirits living in the trees in the compound, and then turned
to salute Papa Dieupe’s “children” in the society. Finally, after they’d played until about
midnight, Papa Dieupe himself emerged from his small house and received them.
After playing music in the compound for much of the night, the group slept, and
awoke early Saturday morning to play and “warm up” before they left. While the musi-
cians played, each of the dancers (who were all women) took turns holding the whip
belonging to the leader, and ran in circles through the compound. The other dancers set
off in hot pursuit, their dresses streaming out behind. Papa Dieupe told me they were
taking turns being Jesus, running from the “Jewish soldiers.” Pilate’s Roman soldiers
were nowhere in evidence, but rather had been collapsed into a new bloodthirsty figure
of “Jewish soldiers.” Comically enacting Jesus’ suffering on his walk to Calvary, the Rara
members were amusing themselves by portraying both Jesus and his “killers,” “the
Jews.”
48
During the Easter Rara festivals, the story of Jesus’ life and death replays itself in
the churches and streets of the country, and Jesus, Judas, and the Jews join the spirits
of Vodou as dramatic characters to be performed and interpreted. Good Friday in
particular becomes a day of stark contrasts between the fran Katolik, who pray, fast,
and walk the stations of the cross, and the Rara bands, who parade noisily through
the streets singing and working to chofe (“heat up”) relationships with Vodou spirits
and the recently dead. Catholic Haitians make a clear connection between the exu-
berant celebrations of Rara on the anniversary of Jesus’ death, and “the Jews who
killed him.” A popular expressions is, Ou al nan Rara, se Jwif ou ye, “If you go in the
Rara, you are a Jew.”
Haitian Catholicism equates Vodou, the devil, and “the Jews who killed Christ,”
and we can see how celebrating Rara in the streets on the day Christ died “makes you
a Jew” in the Catholic view. Even some university-educated Haitians have a vague
concept that “Rara is a Jewish festival.” At a fancy cocktail party in the wealthy
enclave above Petionville I was introduced to a young Haitian architect from the
mulatto class. “Studying Rara?” he asked incredulously. “Well, you’ll find that it’s a
Jewish thing.” Pressed on how a Jewish festival could have found its way through his-
tory to be adopted by the Haitian peasantry, the man shrugged his shoulders and
reached for his rum punch.
Every Rara member I interviewed, on the other hand, remembered that Rara
“came from Africa,” with the slaves. This seems a clear historical fact: Rara contin-
ues and extends a number of African cultural principles, including the centrality of
community enterprise, relationships with the ancestors and the deities, a kind of
politics of “big-man-ism,” the use of natural sites for spiritual work, as well as
the performative African-based drumming, call-and-response singing, and dance in
public festival.
Elizabeth A. McAlister90
1403971625ts07.qxd  28-9-06  1:09 PM  Page 90


--- PAGE 106 ---
After establishing the African roots of the festival, however, Rara leaders would
invariably go on to articulate the idea that Rara was linked to the Jews. Many of
them cited the precise origin of Rara as the celebration of the Crucifixion itself. “It
was the Jews who crucified Christ who made the first Rara.” One oungan explained
it this way:
Long ago, after they finished nailing Jesus to the cross, the soldiers who did that saw that
it would be even more satisfying to put out a Rara to show that they were the winners.
They put out a Rara, they made music. They were rejoicing, singing and dancing.
49
This idea that “the Jews who crucified Christ” rejoiced and made the first Rara was
related to me over and over by Rara members. The historical genealogy of the notion
is obscured here, as is the cultural history of most dispossessed groups. Yet one returns
to the Passion Plays of the early church, modeled after the ones in medieval France,
England, and Germany. The Jews are the central villains of these stories and are
directed by demons and devils hovering in the background. T ogether the devils and
the Jews convince Judas to betray his master, and celebrate when they are successful.
Joshua T rachtenberg describes it thus: “Around the cross on which Jesus hangs the Jews
whirl in a dance of abandon and joy, mocking their victim and exulting in their
achievement.” This explicit scenario of a crucified Christ surrounded by joyful, danc-
ing Jews celebrating their victory makes its way from the popular European imaginary
to become a memory of former African slaves.
50 Another Rara president reiterates:
Rara is what they did when they crucified Jesus, on Good Friday. At that point, all the
Jews were happy. They put the Rara out, they masked, they danced, they dressed in
sequins, they drank their liquor and had fun.51
The link between Rara and “the Jews who killed Christ” was strong enough in the
Haitian imagination that Rara members became Jews in their own rememberings. A
oungan told me that “It was the Jews who came with this tradition. Now it’s become
our tradition.”52 Another oungan provided an explanation that implicitly described
how the Africans could have inherited this celebration of the ancient Hebrews. “Rara
is something that comes from the Jewish nation. So, mystically speaking, Haitians are
descended from Africa. The Africans always kept their mystical rites.”
53 In this logic,
Africans are equated with the Jews of antiquity, and it is this linkage that explains
how Haitians have inherited Rara from the Jews. Through Rara, these Haitians
embraced the subversive identity of “the Jew” and see Jews somehow as forerunners
of their African ancestors.
When Rara members embrace the negative cultural category of the Jew, the
mythology they generate may be understood as a repressed people’s subversion of the
ruling order. This class resistance to Catholic hegemony is a form of theatrical posi-
tioning on the part of the peasants that says “We are the Jews, the enemy of the
French Catholic landowners.” Like other groups that take on the negative terms
ascribed to them by the powerful, Haitians take on a mantle of denigration in the face
of a hostile dominant class. Just as “high culture” includes “low culture” symbolically
in its self-construction, so here does the “popular culture” include the “elite” in its turn.
“The Jew” in the Haitian Imagination 91
1403971625ts07.qxd  28-9-06  1:09 PM  Page 91


--- PAGE 107 ---
Laënnec Hurbon understands this dynamic historically as a creative appropriation of
cultural goods:
[the slaves’] diverting of Christianity to their own ends...had nothing to do with the
systematic denial of Christianity, nor was it a sign of inadequacy of evangelization, but
a process of making off with those elements of Christianity which could be useful in the
struggle and in the construction of their new culture.
54
Vodouists’ interpretations of biblical stories can be understood as creative subver-
sions of official discourse. Like the Rastafari of Jamaica, Vodouists are adept orators
and creative interpreters of myth and Scripture. Every imaginative Vodou practi-
tioner may offer a new visionary interpretation of Bible and of history. These versions
allow Vodouists and Rara members to authorize their own history while positioning
themselves, for themselves, in terms of the dominant class and its religious ideology.
Jesus Christ is the subject of much theorizing on the part of Vodouists. In one
myth, God created the twelve apostles just after he created the earth and the animals.
The apostles were rebellious and challenged God. In punishment, God sent them to
Ginen, the mythical Africa of Vodou’s past and future. The apostles and their descen-
dants became the lwa, while a renegade apostle who refused to go to Ginen became a
sorcerer and took the name Lucifer.
55 Throughout the oral mythologies of Vodou is a
clear theme of morality and a distinction between working with the Ginen spirits and
working with the forces of sorcery. Usually the sorcerer is also a slave master of cap-
tured spirits and souls, and so themes of morality are bound together with philo-
sophical issues of slavery and freedom.
One story I was told creatively posits Jesus as the first zonbi, a soul that has been
captured and sold in order to work for its owner. Although I have written of this else-
where, it bears reiterating here. This myth positions Jesus and God as the innocent
victims of two unscrupulous Haitian soldiers who secretly witnessed the resurrection.
It was related to me by a sorcerer who confided that he knew the techniques of cap-
turing the spirit of the recently dead (zonbi) and ordering it to work:
The whole reason that we are able to raise people after they die goes back to when they
crucified Jesus Christ. Christ was sent by Gran Jehovah, by Gran Mèt [literally “Great
Master”]. He also sent Mary Magdelene, along with two bodyguards for Jesus from the
Haitian Armed Forces. When Jehovah gave the password to raise up Jesus from the
dead, the soldiers stole the password and sold it. It’s been handed down from father to
son, which is how I could get it.
56
Vodou takes what it can use theologically and constantly re-creates itself with fresh
material. The Vodouist fits biblical figures into an already existing Afro-Creole
scheme. Jesus is problematic for the Vodouist: the heavy catholicizing of the French
and, later, the Haitian elite makes Jesus the god of the dominant classes. This story
subtly acknowledges the teller’s opposition to Christianity: a worker (a Haitian foot-
soldier) stole something from Jesus (the god of the elite). The stolen knowledge now
becomes a tool for the subordinates, since it is Vodouists who now control the resur-
rection secrets of God. This tale illustrates how the Vodouist uses oppositional
mythology as one of the ongoing weapons in everyday Haitian class warfare.
Elizabeth A. McAlister92
1403971625ts07.qxd  28-9-06  1:09 PM  Page 92


--- PAGE 108 ---
Rara leaders I interviewed accepted the Catholic label of pagan, Satanist, and Jew
and theorized their position in a specific Vodou theology. This view agrees that Rara
is anti-Christian. As one leader explained, “Rara is basically against the power of
God. Because Rara is what they did when they crucified Jesus, on Good Friday.” This
view understands Rara to be “against the power of God,” in Catholic terms.
57
On some level, however, God has abandoned Haitians. The president of Rara
Mande Gran Moun in Léogane explained: “God made the king Lucifer. God com-
mands the sky, and the king Lucifer commands the earth. Everybody who is poor on
this earth is in hell.”
58 In this interpretation, God rules the heavens but has given
Lucifer control over the earth, and humans are actually the political subjects of the
king Lucifer. In the face of a class structure divided by access to the means of pro-
duction but marked in many ways by religious affiliation, the response of the
Vodouist is to embrace and creatively rework the identity given them by Catholics.
Commenting directly on the suffering generated by extreme economic exploita-
tion, the figure of Lucifer stands as a kind of moral commentary on the state of
Haitian government and its history of class inequality.
Rara leaders construct theology through the appropriation of “high” cultural ele-
ments into allegories of empowerment. The stories of the “Jewish Rara” and the
“zonbi Christ” construct a sort of engagement with the texts of the Catholic domi-
nant classes in which the power of the Vodouists or Rara members is hidden inside
the images of demonization. Haitian sorcerers construct themselves as active enemies
of the Catholic order, as Jews, or as allies of thieves who stole from God. The narra-
tives support Hurbon’s statement that “In the eyes of the Voodooist, his mysticism is
his power. Thus it may be correct to say that the Voodoo cult, since its inception with
a Creole coloration, is used by Voodoo believers as a power base from which to deal
with the power elite.”
59
These myths can be seen as antihegemonic counternarratives that reconfigure his-
tories and genealogies to cast power with the popular classes. It is a common result of
repressive contexts that cultural expression will generate double-voiced, allegorical
strategies so that the dominant culture is turned back on itself, transformed by the
subordinate. The myths generated and performed by Rara reveal how “high”
Catholic culture and the “low” Vodou culture are constructed in relation to one
another, each mystically exoticizing the other in the ongoing performance of class in
Haitian society. Each end of the class spectrum reaches for the figure of “the Jew” to
authorize its own power in the imaginary of Haitian class warfare. “The Jew” in Haiti
remains largely a figure constructed from the leftovers of medieval Christianity and
sustained through Catholic popular culture. Inherited by Afro-Haitians, “the Jew” is cre-
atively re-presented as a figure allied in opposition to the Church, to the landowners,
and to the Franco-Haitian elite.
Conclusion
A popular expression of surprise in Haiti roughly corresponds to the phrase “I’ll be
damned!” It says, simply, Jesu, roi des Juifs! “Jesus, king of the Jews.” “The Jews” are a
“The Jew” in the Haitian Imagination 93
1403971625ts07.qxd  28-9-06  1:09 PM  Page 93


--- PAGE 109 ---
stock figure in Haitian popular culture, inherited in the process of Catholic European
missionizing that was part and parcel of the Latin American plantation enterprise. A
figure used at once as scapegoat and mystical forebear, “the Jew” can also be a come-
dian who speaks the unspeakable. He shows up in Carnival as Papa Jwif, a Juif errant
(wandering Jew) who delivers satirical political commentary or enacts problematic
issues in the community. In Port-au-Prince during the coup that ousted President
Aristide, Papa Jwif was both a signal of the AIDS pandemic and a symbol of the
corrupt military rulers, diseased beyond redemption. He showed up as a carnival
character dying of AIDS. He was surrounded by an entourage of doctors perpetually
treating him with useless remedies, coded as U.S. political forces propping up a
violent and corrupt regime.
“The Jew” and Judas are most often negative markers, and to be a jouda (Judas) is
to betray one’s friends through gossip. I have heard particularly violent army officers
or tonton makoutes described in low tones as yon Jwif (a Jew) in their cruelty or bar-
barism. T o be greedy or stingy is to be kras pase Jwif(cheaper than a Jew). While most
of the negative images of the Jew center on the premodern anti-Judaism focusing on
Jews as betrayers and “Christ-killers,” the anti-Semitic vocabulary of Jews as hoarders
and usurers has crept secondarily into the Haitian cultural vocabulary.
In Vodou, “the Jew” represents a particularly potent magic, centered on the figure
of Moses. Haitians have canonized Moses as a Vodou spirit of their own, and hand-
made ceramic figures of Sen Moyiz (Saint Moses) clutching the tablets containing the
T en Commandments sit on the occasional altar. With Moses long pictured in popu-
lar Christianity as the most famous magician of all time, who transformed serpents
into staffs and parted the Red Sea, his magic intrigues Haitian mystics. His magic and
the magic of “the Jews” in general is an attractive source of power for disenfranchised
Vodouists.
All of the myths, symbols, and rituals centered on the Jew raises the question:
What was the historical Jewish presence in Haiti? While Jews never established a last-
ing community, it is nevertheless possible to discern a thin strand of Haitian Jewish
history. It starts with the genesis of the modern Americas: at least one known recently
converted converso was aboard Cristobal Colon’s ship in 1492, and five others are sus-
pected by historians.
60 Although the forces of the Inquisition excluded Jews, Moors,
and other non-Christians from the colonies, “Jews slipped through and managed to
live unmolested in loosely organized communities.”
61 Most colonial Jews were
Sephardim, Iberian Jews of Spanish or Portuguese origin. They often came under
false identities, many of them to Hispaniola, which was settled first.
62 Some came
directly from France, but others made a circuitous route from initial settlements in
Dutch territories, or from Spanish and Portuguese colonies after they established the
Inquisition.
63 In a study on Jews in Saint-Domingue, Zvi Loker has located Jewish
settlements in four zones of Haiti, including 80 Jewish families from Curaçao who
settled as traders in Cap François and brought with them a prayer leader.
64
The relationships between most Christians and the Jews in Saint-Domingue were
friendly, and Jews became a subgroup of the planter and business class. As a result, the
efforts of the Church to create an anti-Jewish popular feeling were not too successful.
The demonized images of the biblical Jews do not seem to have been converted into
explicit anti-Jewish violence.
Elizabeth A. McAlister94
1403971625ts07.qxd  28-9-06  1:09 PM  Page 94


--- PAGE 110 ---
In the late nineteenth century, Ashkenazi Jewish families arrived in the country.
The pattern for these arrivals and for the descendants of colonial Jews was to assimi-
late and convert to Catholicism, although many today acknowledge their Jewish
ancestry. There were also Jews among the Middle Eastern diaspora of the early
twentieth century, who settled in Haiti to become known as Siryen, “Syrian,” regard-
less of their nationalities as Syrian, Lebanese, or Palestinian.
65 Later, during the
Holocaust, some French and German Jews made their way to Haiti on steamship.
While most moved on to North America or Israel, a handful stayed in Haiti to live
out the rest of their lives. In perhaps the most delightful symbolic reversal of all, the
Haitian legislature in the 1930s declared all Jews to be of African ancestry, since they
came from Egypt at the time of the Exodus with Moses. This justified permitting
European Jews to settle in Haiti as enfranchised citizens, since the Haitian
Constitution had made land ownership possible only to those of African descent.
Despite the small but constant Jewish presence in Haiti, there is no evidence that
a synagogue ever existed. Only one Jewish cemetery was established, long ago in the
colonial period; it has long since been abandoned.
As Haitians spread further abroad in their own diaspora, the founding of the State
of Israel and subsequent gathering of Jews have given Jews a positive image. The
Aristide government contracted for a study of Israel and its politics of returning
citizenry, viewing Israel as a possible model for recouping the human potential lost in
the brain drain of outmigration.
Despite the recent positive valence given to Jews in Haitian thought, the original
anti-Judaic tropes of Christianity remain. As this essay has rehearsed, Easter season
has always set the stage for the resurfacing of the image of “the Jew,” both in popular
theater and in the official church. Throughout Christendom, references to Jews were
most numerous in sermons delivered during Easter, and the clergy used the
Crucifixion story as the moment to illustrate the demonic nature of “the Jew.”
The rituals of Holy Week provided the clergy with a clear narrative to fix in the minds
of the faithful the enormous crime that the Jews had committed against Jesus.
66
The symbolism of Christianity is extremely powerful; its emergence and predom-
inance as a major religious and political force make this obvious. It is the narrative
quality of Christianity that is so powerful, a symbolic progression that makes its way
into popular thought from sermons and church services to the Passion Plays, stations
of the cross, Carnival parodies and, in Haiti, Vodou myth and Rara theater. These
popular, dramatic manifestations demonstrate that Christianity is not just a theolog-
ical system: “It is also a structure of the imagination; its most striking feature, by
which it has gained its hold on a great portion of humanity, is its narrative.”
67
Bruce Lincoln admonishes us that examining “world religions without consider-
ing the way they came to enjoy that status is a serious methodological and moral
error. In contrast, to probe that history is to understand how a relatively small set of
religions have expanded their territory and power at the expense of others.”
68 In
Haiti, the site of the first American colony, the African survivors of plantation slavery
have inherited the anti-Judaism of medieval Europe. At the same time the same
Africans and their Creole descendants became targets of a brutal campaign of cultural
violence that used anti-Judaism as its blueprint. T oday, layers upon layers of histori-
cal symbolic residue swirl around together, as “Jews” are both saints and ancestors,
“The Jew” in the Haitian Imagination 95
1403971625ts07.qxd  28-9-06  1:09 PM  Page 95


--- PAGE 111 ---
pigs and Judases. They can be at once ancient wisdom and global capital, but are
always a mystical and exotic power in the Haitian imagination.
Notes
1. This work is indebted to Phyllis Mack and her faculty research seminar at the Rutgers
Center for Historical Analysis, where I began this essay as a postdoctoral fellow, and to
Albert J. Raboteau and the Northeastern Seminar on Black Religions at Princeton
University. I also wish to thank my research partners in Haitian fieldwork: Chantal
Regnault, photographer extraordinaire; my assistant, Phenel Colastin; and our driver,
Blanc Bazle. Thanks also to Father Antoine Adrien and Holly Nicolas, and to Leslie
Desmangles, Joel Dreyfuss, Henry Gold-schmidt, Leon-Francois Hoffman, Glenn
Ingram, Alan Nathanson, Judith Weisenfeld, and Jeremy Zwelling. I am also most grate-
ful to Deborah Dash Moore and the Young Scholars Program in American Religion and
Betsy T rauble and the Wesleyan University Center for the Humanities, and wish that
space permitted me to name the participants in these seminars who generously helped me
think this story through.
2. Bartolome de las Casas, History of the Indies (New York: Harper and Row, 1971). Cited in
Catherine Keller, “The Breast, the Apocalypse, and the Colonial Journey,” in The Year
2000: Essays on the End, ed. Charles B. Strozier and Michael Flynn (New York: New York
University Press, 1997), 42–58. Haiti has various name changes: The Amerindian “Aiyti-
Kiskeya” was changed by Colon to “Hispaniola,” “Little Spain.” Later, in 1697, the
French named their colony Saint-Domingue, and in 1804, newly independent slaves and
people of color returned the land to its original name of Haiti.
3. These themes are taken up in my dissertation; see Elizabeth A. McAlister, “ ‘Men Moun Yo,’
‘Here Are the People’: Rara Festivals and T ransnational Popular Culture in Haiti and
New York City,” PhD dissertation, Yale University, 1995.
4. Ronald Sanders, Lost Tribes and Promised Lands: The Origins of American Racism (1978,
repr., New York: Harper Perennial, 1992), 90.
5. Cecil Roth, A History of the Marranos (Philadalphia: Jewish Publication Society of
America, 1932). Anusim, Hebrew for “forced ones,” has now replaced the English
“Crypto-Jews” or the Spanish conversos, or “converted Jews,” and the more derrogatory
marranos, or “swine,” in Jewish studies literature. See also David M. Gitlitz, Secrecy and
Deceit: The Religion of the Crypto-Jews (Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society, 1996).
6. Christendom also links the Jews, the devil, and the peoples of the First Nations in New
Spain and the United States. See Fernando Cervantes, The Devil in the New World: The
Impact of Diabolism in New Spain (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1994).
7. Michel-Rolph T rouillot, Haiti, State Against Nation: The Origins and Legacy of Duvalierism
(New York: Monthly Review Press, 1990), 81.
8. World Bank, “Memorandum on the Haitian Economy. May 13. Latin American and
Caribbean Regional Office, 1981.” Cited in Linda Basch, Nina Glick Schiller, and
Cristina Szanton Blanc, Nations Unbound: Transnational Projects, Postcolonial Predicaments
and Deterritorialized Nation-States (Langhorne, PA: Gordon and Breach, 1994), 159.
9. Basch, Schiller and Blanc, Nations Unbound, 161.
10. See, e.g., Joan Dayan, Haiti, History, and the Gods(Berkley: University of California Press,
1995); Leslie Desmangles, The Faces of the Gods: Vodou and Roman Catholicism in Haiti
(Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1992); LeGrace Benson, “Some Breton
Elizabeth A. McAlister96
1403971625ts07.qxd  28-9-06  1:09 PM  Page 96


--- PAGE 112 ---
and Muslim Antecedents of Vodou Drapo,” in Sacred and Ceremonial T extiles(Chicago:
T extile Society of America, 1996), 68–75.
11. Karen McCarthy Brown, Mama Lola: A Vodou Priestess in Brooklyn (Berkeley: University
of California Press, 1991).
12. See Serge Larose, “The Meaning of Africa in Haitian Voodoo,” in Symbols and Sentiments:
Cross-Cultural Studies in Symbolism , ed. I. M. Lewis (London: Academic Press, 1977),
85–116.
13. In Vodou, the soul is made up of different overlapping parts. The zonbi is a part of the soul
that lingers near the grave. It retains the personality of the living person and can be cap-
tured and manipulated. This zonbi, the zonbi astral, is not connected to a body and is dif-
ferent from the living-dead figures in the popular Haitian and U.S. imagination, so often
portrayed by Hollywood. For an elaboration on the uses and construction of zonbi astral,
see Elizabeth McAlister, “A Sorcerer’s Bottle: The Art of Magic in Haiti,” in Sacred Arts of
Haitian Vodou, ed. Donald J. Cosentino (Los Angeles: UCLA Fowler Museum, 1995),
304–321.
14. This is the time of Jesus’ death noted in Scripture.
15. Thérèse Roumer, interview, Petionville, February 16, 1993.
16. George Fouron, personal communication, New Haven, CT , November 1997.
17. Thérèse Roumer, interview, Petionville, February 16, 1993.
18. W . B. Seabrook, The Magic Island (New York: Literary Guild of America, 1929),
270–272.
19. See, e.g., Muriel Thayer Painter, Edward H. Spicer, and Wilma Kaemlein, eds., With
Good Heart: Yaqui Beliefs and Ceremonies in Pascua Village(T uscon: University of Arizona
Press, 1986); and James S. Griffith, Beliefs and Holy Places: A Spiritual Geography of the
Primeria Alta (T uscon: University of Arizona Press, 1992), 95.
20. See Marilyn Ekdahl Ravicz, Early Colonial Religious Drama in Mexico: From Tzompantli to
Golgotha (Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press, 1970); and Richard
C. T rexler, “We Think, They Act: Clerical Readings of Missionary Theatre in 16th
Century New Spain,” in Understanding Popular Culture: Europe from the Middle Ages to the
Nineteenth Century , ed. Steven L. Kaplan (New York: Mouton Publishers, 1984),
189–227.
21. In Judas Iscariot and the Myth of Jewish Evil(New York: Free Press, 1992), Hyam Maccoby
points out the consistent use of Judas by Christian myth as a symbol for all Jews. “Of all
Jesus’ twelve disciples, the one whom the Gospel story singles out as traitor bears the name
of the Jewish people.”
22. Sander Gilman, The Jew’s Body(New York: Routledge, 1991), 18.
23. Joshua T rachtenberg, The Devil and the Jews: the Medieval Conception of the Jew and Its
Relation to Modern Antisemitism (1943; repr., New York: Harper T orchbooks, 1966), 20.
24. T rachtenberg, Devil and Jews, 20.
25. Painter, Spicer, and Kaemlein, With Good Heart, 352.
26. T rachtenberg, Devil and Jews, 22.
27. T rexler, “We Think, They Act.”
28. For a discussion of the conflation of British, Protestant, and Civilized into one identity
against Native American “heathens,” see James Axtell, The Invasion Within: The Contest of
Cultures in Colonial North America (New York: Oxford University Press, 1996).
29. See Roth, History of the Marranos. The anti-Judaism taught by the Catholic clergy in Haiti
bears the characteristics of a classically premodern Jew-hatred centering on the betrayal of
Judas. In this logic, Jews are primarily polluters and traitors; there is little reference to the
modern anti-Semitic tropes of a Jewish conspiracy of exploitation hinging on issues of cap-
ital or usury. See the chapter “From Anti-Judaism to anti-semitism” in Gavin I. Langmuir,
“The Jew” in the Haitian Imagination 97
1403971625ts07.qxd  28-9-06  1:09 PM  Page 97


--- PAGE 113 ---
History, Religion and Antisemitism (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1990),
275–305.
30. On the Inquisition and the Jews in Mexico, see Seymour B. Liebman, The Jews in New
Spain: Faith, Flame and the Inquisition (Coral Gables, FL: University of Miami Press,
1970).
31. T rachtenberg, Devil and Jews, 26.
32. See Marc Shell, “Marranos (Pigs), or from Coexistence to T oleration,” Critical Inquiry
11, no. 2 (Winter 1991): 306–335.
33. Carolyn E. Fick, The Making of Haiti: The Saint Domingue Revolution from Below
(Knoxville: University of T ennessee Press, 1990), 278.
34. George Breathett, The Catholic Church in Haiti (1704–1785): Selected Letters, Memoires
and Documents (Salisbury, NC: Documentation Publications, 1982), 4.
35. Anne Grene, The Catholic Church in Haiti: Political and Social Change (East Lansing:
Michigan State University Press, 1993), 76.
36. G. Debien, “La Christianisation des esclaves des Antilles francaises aux XVIIe et XVIIIe
siecles,” Revue d’histoire de l’Amerique francaise, 21 (1967): 99–11.
37. Ephesians 6:5.
38. See Joshua, Devil and Jews.
39. Dayan, Haiti, History, and the Gods, 252.
40. Ibid., 253.
41. Moreau de Saint Méry [1797] 1958, 1:55. Cited in Desmangles, Faces of The Gods, 27.
42. Dayan, Haiti, History, and the Gods, 252.
43. Ibid, 253.
44. Cited in Laënnec Hurbon, Dieu dans le Vaudou Haïtien (Port-au-Prince: Editions
Deschamps, 1987), 21.
45. David H. Brown, “Garden in the Machine: Afro-Cuban Sacred Art and Performance in
Urban New Jersey and New York,” PhD dissertation, Yale University, 1989, 16.
46. Peter Stallybrass and Allon White, The Politics and Poetics of Transgression (Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press, 1986), 3.
47. I witnessed such a Passion Play by African American Catholics at Saint Ann’s shrine in
New Orleans, for example, in 1998.
48. The band Ya Seizi can be heard playing in Papa Dieupe’s compound on track 19a of the
recording compiled by this author: “Rhythms of Rapture: Sacred Musics of Haitian
Vodou,” Smithsonian/Folkways Recording SF 40464, 1995.
49. Papa Mondy Jean, interview, Port-au-Prince, April 1992.
50. A few Rara presidents told me that there was a game, a noisemaker, that the Jews held in
their hands and spun at the Crucifixion. This made a noise that came to be called “Rara.”
Papa T elemarque, interview, Darbonne, Léogane, March 6, 1993. One notices the possi-
ble connection with the noisemakers of Purim. This connection seems obscure; at any
rate, it is yet impossible to locate.
51. Rara costumes are elaborately sequined in parts of Haiti. Siméon, interview, Bel Air, Port-
au-Prince, July 30, 1993.
52. Siméon, interview, Bel Air, Port-au-Prince, March 20, 1993.
53. Siméon, interview, Bel Air, Port-au-Prince, July 30, 1993.
54. Laënnec Hurbon, Culture et Dictature en Haiti: 1’imaginaire sous contrôle (Paris:
L ’Harmattan, 1979), 43.
55. Alfred Métraux, Voodoo in Haiti (1959) (New York: Schocken Books, 1972), 326.
56. Papa Dieupe, interview, Artibonite, Easter Sunday 1993.
57. A similar symbolics works in Afro-Cuban religion, Lukumi. Unbaptized ritual objects and
“working” charms are called judeo, “Jewish.”
Elizabeth A. McAlister98
1403971625ts07.qxd  28-9-06  1:09 PM  Page 98


--- PAGE 114 ---
58. Mayard, interview, Rara Mande Gran Moun, Léogane, March 20, 1993. David H. Brown
reports an interesting parallel in the Kongo-derived Palo Monte practices in Cuba. As he
constructs a prenda, a “working” object, on Good Friday, a Mayombero comments to
Brown, “On the day of the week, the week of the year when they are quiet—Good
Friday—we are doing our thing.” Says Brown, “As spiritual opposites of Christ and the
Saints of Olofi and the orichas, they are ‘driving nails’ on the day of the Crucifixion.”
Brown, “Garden in the Machine,” 375.
59. See Hurbon, Culture et Dictature en Haiti, 133.
60. Liebman, Jews in New Spain, 31.
61. Clarence Haring, The Spanish Empire in America, 29. Cited in ibid., 42.
62. Liebman, Jews in New Spain, 42.
63. Zvi Loker, “Were There Jewish Communities in Saint Domingue (Haiti)?” Jewish Social
Studies, 44, no. 2 (Spring 1983): 135–146.
64. Ibid., 137.
65. The residence of the Israeli ambassador, at the time of this writing, is at the center of
Jewish activities in the country. He invites any practicing Jews and Jewish visitors to Haiti
to holiday seders at his home.
66. Bernard Glassman, Anti-Semitic Stereotypes Without Jews: Images of the Jews in England
1290–1700 (Detroit: Wayne State Press, 1975), 25.
67. Maccoby, Judas Iscariot, 1.
68. Bruce Lincoln, “Religious Imperialism and Its Victims: Resisting the Erasure of Those
Who Resist,” conference paper, UC Davis, March 1996.
“The Jew” in the Haitian Imagination 99
1403971625ts07.qxd  28-9-06  1:09 PM  Page 99


--- PAGE 115 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 116 ---
Chapter 7
Resisting Freedom: Cultural Factors in
Democracy—The Case for Haiti
Patrick Bellegarde-Smith
The trees fall from time to time, but the voice of the forest never loses its power. Life
begins.
—Jacques Alexis, Les Arbres Musiciens (Paris, 1957)
Haitian societal development seems to be filled with paradoxes, contradictions, and
enigmas. The process begun with the “encounter” of 1492 was profoundly corrupt-
ing in terms of cultural deflections to both the Old World and the New World and
to established patterns of interaction everywhere between the powerful and the weak
that are still evident today. Haitian history has been marked by struggle and by con-
tinuous acts of rebellion that, in more quiescent times, have become passive resistance
known by the Haitian label, marronage.
The Haitian Revolution of 1791, the most complete social revolution in the
hemisphere until Mexico in 1910 and Cuba in 1959, was formed by two major dis-
tinct movements that coalesced in an unsteady alliance but never fully merged. The
first movement, that of the enslaved, was the heir to all earlier slave rebellions, and
was consistent with slaves’ opposition to slavery and all forms of oppression. The sec-
ond movement was that of the plantocracy of color. Using a combination of tactics
and approaches such as warfare, guerrilla activities, and poisonings, this group
terrorized the plantocracy. The leaders were often Vodou priests. Boukman Dutty
and a female priest are said to have officiated at a Vodou ceremony at Bois Caïman—
doubtless one of many such ceremonies—inaugurating the insurrection of 1791.
Makandal, an African-born Muslim with a reputation of being a bòkò, led the 1757
revolt.
1 Pierre Dominique T oussaint Louverture, who later ruled, was also thought
to be a bòkò. Makandal’s sacred mission, like that of Zumbi of Palmares, was to rid
1403971625ts08.qxd  28-9-06  1:10 PM  Page 101


--- PAGE 117 ---
the colony of its white inhabitants and to create an African kingdom in Saint-
Domingue.
The social philosopher Dantès Bellegarde (1877–1966), who was most unsympa-
thetic to Vodou, wrote the following about Makandal: “The certainty [that he had
survived execution by the French] played an important role in organizing later upris-
ings. It maintained the trust of slaves who had found in the Vodou religion a partic-
ularly strong ferment to exalt their energies, since Vodo u...had become less a
religion than a political movement, a kind of ‘black Carbonarisme’ whose objective
was white extermination and black liberation.”
2
Writing later about T oussaint Louverture, Bellegarde stated: “Some have doubted
the sincerity of the Catholic faith of T oussaint without offering a single fact to justify
such a doubt.” He continued in an apparent contradiction, “he knew from personal
experience that the vodun ceremonies were only a pretext for political reunions
where, in the secretive ‘houmforts’ [temples] and in the exaltation of ritual dancing,
plots were being hatched against the authorities or, again, attacks against property;
[T oussaint] had become the ‘authority’ [as governor] and had made himself defender
of property, which article 13 of the Constitution had declared ‘sacred and unassail-
able.’ ”
3 Under capitalism, property is sacred and freedom of cultural expression can
be curtailed in its defense. The slaves qua peasants had been forced to remain on
plantations against their will. They revolted, as they would again and again after
Haitian independence, for which they had fought. Most of the 100,000 deaths
during the war for independence were from their ranks.
T oussaint Louverture, as well as all of his successors at the helm of the Haitian
state, realized Vodou’s potential for challenging the power and authority of the state
and the “mainstream” vision of society. T oussaint Louverture was thought by his fol-
lowers to be a believer in Vodou, reflecting the phrase that “Haiti is 80 percent
Catholic, but 100 percent Vodou.” This emphasizes the view that it need not be
“practiced” to have a valid hold on most minds as a state of mind, a spiritual system,
and a world view.
4
By the time T oussaint Louverture came to power, an awesome change in the nature
of the struggle had already begun. The leaders of the first uprisings had died in bat-
tle, been assassinated, or been co-opted by newcomers who were themselves
Westernizers. Plymouth, Jean Biassou, Lamour Dérance, Jean-François Papillon,
Romaine la Prophétesse, and, of course, Boukman Dutty, and countless other men and
women were “dismissed” in a later phase of the struggle for independence. Westernizers
in power have dismissed competing historical explanations of various events.
The majoritarian vision in Haiti, as elsewhere, was established largely on the col-
lective experience of enslavement that, at its onset, had solely an economic purpose:
to exploit the natural resources and human capital cheaply for the benefit of the met-
ropolitan elites. Indeed, the colonial state—with intentional as well as unintentional
results—set social policies to sustain economic exploitation in the plantation system
by converting the enslaved population to Christianity and by assimilating a few to
French cultural norms in order to enslave better. Some slaves saw the benefits of such
a course of action. The majoritarian vision also developed from the peasants’ shared
language (Kreyòl) and religion (Vodou) which helped provide them with an ideological
superstructure in form and content.
5
Patrick Bellegarde-Smith102
1403971625ts08.qxd  28-9-06  1:10 PM  Page 102


--- PAGE 118 ---
Significantly, language and religion were inventions of the Haitian peasants that
permitted them to face the power deficit between master and slave, oppressor and
oppressed, and a dominant Europe and a subaltern Africa. In both Haitian language
and Haitian religion, one finds the necessary compromises and subterfuges that the
weak use to survive. They also reflect a “hybridity” built largely on deception, later
referred to by some scholars as “Creole culture.” But synthesis does not mean
syncretism. Neither implies synergy, but sometimes its opposite.
6
Kreyòl and Vodou are, in the final analysis, organized responses to oppression, cre-
ated from African foundations. Kreyòl appears to have grammatical and syntactical
roots in West Africa, notably in the Kwa language group, into which foreign words
(such as French) were easily incorporated out of the necessity to communicate with
those in power.
7 Kreyòl is conceptually rich, having borrowed from many sources to
reflect new artifacts. At no time was Kreyòl “animal talk,” “baby talk,” “ petit nègre,”
“un français remis en enfance,” or “bad French,” as long believed by many scholars. At
no time was Vodou “un Catholicisme maldigéré,” although it may have been indigeste.
Both emanated from West African societies remarkable for their overall cultural sim-
ilarities, although there was certain preeminence achieved over time by a core of Fon,
Ewe, Yoruba, and related peoples.
8
The inclusion of non-African forms into the Haitian language and religion
became a form of adaptation rendered necessary by circumstances. Kreyòl became, at
once, a “contact” language and a “counterlanguage,” the latter with its studied ambi-
guity, irony, satire, and wit, and its ability to voye pwent.
9 In one sense, it defeated the
purpose of separating Africans from members of their ethnic group. As a contact lan-
guage, it became the lingua franca in Saint-Domingue between French and Africans
and between African and African. T oday, all Haitians speak Kreyòl; less than 10 percent
of the population is fluent in French, the other official language. As the national
language understood by all, Kreyòl served as the language of widest communication
throughout Haiti, particularly in the absence of widespread literacy.
10
Born in the Americas, Vodou responded to the spiritual and temporal needs such
as in health care and psychology of the majority population by amalgamating rituals
from west, west central, and south central Africa. Here again, Dahomean and Yoruba
elements predominated, with significant contributions from Kongo cultures and
civilization.
11 A strong family resemblance exists within the religious systems, moral
ideals, and social organizational structures of most African cultures, particularly as
concerns ancestral veneration and the cosmic, esoteric, or occult interaction between
worlds and universes. The significance of Vodou in the Haitian struggle for inde-
pendence, in the slave uprisings that preceded it, and in subsequent peasant rebel-
lions, cannot be overstated, nor its importance in most art forms such as music,
dance, the plastic arts, and oral literature, as befits a system that is also the culture’s
repository for social thought, organization, and ideology.
The central role of religion in human affairs is fairly well understood for its
explicatory value in all societies. Less a religion than a spiritual system and discipline,
Vodou extends “naturally” and easily, permeating all systems, structures, and institu-
tions in the large and subtle ways in which most Haitians view their world and all
worlds, even as they migrate.
12 Indeed, Haitians need not be observant, initiated, nor
believers to partake of that shared national world view fostered through Vodou.13 As
Resisting Freedom 103
1403971625ts08.qxd  28-9-06  1:10 PM  Page 103


--- PAGE 119 ---
with Judaism in Israel and Shinto in Japan, Vodou helped define the Haitian nationality
and ethos. Roman Catholicism, in its French variant, remained the official religion
until 1987 and defined the state, the powers that structured it, and the elites who
controlled it. Individuals who have decried Vodou or who have been embarrassed by
it have hoped to attain a “higher standard,” an interesting point of colonial psychol-
ogy.
14 The ostensible rejection of Vodou, or any other African cultural marker,
has been absurdly common among black populations throughout the Western
Hemisphere, where physical oppression has been accompanied by the requisite impo-
sition of European cultural norms, resulting in the marginalization of these groups.
They have, in turn, internalized their apparent inferiority and have been given the
status of a minority (not necessarily defined in demographic terms). Colonialism
engaged all human faculties and has been a factor in all social science.
15 Eurocentric
anthropologists, psychologists, and economists, typically anchored in their own civi-
lization, have found it necessary thus far to divide the world between “primitive men-
talities” and modern man, and in perfectly rational arguments support directly
policies that subjugate most areas of the world.
16
Power That Defines: Class, “Modeling,” 
and Dominant Paradigms
The leaders who hijacked the twenty-one American republics in the nineteenth
century, leading them to formal independence, had come from similar (if not identi-
cal) social backgrounds as criollos (in Spanish America) and colonists (in the United
States). Both groups were descended from Europeans who settled these colonies after
they had been “discovered” by their forebears, who had come as conquerors.
The Haitian struggle for independence, formally lasting thirteen years, led to the
creation of the first independent Latin American state in 1804. It was, besides, the
first “modern” state of African origin on the Western model, followed by Liberia,
whose elites were established along identical premises.
The Haitian war of independence came about as a result of an amalgam of diverse
movements and conflicts. The first movement arose on the part of the enslaved
majority—about 90 percent—as a search for freedom and liberation, defined by them as
cultural autonomy and the power of political initiative. The second movement erupted
from among the middle groups whose existence came from the social order fostered by
the encounter between the West and Africa in colonial Saint-Domingue, as elsewhere.
Indeed, between the white apex and the black base of the societal triangle, there existed
a level intermediate in status and color, which aspired to be closer to God.
17 Class
interests dictated that the affranchis, as the free people were called, would lend their
support to whichever group could buttress its insecure social position. Middle classes in
all cultures have often felt inherently insecure. In perhaps 99 percent of the cases, they
have exercised the option of lending their support in favor of the powerful upper classes.
The French Revolution of 1789, not the endemic slave uprisings, had unleashed the
affranchis’ natural reserve, as they wished to remove the petty racial vexations of colonial
social apartheid and to become citoyens actifsas the revolution had promised.
Patrick Bellegarde-Smith104
1403971625ts08.qxd  28-9-06  1:10 PM  Page 104


--- PAGE 120 ---
The affranchis had achieved a significant economic position despite French
racism: One-fourth to one-third of the plantations and one-fourth of the slaves
belonged to them. The white plantocracy had misgivings about the racial implica-
tions of the French Revolution with respect to colonial society. Consequently, many
in the white plantocracy were royalists who had sided with France’s arch rival, the
United Kingdom. Spanish settlers in the Americas had had the same qualms about a
liberalizing Spain (under Napoleonic rule), a concern that had led to Mexican inde-
pendence under Augustín Iturbide, whose group came to power partly to forestall a
social revolution from among the (Indian and mestizo) lower class in the early nine-
teenth century.
18 U.S. intervention in the Spanish-American-Cuban War had a simi-
lar genesis. The Haitian affranchis had achieved a status similar to that of the
Spanish-American criollos and the North American colonists, with similar conflicts
arising in Saint-Domingue as had arisen between criollos and peninsulares, the
American colonists and the British. In Haiti that dispute carried an additional bur-
den, that of biological “race.” The white plantocracy opposed the granting of social
and political equality to brown and black planters. What had been a family dispute
among putative members of a potential same bourgeoisie would lead to a “racial” war
because of the intransigence of white Saint-Dominguois and French racism.
Colonial societies such as Haiti, in which a segment of the population is often
formed from the union between ruler and ruled and master and slave from disparate
cultures, frequently have as a salient element of their psychology the self-hatred and
sense of violation resulting from the cultural and emotional rape that took place.
This sense of violation and distrust accounts for tensions in the existing relations
between the governed and the social institutions of the country. By forcibly depriv-
ing people of their cultural heritage, colonialism sought willfully to structure and
organize all social alliances, thereby instituting its domination over the norms and
values of the colonized.
19 More often than not this domination resulted in feelings
of inferiority among those who had been colonized, in part the very definition of a
racial minority. The vanquished often exhibit a form of idolatry vis-à-vis the con-
queror. This sort of psychological violence inherent in all colonization—and in reli-
gious conversion—together with most colonial administrative practices, goes a long
way toward explaining the spirit and the reality of authoritarianism found in neo-
colonial societies. Often unable to transcend the conditions of their birth, Haitian
elites are also victims of the clash between the Western old and a new non-Western
world order. Furthermore, in contradistinction with the rigid racialist position of
Anglo-Saxon cultures—de jure policies as well as de facto—cultural assimilation was
promoted by the Latin powers. Anglo-Saxon societies openly excluded blacks; Latin
societies, in theory, included them, but only according to a racialist argument that
blacks could be salvaged, despite their having nothing to contribute culturally.
Christianity everywhere adopted the Latin version of racism by actively seeking
converts from among black populations. Under such odds, what was to be the
rational response of Haitian elites?
The grand alliance between slaves and affranchis that culminated in Haitian inde-
pendence fourteen years later, in fact, was a cynical and calculated effort to co-opt the
slaves’ fighting power for the affranchis’ own purposes.
20 That alliance was, nonetheless,
the necessary condition for independence, although not for freedom.
Resisting Freedom 105
1403971625ts08.qxd  28-9-06  1:10 PM  Page 105


--- PAGE 121 ---
The assessment of the philosopher Louis-Joseph Janvier (1855–1911) is particularly
useful in this context. Commenting on Haiti’s continued authoritarian tradition, he
wrote at the turn of the century that “political freedom is an inferior good [compared
to] national independence.”
21 Ribeiro, the Brazilian scholar, synthesized the condi-
tions left by colonialism, stating, “Each people, even each human being, was affected
by and caught up in the European economic system or the ideals of wealth, power,
justice, or health inspired by it.”
22 This legacy also explained Emperor Jean-Jacques
Dessalines’ cry of anguish when former affranchis tried to appropriate all property
that belonged to their white fathers (not to their black mothers): “What of the poor
blacks whose fathers are in Africa, won’t they inherit anything?” In the larger context,
however, it meant slavish acceptance of liberal ideology as it sustained capitalism,
which was seen as quintessentially “modern.” In early nineteenth-century Haiti,
French political influences, British social thought, and the example of the North
American rebellion of 1776 aided in the formulation of Westernized ideologies that
were viewed as rationalistic and the sine qua non of modern existence.
23
The ascendancy of the former affranchis occurred shortly after independence. The
consolidation of elite hegemony, starting in the 1820s under the long reign of
President Jean-Pierre Boyer, led to the first major postindependence peasant uprising,
in 1843. The Piquets, the “suffering army” as the insurgents called themselves,
demanded land distribution, the dispossession of the rich, and “black” (peasant)
political control. Beaubrun Ardouin, a historian (1796–1865), had claimed the
Caribbean as a whole for the mulâtres (a new name for the former affranchis) who
had nowhere else to go. Simón Bolivar had made a similar argument for Spanish
America.
Despite the “revolutionary” message, there was the continuation of structures, the
form and the spirit of colonial constructs adopted from the slave master. The histo-
rian Lespinasse (1811–1863) added to the analysis that the spirit of freedom was a
mulâtre gift to the blacks—that the slaves had acquired a taste of independence from
mulattos. But all must now unite for raison d’état.
24 These historians had rendered in
a fairly sophisticated way—the first time this had been done by Westernized blacks
anywhere in the world—even earlier analyses published by Haitian intellectuals. In
1817, for instance, Valentin Pompée de Vastey had defended the European coloniza-
tion of Africa almost a century before it was fully under way.
Whether based on pre-Enlightenment ideologies, or liberalism, conservatism,
positivism, or, much later, Marxism and modernization theories, all were ideas
expressed by the small coterie of Haitian intellectuals that hoped to help define Haiti
to the rest of the world, institute its policies, and define its raison d’être. All of these
ideas came from a Western civilization that claimed universality, but in fact remained
alien to most Haitians. Once translated into state policy, these ideas were never so
broad as to incorporate broad segments of the polity into res publica—neither the
very large peasantry, the small urban working class, or at its outset, the emerging
middle classes.
The desire of one group to maintain power over others occurred through a brutal
econo-political system instituted from the ideological base of a political culture dom-
inated by an upper class, and not necessarily from a national political culture. Elites
were fearful of relinquishing pieces of what was a limited pie, which, starting in
Patrick Bellegarde-Smith106
1403971625ts08.qxd  28-9-06  1:10 PM  Page 106


--- PAGE 122 ---
the 1880s, was also additionally shared by expatriate European, North American, and
Levantine elites.25 Individuals and groups vied for preeminence within a restricted
and restrictive social environment, in which perhaps 5 percent of the population
counted.
26
Among the elites, men (and a few women) argued in favor of the French language
and of Roman Catholicism as the pillars upon which to erect Haitian culture; some
mistook the dream for the reality. The obstacles to achieving this on a widespread
basis eventually proved insurmountable. Most Haitians knew that Kreyòl and Vodou
were the poto mitan(the center posts) of Haitian culture, the language they spoke and
the gods they worshipped. The dichotomies in Haiti near the turn of the century
between European and African, elites and peasantry, French and Kreyòl, and
Catholicism and Vodou were vital echoes of earlier dichotomies between affranchi
and slave, brown and black, creole and bossale, and civilized and primitive. The
dichotomies informed a vision, a world view, and a mentality in which reality, to a
large extent, was composed of opposites, and was viewed as such. Haitian society was
in fact ordered according to a non-Western view in which knowledge of French and
Kreyòl was part of a continuum, in which the majority worshipped the Loa (deities)
while still going to church, and where shades of brown and black occurred within
each extended family. In the final analysis, the national period reflected a continua-
tion of social policies set by France during colonization that were, in a paradox more
apparent than real, easier to pursue once the whites had been forcibly removed from
the national scene.
The first American occupation of Haiti (1915–1934), brutal at all levels, was a
cultural shock as well.
27 In view of the proud and bellicose racism of the United States
as it applied to the whole of Latin America, Haiti—la France noireof Jules Michelet—
was believed by the United States to be inoperative. Early on, Simón Bolivar had
stated that the United States, “so enamored of its own liberties, is already less fond of
the liberties of others. Quite the contrary: it has made of this liberty an instrument
for causing other people misery.”
28 U.S. economic interests in its private sector, far
more than strategic interests, had been a primary cause of the occupation.
In the shock of the occupation, emerging middle class intellectuals throughout
Haiti rose against the cultural status quo, defending African norms and values
adhered to by the majority of Haitians, despite knowing little about them. These
efforts did not preclude widespread persecution of Vodou, however, nor did it signify
an acceptance of Kreyòl. Hurt to the very core of their souls by an American army
that had penetrated Haitian psychic defenses, intellectuals rebelled against the vision
expressed by Bellegarde that Haiti was “an intellectual province of France.” Later, in
the heat of the culture wars he would add, “What would happen to a Dahomean islet
in the heart of the Americas?”
29 The Indigénisme movement spread nonetheless, inch-
ing closer—but not too close—to a peasantry lauded in the abstract.30 That peasantry
had taken the brunt of the U.S. invasion and had responded to that invasion with an
armed resistance movement. It appeared to the peasantry that the whites were
reinstituting slavery.
Bellegarde’s nemesis was his personal friend, Jean Price-Mars (1875–1969), whose
works were well placed to “start” the worldwide movement of négritude, yet another
literary movement of blacks who had been assimilated into French culture, and who
Resisting Freedom 107
1403971625ts08.qxd  28-9-06  1:10 PM  Page 107


--- PAGE 123 ---
had realized faintly what had been lost. The more radical members of these groups
moved toward Marxism. But both Marxism and négritude were still solidly anchored
in a Western ethos—an anti-Western Westernism, if you will—similar to Sartre’s
description of négritude as racist antiracism.
31 These Haitians retained an etic view-
point; in the context of Haitian upper and middle classes and education, an emic
quality remains elusive.
Not so paradoxically, the U.S. occupation shored up the Haitian upper classes, the
best guarantors of U.S. hegemonic economic interests in the country, against the rising
popular tide. It had been increasingly difficult to quell popular discontent against a
status quo established in 1806. A series of ephemeral governments at key points in
Haitian history had revealed the disarray of a ruling group faced by pressures from
below. At times, only foreign intervention seemed able to maintain political stability.
By 1847, the system had already undergone tremendous stress, largely from the
Piquets’ uprising. The country had four presidents between 1843 and 1847. As the
malaise continued to grow, and rural uprisings maintained pressure on Port-au-
Prince—the Caco rebellions might be said to have lasted between 1860 and 1929—
six ephemeral governments succeeded one another between 1911 and 1915. Later,
additional pressures from the newly conscious middle classes, as distinct from the
peasantry, led to five governments between 1956 and 1957. The crises became
increasingly severe. After the fall of President Jean-Claude Duvalier in February
1986, five provisional governments took power between 1986 and 1991, and a pro-
longed military dictatorship under General Raoul Cédras took over, with three dis-
tinct administrations between 1991 and 1994.
32
In each case, the crisis was resolved temporarily—by President and later Emperor
Faustin Soulouque in 1847, the American occupation in 1915, the “selection” of
President François Duvalier in 1957 with U.S. support, and the election of President
Jean-Bertrand Aristide in 1991 and his restoration in 1994, with U.S. support. The
United States proved to be a crucial player in the transition between upper class and mid-
dle class rule in 1957 and between middle class and “popular” rule in 1991, while its
hegemonic interests remained intact or actually increased. A symmetry was being estab-
lished: Desperate living circumstances would lead to revolutionary conditions, which, in
turn, would lead to repression. Each response ultimately led to increased repression.
As if le Peuple Mattered: Democracy in 
Popular Culture
Demographics and class structure, as well as popular culture dictate that the impact
of social movements upon the body politic and political culture be considered seri-
ously. The objective had been to stymie popular participation in politics. Frequent
declarations about the inherent lack of a democratic tradition in Haiti are ahistorical
and are anchored in a Western social science tradition that rejects the reality of class,
while itself remaining culture specific.
33 More significant in furthering an under-
standing of Haiti’s political culture might be the study of the ideological superstructure
ensconced in a metaphysical world view elaborated by Haitians. Palmares and other
Patrick Bellegarde-Smith108
1403971625ts08.qxd  28-9-06  1:10 PM  Page 108


--- PAGE 124 ---
similar experiments in indigenous autonomy were destined to fail when at odds with
the economic interests of the powerful. Indeed, the cry “ que deviendrait un ílot
dahoméen . . . ,” however ill intentioned and racist, acknowledged that Haiti could be
recolonized because it was barbaric, as was Africa in the 1940s. The statement did not,
however, question the basis for that assertion. The elites’ best intentions notwith-
standing, they did not preclude neocolonization starting in the 1880s or self-righteous
efforts by the international Western community to civilize Haiti.
34 But belles lettres
and belles manières did not suffice in saving the country from interference and
intervention.
Middle class political control (as distinct from economic power) had incited great
hopes in the 1940s. The middle classes did not bring with them the psychological
baggage or the reservations of the previous ruling group regarding language and
religion. And it claimed to represent le peuple. Cultural nationalism transmogrified
into political nationalism, and were both a part of an anticolonial arsenal in which
the master, nonetheless, remains the model, the patron (blueprint or boss) for one’s
action. These developments indicated that after two centuries of independence, Haiti
and the still-colonized Caribbean countries were not far apart politically or culturally.
The middle class faced social apartheid and petty humiliations of the kind suffered
earlier by the affranchis, whose descendants and intellectual heirs they were now
fighting. That middle class had been formed by the economic space created by bene-
ficial worldwide conditions, the political stability provided by the U.S. occupation
(that also discriminated against it on the basis of color), and the educational oppor-
tunities established by the governments of Philippe-Sudre Dartiguenave and Louis
Borno. In fact, the middle class represented a new element in the equation in the
rapport de forces that failed to live up to the expectations of many.
Although opposed to the first middle class government of President Dumarsais
Estimé (1946–1950), the United States supported the second, that of François
Duvalier. The United States seemed fairly comfortable with a racial rather than a class
analysis, since it could and did blunt class differences while augmenting the “political
class” and giving the appearance of expanding democracy. The United States had fol-
lowed a similar course in Cuba and the Dominican Republic with success. As was
later proven within the confines of the United States proper during the Civil Rights
movement, an obsession with the social construct “race” (as a form of nationalism),
is more easily a part of a conservative and traditionalist agenda than not.
35 The old
guard, nonetheless, had viewed the replacement of cherished cultural positions (Haiti
as Christian, French, and a part of the Western world), as challenging a national
identity, disguising class interests.
The issue of a national identity (hence, personal identity) had a profound impact
and implications in all other areas.
36 But for two centuries, the debate took place in a
rarefied atmosphere in which the majority of Haitians had no voice. Despite real
cultural dislocation, as the intelligentsia peregrinated from Pan-Americanism, to Pan-
Caribbeanism, to Pan-Africanism, indigénisme, negritude, and now to Antillanité—
all a search for a middle ground and a sustainable identity—the people seemed
remarkably unconcerned. The uprisings of yesteryear seem to have been replaced by
a form of passive resistance, a marronage, reflected in religion, language, and fairly
uncontrollable institutions and activities that set the province apart from the
Resisting Freedom 109
1403971625ts08.qxd  28-9-06  1:10 PM  Page 109


--- PAGE 125 ---
“République de Port-au-Prince,” the countryside from the urban center when the
center’s centripetal force was increased purposefully during the occupation. 37 The
“gouvenman lannuit ” was harder to sustain, as the reach of the central government
became more realizable.38 And the widespread and generalized movements that led to
the overthrow of the dictatorship in 1986 had come from all segments of the popu-
lation, including the Catholic Church, the hounfò (Vodou temples), Duvalierists
(who attempted Duvalierism sans Duvalier), and the army. But because of irreconcil-
able differences, the grand alliances broke as soon as they coalesced. The popular
movement remained unimpressed by political parties (a sine qua non of Western
definitions of democracy) until Lavalas came upon the national scene.
But where there is intrusion there is resistance. Only in the area of culture can an
oppressed population find a playing field. That resistance was exemplified and illus-
trated in a culture that was often countercultural and would become the dominant
culture if there were a change in the socioeconomic system of the sort that might have
been sustained if the Haitian Revolution had survived the assassination of Jean-
Jacques Dessalines in October 1806. President Jean-Bertrand Aristide was conscious
of both symbol and reality when he took the oath of office in Kreyòl, and received the
presidential sash from a manbo (female Vodou priest) in February 1991, with sym-
bolic forms of greeting that resonated deeply within the population. His deliberate
use of Kreyòl indicated a break and discontinuity in cultural patterns that was
strangely symbolic of the synthesis in Vodou and dealt blows to both the elite lan-
guage (true language, French) and the elite religion (true faith, Catholicism).
39
Subsequently, in 1995 Aristide further evened the playing field between Vodou and
Christianity. When he flung open the gates of the presidential mansion to serve food
to beggars personally, he simultaneously transformed a white house built on the
model of the Petit T rianon into a national palace.
In all fairness to France, the spread of the French language, which was essential
in establishing the commonweal, was incomplete by the time of Haitian independ-
ence. France was not fluent in French. The French Revolution and the Napoleonic
Wars were the context in which that language spread inside France, creating the
modern nation state and nationalism as we now understand it. Haiti was linguisti-
cally unified before France. The adoption of French (rather than English, which
Henri Christophe might have wished) rendered that language of differentiation and,
in the process, made Kreyòl the language of countercultural resistance. The
manichean dichotomy, which is not found in the Vodou religion, need not have
occurred: A linguistic continuum has always existed, illustrated by the expressions
parler pointu and parler plat.
40 Language has “color” and becomes a marker for
limiting access to power.
Carew, the Guyanese novelist, said that “we have misperceived ourselves since
Columbus.”41 But it is also true that criollos and affranchis in Latin America devel-
oped a nativism and a nationalism ahead of much of Europe. Why? The answer lies
partly in the hybridization of cultures and the deracialization of race in which race
remains a factor, and in which the concept of miscegenation acquired a positive cast
that it did not acquire in North America. (In the United States, nationalism takes the
form of white ethnic chauvinism.) Haitian racial definitions were borrowed from
those of northern Europe (France, England, and the United States), and mulâtres
Patrick Bellegarde-Smith110
1403971625ts08.qxd  28-9-06  1:10 PM  Page 110


--- PAGE 126 ---
became “blacks” except when at home, where they became blan peyi (local whites)—
elsewhere, blanco de la tierra (in Spanish), and branco da terra (in Portuguese)—
raising the specter of caste-like social arrangements and quasi-ethnic differences. 42
Limpieza de sangre (purity of blood, clean blood), is but an approximation of desire.
New peoples arose in the colonial contexts, different from the lower classes—the raw
material for new sociocultural formations. The latter retained a “different” outlook,
and their original culture evolved as counterculture.
In religion, the other primary cultural element defining nationality, Haiti’s early
break with Africa not so paradoxically reinforced Africanisms in which content
remains strangely familiar today to Ewe and Fon populations. As in Quebec with
French Catholicism, that Vodou remained vital to most forms of political resistance
cannot be disputed. The armed resistance to the U.S. occupation, which came exclu-
sively from the countryside, was anchored in the national religion, as seen in this
exchange in December 1921 between Monseigneur Jean-Marie Jan, the French
Roman Catholic Bishop of Cap Haitien, and Senator Medill McCormick, a member
of the U.S. Senate commission that investigated the reports of atrocities leveled
against the occupation:
Senator: Your comments on the U.S. occupation of Haiti?
Bishop: The occupation was an act of kindness...
Senator: The war against the Americans, how do you explain it?
Bishop: The people were pushed to desperation by [American] arbitrariness, injustice
and mistreatments. It proclaimed its right to self-defense. Does the United States
want to impose Protestantism by force?
Senator: The Washington government will never attack Haiti’s [Catholic] faith. Can you
provide information on Vodun, its practices and status? Has it diminished since the
occupation?
Bishop: It has increased....The greatest cause for this is that the bocors ( bokò) were the
soul of the insurrection.
43
In the battle between French and U.S. imperialism, the French bishop had
expressed the well-founded fear that U.S. missionaries would weaken the French tra-
ditional advantage in Haiti. At the same time, Edwin Denby, the U.S. Under
Secretary of the Navy, was writing E. O. Watson, the director of the U.S. Council of
Churches, that “Haiti is within the sphere of the United States...and the Churches
and the missionary societies can be of very real help....The Navy Department will
be happy to facilitate your work in any way possible.”
44 The very serious efforts to
convert the Haitian population to American Protestantism should be an indication
that others have understood the importance of Vodou. The persecutions orchestrated
by many Haitian presidents (although themselves believers in Vodou), following
T oussaint L ’Ouverture’s recognition that resistance and conspiracies could well come
from these quarters, should provide similar indications. It seems certain that Haitians
have found the millenary religion to be a source of empowerment over the past five
centuries. Less a religion than a spiritual discipline sustained by awesome rituals,
Vodou, as with Kreyòl, provides a fluidity, a cultural continuum and a bridge
between those in the upper and middle classes who follow it for its magie (magical
powers) and those at the bottom who recognize it as a world view sui generis.
Resisting Freedom 111
1403971625ts08.qxd  28-9-06  1:10 PM  Page 111


--- PAGE 127 ---
The dichotomies between European and African, slaveowner and slave, brown
and black, French and Kreyòl, elite and peasant, and Christian and servant of the Loa
were created largely out of the necessity for a small minority to subjugate the majority
and maintain control for the primary purpose of acquiring wealth. The gulf created
through these juxtapositions would seem to be insurmountable, sapping the very
notion of “nation.” Having their genesis in colonialism, these bifurcations should be
seen not as opposites, but as part of a spectrum and a cultural continuum in which
Haitians find themselves. Neither Indian Hinduism, Japanese Shinto, nor Native
American spirituality has suffered the indignities born by Vodou. The Japanese con-
text in which Buddhism and Shinto have their spheres is instructive. One acknowl-
edges generally the singular importance that Vodou has on all Haitian arts, although
not in other domains such as science and psychology.
Questions regarding the issue of identity have been the concern mainly of elites in
Haiti, as have questions regarding the power to define, for as new hybrid cultures were
developing from the clash of civilizations in the Americas, no such worries occupied the
collective minds of le peuple. The issue becomes important, however, when tied to
power and class. It needs to be resolved, furthermore, when liberation—subsuming
freedom and democracy—is at stake. One must not in the process jettison the out-
standing achievements, norms, and values created in the West that could help in the
evolution and development of Haiti. A redefinition of both formand context must take
place, however, based on the ethos of a people neglected far too long. A society in which
the haves crush the have-nots can never be democratic nor can it be a community, no
matter how numerous the elections. And within the purview of a well-organized state,
structure and institutions must be willing to address the well-being of the majority in
order to ensure some sense of belonging, a modicum of stability, and social peace.
Repression inevitably occurs when oppression remains strong; it also occurs when insti-
tutions created by the majority are not respected but are instead targeted for destruc-
tion. Democracy in Haiti will be an Africanizing process, as the structures of the state
come to reflect the institutions of the nation.
45 One might well assume that ancestral
values and norms will not be prized as they resurface in the body politic after a lapse of
two centuries. New intellectual paradigms in Haitian scholarship are in the offing.
If Haitian history teaches us anything at all, it is the inordinate love for democracy
in a people that has never stopped fighting against those who would deny them that
freedom. That history is little understood by scholars outside Haiti; the concept of
political culture has hence been misapplied; and democracy, seen as the preserve of
Western societies, has been defined improperly.
Notes
1. Boukman Eksperyans, a “roots” (racine) band with a high octane “world (African) beat,” is
named after him. A bòkò is a Vodou priest in the north of Haiti, or a root doctor or magi-
cian, elsewhere.
2. Dantès Bellegarde, Histoire du Peuple Haïtien (Port-au-Prince, 1953), 59. Carbonarisme
refers to a secret Italian society that met in the woods to plot that country’s unification in
the nineteenth century under the leadership of Guiseppe Garibaldi (1807–1882).
Patrick Bellegarde-Smith112
1403971625ts08.qxd  28-9-06  1:10 PM  Page 112


--- PAGE 128 ---
3. Ibid., 77. It was understandable that enslaved Africans—considered to be property—
declared war on property.
4. See Patrick Bellegarde-Smith, Haiti: The Breached Citadel (T oronto: Canadian Scholars’
Press, 2004).
5. As an aside, when unable to find the solution to an algebraic problem in English, I turned
to French. This artifice allowed me to gain a fresh perspective on a given question.
Language—and a rich vocabulary—can frame an argument.
6. That Vodou and Kreyòl comprise non-Africanized forms reflects in part an admission of
fear and lack of control on the part of a large group subjugated to a powerful smaller group.
It also demonstrates the necessity of using “new” words for new things. Additionally, in
Vodou, the absolute necessity of hiding what was already a mystical religion demanding ini-
tiation came as the result of colonial interdiction and as the recognition of the validity of all
spiritual systems. (The relationship between Buddhism and Shinto in Japan or perhaps that
between Hinduism and Buddhism serve me well here.) I do, however, accept the validity
and reality of a “Creole culture” as defined by anthropologists.
7. There are numerous explanations for the development of Creole languages in general and
of Kreyòl specifically. I accept the logic of the arguments made by linguistics scholar
Marie-Marcelle Buteau Racine and the research of independent scholar, Thérèse Roumer,
on these matters. Why would enslaved Africans born in Africa “forget” the structure of
their languages? Kreyòl is not a romance language, as stated in Webster’s Dictionary, as
Yiddish is Germanic.
8. My experience in West Africa would seem to support this argument, where I stunned
Africans by demonstrating “pure” Ewe behavior while I was dancing. Many others have
spoken of Kreyòl in similar terms.
9. Voye pwentis a feature of Kreyòl that allows a speaker verbally to attack someone indirectly
by innuendo. Kreyòl shares these linguistic features with other fairly autonomous African-
derived languages and dialects in the Western Hemisphere, notably, black English (or
Ebonics) in the United States. “Playin’ the dozens,” “signifyin’,” and “testifyin’ ” are com-
mon examples of kinds of discourse in black English. See the works of Geneva
Smitherman.
10. The Kreyòl lexicon is overwhelmingly French although it comprises far-reaching contri-
butions from various African languages, English, American, Spanish, Dutch, and
Portuguese. Similarly, although its base is Germanic, English owes much of its vocabulary
to Norman French, Latin, and Greek. All Haitians speak Kreyòl; 10 percent know French,
and as many or perhaps more, know English. Approximately 5 percent are fluent in
Spanish.
11. In the religion these rituals are kept separate, and in various parts of Haiti different rituals
dominate. See Robert Farris Thompson, Flash of the Spirit: African and African-American
Art and Philosophy (New York, 1983).
12. It is common to find Vodou practitioners in most families that purport to despise Vodou.
Commonly, one member of an extended family will continue the Vodou rituals for all
family members, even among elite families. My personal and academic interests in this
subject led me to discover similar behavior among most Haitian presidents and their
family members.
13. When a religion is a part of the ethnic patrimony, which is typical in the African setting,
it needs no name, since all individuals participate in its rituals at various levels. In Haiti,
Vodou (Voodoo, Vaudou) is an “invention” necessitated by the presence of other religions
in the landscape.
14. See Frantz Fanon, The Wretched of the Earth(New York, 1968); Aimé Césaire, Discours sur
le colonialisme (Paris, 1955); and Albert Memmi, Portrait du colonisé, précédé du portrait du
colonisateur (Paris, 1957).
Resisting Freedom 113
1403971625ts08.qxd  28-9-06  1:10 PM  Page 113


--- PAGE 129 ---
15. This view is factored into the academic discipline of africology, but not necessarily in other,
more Eurocentric disciplines. Africology complements other disciplines that are Eurocentric
in thrust. The africological subfield in psycho-social inquiry is particularly à propos here.
16. See James M. Blaut, The Colonizer’s Model of the World(New York, 1993), 97–100.
17. An illustration is found in Euzhan Palcy’s film La Rue des cases nègres (Sugar Cane Alley),
about Martinique in the 1930s, in which the son of a white planter and a mulatto woman
with aspirations for her son, turn against the colonial structure altogether, embittered by
the “irrationality” of his father’s racism. God is the white man, and the God of Christians
is represented—as he should be—as a white man.
18. The revolution had been planned by two Roman Catholic priests, Miguel Hidalgo and
José-Maria Morelos. They paved the way for priests Camilo T orres (Colombia) and Jean-
Bertrand Aristide (Haiti), who later led populist social movements.
19. While U.S. President Ronald Reagan bemoaned the missed opportunity to have resolved
the Native American “problem” once and for all, they were not “forcibly” assimilated.
They were, in large measure, however, assimilated culturally, racially, and linguistically.
They were also the victims of widespread genocide.
20. Official Haitian historiography relates the creation of the blue and red flag in 1803 as
symbolizing the union of the blacks (mostly slave, represented by the blue) and affranchis
(mostly mulatto, represented by the red), and the motto “L ’Union fait la force” (“In unity
there is strength”). There are alternative popular explanations of the same event.
21. Louis-Joseph Janvier, Les Constitutions d’Haiti (Paris, 1886), 32.
22. Darcy Ribeiro, The Americas and Civilization (New York, 1971), 49.
23. See my lengthy treatment of that subject in In the Shadow of Powers: Dantès Bellegarde in
Haitian Social Thought (Atlantic Highlands, NJ, 1985).
24. Beauvais Lespinasse, Histoire des affranchis de Saint-Domingue (Paris, 1882), 15–16.
25. See Brenda Gayle Plummer, Haiti and the Great Powers(Baton Rouge, 1988), 41–66.
26. See the analysis in Bellegarde-Smith, In the Shadow of Powers, 30–53.
27. Roger Gaillard, Les Blancs débarquent: la guérilla de Batraville(Port-au-Prince, 1983), 238.
An English text is Hans Schmidt, The United States Occupation of Haiti(New Brunswick,
NJ, 1971), 135–153.
28. Cited by Germán Arciniegas, Latin America: A Cultural History (New York, 1967), 379.
29. Dantès Bellegarde, Haiti et ses problèmes (Montreal, 1941), 17.
30. My experience with the major poets Léon Laleau and Jean F . Brierre and the Guyanais
Léon-Gontran Damas over the years has shown me how tenuous the African connection
was. At the end of their lives, all three recanted their negritude to me, personally.
31. Jean-Paul Sartre had written this in a preface, “Orphée noire,” to Léopold Sédar Senghor,
Anthologie de la nouvelle poésie nègre et malgache (Paris, 1948), xx.
32. The ephemeral presidencies were the following: 1843–1847: Rivière Hérard, Philippe
Guérrier, Louis Pierrot, Jean-Baptiste Riché. 1908–1911: Antoine Simon, Cincinatus
Leconte, Tancrède Auguste, Michel Oreste, Oreste Zamor, Davilmar Théodore, Vilbrun-
Guillaume Sam. 1956–1957: Joseph-Nemours Pierre-Louis, Franck Sylvain, the
“collégial,” Daniel Fignolé, General Antonio Kébreau. After 1986: General Henri
Namphy, Leslie Manigat, “Namphy II,” General Prosper Avril, Ertha Pascal-T rouillot—
after seven months of Jean-Bertrand Aristide (René Préval)—General Raoul Cédras
between 1991 and 1994, with three “distinct” presidents or prime ministers: Emile
Jonassaint (and Jean-Jacques Honorat), Marc Bazin, and then Aristide II, with Robert
Malval, Smarck Michel, and Claudette Werleigh.
33. See Bellegarde-Smith, Breached, 175.
34. Major efforts were undertaken by the French Roman Catholic Church after 1862 and by
U.S. Protestant missions from 1922 to the present.
Patrick Bellegarde-Smith114
1403971625ts08.qxd  28-9-06  1:10 PM  Page 114


--- PAGE 130 ---
35. The leadership of President François Duvalier in Haiti, President Léopold Sédar Senghor
in Senegal, and African-American nationalists buttress my position.
36. At a conference of the Association of Caribbean Studies in Martinique in 1984, Roger
T oumson, a Martinican thinker speaking on Caribbean identity, stopped in mid-sentence
to exclaim: “Only in the Caribbean could we argue about identity after 500 years of colo-
nization. The issue of identity is alien to the French and to most Europeans.”
37. The creation of the Haitian army by the United States in 1916 is a part of that movement.
See Sidney W . Mintz, “Preface,” in James G. Leyburn, The Haitian People (New Haven,
1966), v–xxxvi.
38. This is translated as “government-at-night,” referring to secret neo-African societies that
“govern” the country when the Westernized urban authorities are asleep. Brazilians have a
saying, “the country grows when the government is asleep.”
39. My impression is that, when given a chance, Haitians become fluent more easily in
Spanish and English than in French, since these languages do not carry the psychological
baggage of the last.
40. T o speak in sharp, crisp Parisian tones versus speaking flatly, in grammatically correct but
Haitian-French intonations.
41. Conversations with Jan Carew, Manaus, Brazil (July 1995).
42. See the analysis in Bellegarde-Smith, “Rum as Cognac: Fluidity of an Ethnocultural
Crisis—Haiti,” Kaleidoscope II (Milwaukee, 1994), 13–18.
43. Jean-Marie Jan, Collecta III (Port-au-Prince, 1995), 340–344.
44. Ibid., 350–351.
45. Bellegarde-Smith, In the Shadow of Powers.
Resisting Freedom 115
1403971625ts08.qxd  28-9-06  1:10 PM  Page 115


--- PAGE 131 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 132 ---
Chapter 8
The Haiti-New Orleans Vodou 
Connection: Zora Neale Hurston 
as Initiate-Observer
Richard Brent Turner
The Negro has not been Christianized as extensively as is generally believed. The great
masses are still standing before their pagan altars and calling old gods by new names.
—Hurston, Sanctified Church
Introduction
This chapter will analyze Hurston’s journey as an initiate-observer of Vodou and her
“introspection into the mystery” of the religion as a Vodou adept serving the spirits.
This is an extraordinary religious narrative of an initiate and an observer, interpreting
the key themes of Vodou, tapping the magical-spiritual wisdom of her elders and
ancestors and recording what Haitian adepts call the “ konesans”—the simple and
complex esoteric spiritual knowledge of ordinary Black folk who create transforma-
tive healing rituals in African-diasporic communities.
The chapter explores the religious significance of Zora Neale Hurston’s initiation
and fieldwork in Vodou in the 1920s as the locus for the construction of a Haiti-New
Orleans African-diasporic cultural identity with provocative historical, spiritual, and
artistic linkages between Black communities in Haiti and New Orleans from the
nineteenth century to the present. In Hurston’s publications on New Orleans
Vodou—Mules and Menand “Hoodoo in America,” The Journal of American Folklore
(October–December, 1931), there is important primary source material for analysis
of this Haiti-New Orleans Vodou connection and its significance for African-
American and African-diasporic religious history.
1
1403971625ts09.qxd  28-9-06  1:10 PM  Page 117


--- PAGE 133 ---
Recently, Hurston’s work has been the subject of critical analysis in African-
American theological and religious studies. Katie G. Canon analyzes Hurston’s
utilization of the folk culture and values of the Black church in her novels as a model
for “Black Theological ethics” and “the moral wisdom of Black women.”
2 In his book
Honoring the Ancestors, Donald H. Matthews explores Hurston’s research methodol-
ogy as an early model for “the African-centered approach to the interpretation of
African-American” cultural, theological, and literary studies.
3 In Conjuring Culture,
Theophus H. Smith demonstrates how the Bible served as “a magical formulary” in
Hurston’s folklore research.
4 Finally, Anthony B. Pinn sketches the history of Vodou
in Benin, Haiti, and New Orleans and discusses Zora Neale Hurston’s fieldwork as a
way of rethinking the canon of Black religion in Black theological studies.
5
Pinn’s Varieties of African-American Religious Experience , which reveals the “rich
diversity of black religious life in America” by focusing on non-Christian “popular
religious practices and sites,” informs the African-diasporic orientation of this study.
The following two canonical issues that orient his research are central for under-
standing Hurston’s unique contribution to Black religious history in her time:
(1) The “narrow agenda and resource base of contemporary” black religious studies,
and (2) The “contention that African-American religious experience extends
b e y o n d...  [the] institutional and doctrinal history” of Protestant Christianity to
include Islam and African-diasporic ancestral traditions.
6 Indeed these key issues
were reflected in the religious meaning of Zora Neale Hurston’s research and initia-
tion in Vodou in New Orleans and Haiti. She was 70 years ahead of her time in her
exploration of the enduring connections between American religions and African-
diasporic traditions, and her analysis of the power and richness of urban folk religions
and creolized synthetic-religious identities that stand on their own ground. Hurston’s
interests reflect the current paradigmatic shift in religious studies in a new wave of
cutting-edge scholarship, such as the Vincent Wimbush “Research Project on Society,
Culture, and Sacred T exts,” Walter F . Pitts, Old Ship of Zion , Karen McCarthy
Brown, Mama Lola, and Robert A. Orsi, Gods of the City.
7
Zora Neale Hurston and New Orleans Vodou: The
Haitian Concept of Knowledge, Konesans
New Orleans is now and has ever been the hoodoo capital of America. Great names in
rites that vie with those of Haiti in deeds that keep alive the powers of Africa.
—Hurston, Mules and Men, 183
In 1928, Zora Neale Hurston received a bachelor’s degree in anthropology from
Barnard College and traveled to New Orleans in August to begin six months of inten-
sive fieldwork among the city’s Vodou adepts. Hurston was a student of the renowned
anthropologist, Franz Boas at Columbia University. However, her spiritual experi-
ences in New Orleans Vodou transformed her from a mere participant-observer col-
lector of folklore to an initiate-observer, deeply involved in the key themes and
esoteric knowledge and rituals of the religion.
Richard Brent Turner118
1403971625ts09.qxd  28-9-06  1:10 PM  Page 118


--- PAGE 134 ---
Previous studies of Hurston’s New Orleans fieldwork have minimized the depth of
“her angle of vision” as an initiate to focus on her work exclusively “as anthropologi-
cal document s...and literary texts.” Although this chapter does not contest the
validity of prior scholarship, it focuses on another provocative subject of analysis that
is rooted in the study of Vodou as an African-diasporic religious tradition with deep
roots in Haitian spirituality. Here, Mules and Men will be analyzed as a parallel
expression of the Haitian “Konesans”—esoteric knowledge, both simple and complex
that originates in the spiritual experiences of initiates and mystics and is expressed
intuitively in the healing and magical rituals of the religion. Hurston’s record of eso-
teric knowledge in Mules and Men and “Hoodoo in America” (mentioned earlier) is
very important as a primary source of information about New Orleans Vodou in the
early twentieth century and its connection to Haitian Vodou.
8
The Haitian scholar Milo Rigaud sheds light on Vodou’s magical-esoteric
knowledge, which is embedded in the meaning and the idea of the word:
Voodoo encompasses an exceedingly complex religion and magic with complicated
rituals and symbols that have developed for thousands of years...e v e r ything essential
to the knowledge of the mystery is implicit in this word ...V o  means “introspection”
and Du means “into the unknown.” Those who indulge in this “introspection” into the
mystere (mystery) will comprehend not only the Voodoo gods, but also the souls of
those who are the adepts and the servants of these gods. This is the only way in which
the fruitful practice of the rites is possible to produce supernaturally extraordinary
phenomena or magic.
9
Certainly, in Mules and Men, Zora Neale Hurston views magic as the centerpiece
of New Orleans Vodou’s esoteric knowledge and introspection into the mysteries of
the cosmos. She writes at the beginning of the Hoodoo section of the book:
Belief in magic is older than writing. The way we tell it, Hoodoo started way back there
before everything. Six days of magic spells and mighty words and the world with its ele-
ments above and below was made. And now God is leaning back taking a seventh
day rest.
10
This esoteric ontological statement situates New Orleans Vodou in the realm of
the profound and ancient mysteries of the religion that Haitian adepts such as con-
temporary visual artist, André Pierre, acknowledge as “a world created by magic”:
The Vodou religion is before all other religions. It is more ancient than Christ. It is the
first religion of the Earth. It is the creation of the World. The world is created by Vodou.
The world is created by magic. The first magician is God who created people with his
own hands from the dust of the Earth. People originated by magic in all countries of the
world. No one lives of the flesh...The spirits of Vodou are the limbs of God.
11
In Hurston’s religious narrative in Mules and Men , Moses is the first and most
powerful Vodou spirit because he received God’s magic rod and acquired knowledge
of ten of God’s powerful words from the snake that rested under God’s feet during the
world’s creation. This narrative is not just a folkloric transformation of a biblical story
Haiti-New Orleans Vodou Connection 119
1403971625ts09.qxd  28-9-06  1:10 PM  Page 119


--- PAGE 135 ---
into “a conjure story” as Theophus Smith writes, but it is another path through which
Hurston establishes the Haiti-New Orleans Vodou connection in the realm of
“konesans”—esoteric knowledge.
12 In her later work, T ell My Horse, she explains the
religious meaning of the folk stories of Moses’s magic as “Damballah Ouedo...t h e
supreme Mystere” whose “signature is the serpent.” In New Orleans Vodou, from
the time of the nineteenth-century Vodou Queen Marie Laveau to the present,
Danbala Wedo has been the constant and sometimes the only Lwa involved in ritu-
als as “the ancient sky father [arched] across the sky as a snake beside his rainbow
wife, Ayida Wedo. He is the origin of life, and the ancient source of wisdom.”
According to Hurston, in Haitian Vodou, however, Danbala Wedo always has been
one of the pantheon of Lwa:
In the [Haitian] Voodoo temple or peristyle, the place of Damballah, there also must
also the places of Legba, Ogun, Loco, the cross of Guede who is the messenger of the
gods, of Erzulie, Mademoiselle Brigitte and brave Guede. Damballah resides within the
snake on the altar in the midst of all these objects.
13
The current scholarly consensus established in the research of Patrick Bellegarde-
Smith and other groundbreaking studies of Haitian Vodou is that there is a synthetic
not a syncretic relationship between Vodou as a powerful African-diasporic religion
of resistance to Western hegemony and Christianity.
14 Thus, Vodou stands on its own
ground and has not been absorbed by mainstream Christianity. Hurston acknowl-
edged this important synthetic quality of Vodou in New Orleans and Haiti. She
writes in T ell My Horse,
The Haitian god s...a r e  not the Catholic calendar of saints done over in
black...This has been said over and over in print because the adepts have been seen
buying the lithographs of saints, but this is done because they wish some visual repre-
sentation of the invisible ones, and as yet no Haitian artist has given them an interpre-
tation or concept of the Lwa. But even the most illiterate peasant knows that the picture
of the saint is only an approximation of the Lwa.
15
Also, in Mules and Men, the African ancestral tradition, called hoodoo and con-
jure by early twentieth-century New Orleans Black folk, is not a mere syncretic foot-
note in African-American religious history. In Hurston’s work the secrecy and the
centrality of Vodou in the religious life of New Orleans is part of the esoteric knowl-
edge and power of the religion just as it is in Haiti:
Hoodoo...i s  burning with all the intensity of a suppressed religion. It has thousands
of secret adherents. It adapts itself like Christianity to its local environment, reclaiming
some of its borrowed characteristics to itsel f...I t  i s  not the accepted theology of the
Nation and so believers conceal their faith.16
Therefore, in her Vodou trilogy, Mules and Men, The Journal of American Folklore
(1931 issue), and T ell My Horse, New Orleans is mapped as a significant religious site,
not only because of its relationship to Black southern conjure and root work, but
more importantly for its connection to the creolized synthetic fragments of Haitian
Richard Brent Turner120
1403971625ts09.qxd  28-9-06  1:10 PM  Page 120


--- PAGE 136 ---
culture and spirituality that lie deep in its history. Thus New Orleans is written large
on the map of Black religion as a magical African-diasporic city, which, like Haiti, has
successfully resisted mainstream Christianity’s efforts to absorb its esoteric African
ancestral knowledge.
17
Haitian and New Orleans Vodou: Early 
Historical Connections
What were the important aspects of the early historical encounters between Haitian
and New Orleans Vodou in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries? This subject is
the beginning of the esoteric knowledge of New Orleans Vodou that Hurston
presents in “Hoodoo in America”:
[Vodou] has had its highest development along the Gulf Coast, particularly in the city
of New Orleans and in the surrounding country. It was these regions that were settled
by the Haytian emigres at the time of the overthrow of French rule in Haiti by
L ’Ouverture. Thousands of mulattoes and blacks, along with their white ex-masters
were driven out, and the nearest French refuge was the province of Louisiana. They
brought with them their hoodoo rituals, modified of course by contact with white
civilization and the Catholic Church, but predominately African. These island
Negroes had retained far more of their West African background than the continental
blacks.
18
Approximately 12,000 Haitian immigrants arrived in New Orleans from the
1790s until 1810, seeking refuge from the Black revolution in the former French
colony, St.-Domingue. These immigrants arrived in a city that already had a dis-
tinctive African heritage and religion. According to Gwendolyn Midlo Hall, the
Afro-Creole imprint on New Orleans culture was dynamic and constant in the
1700s under French and Spanish rule. Colonial New Orleans culture revolved
around the Louisiana Creole language that slaves from Senegambia created in the
early 1700s. These Afro-Creole slaves also created rich religious, musical, and folk-
loric traditions that were influenced by significant cultural and social interactions
with Choctaw, Houma, and Chickasaw Indians; French and Canadian Catholic
settlers; and pirates. In the seaport city of New Orleans, racial and cultural mixture
was widespread and institutionalized but New Orleans still remained the most
Africanized slave culture in the United States. Vodou, brought directly to the city
from West Africa by Yoruba and Fon slaves from the Kongo and the Bight of Benin,
was certainly a major factor in this dynamic African-diasporic culture in the
eighteenth century.
19
Beginning in the late 1750s, New Orleans slaves of Bambara, Mandingo, Wolof,
Fulbe, Fon, and Yoruba origin, racially mixed free people of color, and Native
Americans gathered every Sunday for communal trading and recreation in the Place
des Nègres, an open area behind the city that had earlier been a sacred site for the
Houma Indian corn feasts. This site, which was later called Congo Square, was noted
Haiti-New Orleans Vodou Connection 121
1403971625ts09.qxd  28-9-06  1:10 PM  Page 121


--- PAGE 137 ---
for its interaction of African and Indian communities and African dances, drumming,
and songs that were performed by hundreds of New Orleanians of African descent
until the American Civil War era. Certainly, Congo Square was the most important
site in the United States for the public performance of African dances, such as the
bamboula, calinda, coujaille, and pile chactas, which were related to Vodou rites, and
it was the marketplace for Afro-Creole Vodou charms that were called gris-gris in
New Orleans, a term from the Mende language of the Mandingo and Bambara
people.
20
The Code Noir, “The Collection of edicts, declarations, and decrees concerning the
discipline and the commerce of Negro slaves of the Islands of French America,” signed
by Louis XIV in 1685, incorporated people of African descent in St.-Dominigue and
New Orleans into a common French Catholic colonial culture that allowed the space
for the liminal African rituals of Congo Square. Various articles of the Code Noir
required owners to baptize and bury their slaves according to the Catholic religion and
to excuse them from work on Sundays, holy days, and for funerals.
The Code Noir’s legal permission for African drumming in Congo Square was cen-
tral to New Orleans’ position as the Vodou capital of the United States and its attrac-
tion to Haitian immigrants who practiced Vodou.
21 Bobby Joe Neeley believes that
in the context of the mass exodus of Vodou adepts from Haiti to New Orleans in the
early 1800s, “Voodooism and its sacred dance were institutionalized/acculturated
in Congo Square.”
22 His research sheds light on the importance of the drumming in
Congo Square as the means by which the sacred rhythms of the Lwa were invoked in
the dances.
Furthermore, in the drawings of the English architect Benjamin Henry
Latrobe, based on his observations of the Congo Square rituals in 1815, there is
evidence of three different kinds of African drums—the Conga and Ogororo from
the Yorubas and the “open-staved drum” from Dahomey. Certainly, these drums
were used in the public and private Vodou rituals of New Orleans, which were
performed by adepts from Haiti and the Crescent City in the nineteenth
century.
23
Indeed, the arrival of thousands of Haitian immigrants, particularly those who
were free persons of color and slaves in the late-eighteenth- and early-nineteenth-
century New Orleans, created a critical mass of Black French-speaking people who
resisted Americanization after the Louisiana Purchase in 1803 and continued the tra-
ditions of Afro-Creole Vodou into a golden age of development that ended in the
aftermath of the American Civil War in the late 1860s. In spite of the brutalities of
slavery that were present in Louisiana as well as the rest of the American South, Black
antebellum New Orleans, like Haiti, was predominantly Catholic and Creole, and
had a fluid “three-caste racial system: whites, free persons of color, and slaves” that
was constructed in a unique multicultural society.
24 As numerous Black Haitians
intermarried with Black New Orleanians at the Ursulines Chapel and St. Louis
Cathedral, undoubtedly many provocative spiritual exchanges occurred between
Haitian and New Orleans Vodou adepts, and these exchanges created the environ-
ment for the ascendancy of the famous nineteenth-century New Orleans Vodou
Queen Marie Laveau (1801?–1881).
25
Richard Brent Turner122
1403971625ts09.qxd  28-9-06  1:10 PM  Page 122


--- PAGE 138 ---
Vodou Queen Marie Laveau and the Haiti-New 
Orleans Connection
Marie Laveau is the great name of Negro conjure in America.
—Hurston, “Hoodoo in America,” 326
The ancestral legacy and legendary spiritual powers of Marie Laveau are a central
element in Zora Neale Hurston’s twentieth-century religious narratives of Vodou. In
this section we will briefly sketch the Vodou Queen’s connection to Haiti and
Hurston’s work. An autonomous Vodou priesthood, similar to the Haitian manbos
and houngans, emerged in early-nineteenth-century New Orleans. Certainly the
timing of the emergence of the priesthood was connected to the arrival of thousands
of Haitian immigrants in the Crescent City and their connection to Vodou. The New
Orleans priestesses and priests, called queens and doctors, included Marie Saloppé,
Sanité Dédé, Betsey T oledano, Marie Comtese, Marie Laveau, Marie Glapion
(daughter of Marie Laveau), Doctor Jim Alexander, and Doctor John Montane in the
nineteenth century.
26
Marie Laveau, the most important spiritual leader in this group, was a Catholic
free woman of color, born in New Orleans probably in 1801. Her connection to
Haiti began with her first husband, Jacques Paris, a free man of color, who was born
in St.-Dominigue; the couple married in St. Louis Cathedral in 1819. Although
the marriage lasted only a few years, Laveau most likely developed a perspective
about the power of Vodou as political resistance from her husband’s experiences in
his native land. Throughout her adult life, she was known in the Black community
as a devout Catholic who attended daily mass at St. Louis Cathedral. The
Cathedral was a crossroads for the Haiti-New Orleans Vodou connection in
the nineteenth century as the majority of the free women of color in the city were
members of the congregation.
27 Laveau’s Catholic background is an aspect of the
ancestral legacy for Hurston’s twentieth-century initiation in Vodou. Hurston
notes in her narrative that three of the Vodou doctors with whom she studied were
“New Orleans, Catholic,” and had an ancestral connection to the powers of Marie
Laveau.
28
Ina Fandrich, in her dissertation, “The Mysterious Voodoo Queen Marie
Laveaux,” has noted that
[t]his congregation was probably one of most integrated places in the world at the time
and thus became a safe haven for the free women of color who soon formed the major-
ity of the parish membership...I t  i s  not surprising that most New Orleanian Voodoo
worshippers—including Marie Laveaux, and many other prominent priestesses, most
of whom were free women of color—were also members of this progressive church.
The Voodoo religion, whether in its Haitian or its New Orleanian form...f o u n d  a
strange home under Catholic auspices where what appeared on the surface to be
Christian symbols and rituals was abundantly filled and redefined with African spirit
and meanings.
29
Haiti-New Orleans Vodou Connection 123
1403971625ts09.qxd  28-9-06  1:10 PM  Page 123


--- PAGE 139 ---
Marie Laveau reigned as the Vodou Queen of New Orleans from 1850 to 1869.
Vodou reached its highest point of development as an organized religion in New
Orleans under her extraordinary leadership. 30 According to Fandrich, one of the
reasons that Laveau was such a powerful priestess is that she was an example of
the Haitian concept of priesthood . . . [the head of a] spiritual house; i.e. the worship soci-
eties similar to the humfor societies in Haiti, and beyond [her] immediate followers...
[she] served the larger community as consultant in all aspects of life drawing from [her]
divinatory skills and as public healer (because of [her] medicinal, psychological, and
spiritual knowledge).
31
Certainly, Laveau’s extensive spiritual work among prisoners condemned to death
in the New Orleans parish prison, her nursing of yellow fever epidemic victims, as
well as her individual spiritual consultations and distribution of gris-gris at her house
on St. Ann Street made her an extraordinary healer and spiritual head of a codepen-
dent extended religious family network in New Orleans that included plantation
slaves, maroons, free blacks, mixed-race people of color, and white women. Perhaps
more than any other New Orleanian in her time, she was able to penetrate the
boundaries of race, class, color, gender, and religion to establish a profound African
spiritual presence in New Orleans that would continue to inspire Vodou adepts in
Haiti and Louisiana in the twentieth century.
32
Indeed, in Zora Neale Hurston’s initiation under Samuel Thompson, there is
evidence of a continuation of the Haitian model of the “spiritual house” or humfor
society in early-twentieth-century New Orleans. Her narrative noted the numerous
initiates who worshiped in Thompson’s House and participated in her initiation:
Many came into the room and performed ceremonial acts. But none spoke to me. Nor
could I speak to them while the veil covered my face. Then Samuel entered and all the
others retired.33
Finally, it was Marie Laveau’s altars, rituals, and sacred dances consecrated to the
Lwa, particularly Danbala Wedo, at her first house on St. Ann Street and at her sec-
ond house on Lake Pontchartrain, in ceremonies attended only by initiates that cre-
ated her strongest spiritual connection to Haitian Vodou and inspired Zora Neale
Hurston’s initiation in the 1920s. According to Hurston,
Every St. John Eve she use to rise out of the lake with a huge communion candle
burning on top of her head and one in each hand...a s  she rose from the bottom of the
lake and walked to the shore upon the water.34
The sites of Laveau’s spiritual work were mapped as sacred ancestral spaces for
twentieth-century New Orleans Vodou. Hurston’s initiation occurred in Samuel
Thompson’s House on Rampart Street (which intersects St. Ann Street and is across
the street from Congo Square) and in the swamp along Lake Pontchartrain. She
introduces these sites as important landmarks in the narrative of her initiation:
On Thursday morning at eleven I was at the shuttered door of the ancient house. He let
me in cheerfully and led me straight to the altar. There were new candles unlit. He
Richard Brent Turner124
1403971625ts09.qxd  28-9-06  1:10 PM  Page 124


--- PAGE 140 ---
signalled me to help. We dressed the candles and lit them and set three upon tumblers
filled with honey, three filled with syrup, and three with holy water, and set them in a
semi-circle upon the altar. A huge bouquet of flowers was in the center. [And several
days later]...
Samuel led us on a truc k...until a certain spot was reache d...the swamp was
dismal and damp, but after some stumbly walking we came to a little glade deep in the
wood, near the lake.35
Laveau’s spiritual and political power as a Vodou priestess constructed from the
Haitian concept of religious leadership, created a safe haven for New Orleans’ Vodou
adepts and neutralized the impact of police and Anglo-Protestant persecution of her fol-
lowers until the end of her leadership in 1860. Thereafter her daughter, Marie Glapion,
assumed leadership of the New Orleans Vodou community, but she was never able to
reestablish the spiritual or political power that her mother had created. By the end of
the nineteenth century, all of the great Vodou doctors and queens were deceased and
New Orleans Vodou went underground as the federal, state, and city government and
Black and White American Protestant leaders attempted to destroy African-diasporic
folk religion in Louisiana. This hostile political environment influenced the practice of
New Orleans Vodou in the era of Zora Neale Hurston’s initiation.
36
The Initiation of Zora Neale Hurston: Fragments 
of the Haitian Model of Initiation in 
New Orleans Vodou
A man or woman becomes a Hoodoo doctor in three ways: by heredity, by serving an
apprenticeship under an established practitioner or by the “call” . . . there is general belief
that the power can be transmitted, and for this reason most of the old doctors in New
Orleans claim kinship with Marie Laveau.
—Hurston, “Hoodoo in America,” 320
The Sunday African-diasporic dances at Congo Square ended in the 1870s as
the Americanization of Franco Africans in New Orleans accelerated. At the same time,
the status and fortunes of New Orleans Creoles of color declined rapidly in the late
nineteenth century because the white American Protestant racial order replaced the
tripartite racial system of antebellum Franco-Catholic New Orleans. Although multi-
cultural Black New Orleanians entered the twentieth century compromised signifi-
cantly by the new American Jim Crow system, they were one-half of the population of
the city and thus found new ways to resist the assaults on their African-diasporic cul-
ture and to continue to practice Vodou.
37 The “intimate exchange” between Haitian
and New Orleans Vodou continued in the old downtown Creole neighborhoods in
which Zora Neale Hurston was initiated. According to Ina Fandrich,
Since boats and secret messages constantly went back and forth between the island
[Haiti] and the metropolis in the Mississippi Delta, a secret traffic of Voodoo parapher-
nalia and supplies...might have been among the underground exchange items.
38
Haiti-New Orleans Vodou Connection 125
1403971625ts09.qxd  28-9-06  1:10 PM  Page 125


--- PAGE 141 ---
Zora Neale Hurston arrived in New Orleans in 1928 to begin her apprenticeship
as a Vodou initiate:
I was told that I must begin my novitiate. I must sleep for nine nights with my right
stocking on. I must have clean thoughts. I must neither defile body nor spirit. Certain
monies were necessary for the ceremony. I paid the sum. I was told to be seated before
the altar and offer myself with absolute sincerity to the Great One. But once I was
seated I was not to utter a sound. When the spirit was through with me I must leave in
silence.
39
As Hurston experienced her initiation, she observed a religion that had under-
gone several profound changes since the beginning of the twentieth century. These
changes are related contextually to the Haiti-New Orleans Vodou connection.
Many New Orleans Vodou initiates were compelled to disguise their religion under
the veil of spiritualism—“a technique for communication with the dead,” because
of the American government’s campaign to eradicate Vodou in Haiti and
Louisiana.
40 The capstone of this campaign was the U.S. occupation of Haiti and
persecution of the nation’s Vodou leaders from 1915 to 1934, events that were
motivated by American imperialism in the Caribbean and Central America. In this
context, American stereotypes of Haitian Vodou expressed in sensational images of
bloodthirsty orgies and human sacrifices provided part of the rationale for the
criminalization of the Vodou religion in Louisiana.
41 Carolyn Morrow Long has
summarized the punitive actions that were levied against some Vodou healers in
New Orleans:
Beginning in 1909, federal mail fraud laws were invoked against practitioners who con-
ducted business by mail; conviction of mail fraud carried a penitentiary sentence. The
Louisiana Board of Health, under the 1894 Medical Practice Act, prosecuted persons
accused of practicing medicine without a license. A 1929 revision imposed a fifty-to-
one hundred dollar fine or a sentence of ten to ninety days in the parish prison. In 1897,
1916, and 1924, the city of New Orleans instituted statutes against fortune-telling and
obtaining money under false pretenses.
42
Faced with these penalties, some Protestant Vodou initiates formed a protective
shelter in New Orleans’ Spiritual churches. Hurston elaborates on this new synthetic
layer of New Orleans Vodou: “Hoodooism is in disrepute, and certain of its practices
forbidden by law. A spiritualistic name protects the congregation, and is a useful
devise of protective coloration.” Spiritual churches, such as the Eternal Life Spiritual
Church, were first established by Mother Leafy Anderson in 1918. They included
aspects of Vodou, Pentecostalism, Spiritualism, and Catholicism, with elaborate
altars to ancestors, saints, and spirit guides, as well as worship services that featured
female priests and mothers who prophesized and performed healings during ecstatic
trances. At the same time, some Catholic Creoles of color disguised their connection
to Vodou through spiritualist séances led by mediums who received detailed messages
in French from the spirit world. René Grandjean, who was born in France and lived
in Haiti for several years, kept written records of these Creole séances in New
Orleans.
43
Richard Brent Turner126
1403971625ts09.qxd  28-9-06  1:10 PM  Page 126


--- PAGE 142 ---
Despite these restrictions, Zora Neale Hurston continued to experience the stages
of her initiation:
I sat obedient before the altar, shivering unknowingly. I knew when I was dismissed.
I rose and turned from the altar. Then Samuel spoke “The spirit says you must bring
three snake skins next time.” I passed with bowed head...A t  the end of the nine days
I returned with the skins and again sat before the altar.
He prepared the skins and placed them before the Great One. He called him and
admonished him to enter into the skins and give them life.44
Indeed, all of these profound changes in the culture of Black New Orleans and its
connection to Haiti produced a new highly secretive magical emphasis in New
Orleans Vodou that focused on spiritual work for clients and resistance to the reli-
gion’s enemies—it was called hoodoo.
45 It was this magical emphases in Vodou that
attracted Hurston. She studied with nine different Vodou doctors and experienced six
initiations during her months in New Orleans: “When I found out about T urner, I
had already studied under five two-headed doctors and had gone thru an initiation
ceremony with each. So I asked T urner to take me as a pupil.”
46
In the narratives of her religious experiences several of the doctors were assigned dif-
ferent names in Mules and Men and “Hoodoo in America.” This was done to protect
them from legal penalties. Thus, Luke T urner in Mules and Men was also Samuel
Thompson in “Hoodoo in America”; Anatol Pierre, in Mules and Men, was also Albert
Frechard in “Hoodoo in America”; Father Joe Watson, in Mules and Men, was also
known as Father Sims, in “Hoodoo in America”; Kitty Brown, in Mules and Men, was
also Ruth Mason in “Hoodoo in America”; and Dr. Duke, Dr. Samuel Jenkins,
Dr. Strong, Doctor Grant, and Doctor Barnes were assigned one name in both of the
narratives. These doctors were Vodou priests and priestesses
47 and the most powerful of
the group, Luke T urner, was a nephew of Marie Laveau, whose spiritual power came
from that nineteenth-century ancestral connection. In T urner’s memories of his aunt,
described in Mules and Men, she was New Orleans’ most powerful Manbo in the Haitian
model of priesthood, whose favorite Lwawas Danbala Wedo, symbolized by the snake:
Time went around pointing out what God had already made. Moses had seen the
Burning Bush. Solomon by magic, knowed all wisdo m...And Marie Laveau was a
woman in New Orlean s...Alexander the great two-headed doctor felt the power in
her and so he told her she must come to study with him. Mari e...[would] rather
dance and make love, but one day a rattlesnake come to her in her bedroom and spoke
to her. So she went to Alexander and studies but soon she could teach her teacher and
the snake stayed with her always...P eople come from all ends to America to get help
f r o m  h e r...she hold Hoodoo dance in Congo Square every week...and everybody
dance like they do in Hayti.
48
In “Hoodoo in America,” Hurston assigned Luke T urner the new name of Samuel
Thompson and explicated the source of his ancestral wisdom and its roots in Haiti:
Samuel Thompson is in his seventies, a Catholic Hoodoo doctor of New Orleans. He has
a snake skin, which he says is the skin of the great snake that served her [Marie Laveau]
Haiti-New Orleans Vodou Connection 127
1403971625ts09.qxd  28-9-06  1:10 PM  Page 127


--- PAGE 143 ---
altar...S amuel Thompson always wrapped his snakeskin about him before attempting
any serious work. His mother was a Hoodoo worker and her mother before her. He says
that his remote ancestors brought the power with them from “the rock” (Africa) and that
his forbears lived in Santo Domingo before they came to the region of New Orleans.49
In the nineteenth century, powerful Vodou priestesses such as Marie Laveau were
spiritual heads of their own hounfor societies or sanctuaries. The new restrictions on
Vodou adepts in early-twentieth-century New Orleans forced leaders and their initi-
ates to form secret societies such as the Mardi Gras Indian tribes, like the Creole Wild
West and the Yellow Pocahontas that continued aspects of Vodou traditions in their
sequin art, Creole dance, and musical rituals and secret initiations in downtown
neighborhoods. Their traditions were related thematically to the sequin artists of
Haiti who create the flags used in Vodou ceremonies. Also the Mardi Gras Indians’
suits included sequined pouches that were inspired by Haitian Vodou healers, some-
times called “Congo pacquets,” which were embedded with spiritual power.
50
In Zora Neale Hurston’s mystical initiation in Vodou in Samuel Thompson’s
House, as well as her spiritual work with the other priests and priestesses, there is evi-
dence of a secret society of magic similar to the Haitian secret societies, namely
Bizango. The Haitian secret societies were known for their powerful magic and
administration of justice. They were “societies of the nigh t...bound by oath” and
magical rituals at the crossroads of life and death—in the cemeteries and the forests.
51
Hurston’s account of her initiation brings to light some of the themes of these
Haitian secret societies as well as some of traditional aspects of initiation in Haitian
Vodou such as separation, liminality, incorporation, fasting, abstinence from sexual
relations, spiritual bathing in herbs, psychic experience, trance, apprenticeship purifi-
cation (couché, which means to get initiated), acquisition of knowledge of the Lwa
and magical rituals, and ritual sacrifice. However, the central theme in the final
narrative of Hurston’s initiation in New Orleans Vodou that follows is a relationship
between religion and magic that is also at the heart of Haitian Vodou in the secret
societies according to Rachel Beauvoir-Dominique:
Vodou emerged with a fundamental vision in which religion and magic, though
autonomous, nevertheless constitutes a single bod y...each temple, even the most
“religious” in outlook, is under the patronage of one or several...divinities destined to
work, render service and even amass small fortunes for their possessors. During cere-
mony, these Lwa are summoned, not “worshipped.” In exchange for periodic ritual
feeding, the Lwa are expected to protect and soothsay through regular sessions of div-
ination. And they must also carry out therapeutic magic: lucrative treatments and exor-
cisms will fall under the responsibility of the Vodou divinities of which failings are
hardly tolerated...Ritual, medicine, and further techniques of manipulation inter-
twine informed by a common vision of self in which maneuverable human spiritual
entities flow in relationship with other forces, all intermingling in the essence of a
higher power. The vision emerges from a constantly evolving world and the possibility
of adaptation, change, and amelioration.
52
Beauvoir-Dominique’s brilliant analysis of the spiritual and social realm of
Vodou’s magical practices speaks to the powerful spiritual philosophy of social justice,
Richard Brent Turner128
1403971625ts09.qxd  28-9-06  1:10 PM  Page 128


--- PAGE 144 ---
healing, and resistance to domination that continues to connect the rituals of Vodou
initiates in Haiti and New Orleans in the twenty-first century. In Hurston’s final reli-
gious narratives below, we experience the wholeness of being, the codependence of
men, women, plants, animals, and the spirits as Vodou initiates work the cosmic
energies of the universe in magical healing rituals that affirm the humanity and cen-
tral importance of ordinary Black folk in spirit work. Although Hurston is silent
about the details of her possession-performances and the identities of the Lwa (this is
esoteric knowledge for initiates only), the altars are the faces of the Lwa and the cross-
roads of a powerful ancestral spirit world, shared by West and Central Africans,
Haitians, and New Orleanians in their rituals.
53
The excerpts from Zora Neale Hurston’s initiation narrative that follow are impor-
tant for students and practitioners of Vodou in Haiti and New Orleans as the first
reliable record of a Vodou initiation in the United States:
Then I rose from the altar and helped prepare the sacred couch, that is, the moccasin
hide was fixed to green cloth and spread over the couch in the altar room. My sacred gar-
ments were made, including the crown. At three o’clock, naked as I came into the world,
I was stretched face downwards with my navel to the serpent and a pitcher of water at my
head that my spirit might not wander in search of it, and began my three day search for
the favor of the Great One. Three days I must lie silently, that is, my body would be
there. My soul would be standing naked before Spirit to see if he would have me.
I had five psychic experiences during those three days and nights. I shall not detail
them here; but I knew that I had been accepted before the sixty-nine hours had passed.
Strangely enough, I had no sense of hunger—only exaltation. At eleven o’clock on
March 19, St. Joseph’s Day, I arose and was led through the running water and again
stretched upon my face upon the couch. Samuel approached me with a brother on
either side of him. One held a small brush with red paint, the other a brush with yellow
paint. With ceremony Samuel painted a lightning symbol down my back from my right
shoulder to my left hip. This was to be my sign forever. The Great One shall speak to
me in storms. I was now dressed in the new clothes, stockings, underwear, dress and
veil. After I was dressed a pair of eyes was painted on my cheeks just below my eyes as a
sign that I could see in more ways than one. The sun was painted on my forehand.
At high noon I was seated at the splendid altar. It was dressed in the center with a
huge communion candle with my name upon it set in sand, five large iced cakes in dif-
ferent colors, a plate of honeyed St. Joseph’s bread, a plate of serpent-shaped breads,
spinach and egg cakes fried in olive oil, breaded Chinese okra fried in olive oil, roast veal
and wine, two huge yellow bouquets, two red bouquets and two white bouquets and
thirty-six yellow tapers and a bottle of holy water.
Samuel seated me and stood behind me with his ceremonial hat upon his head, and
the crown of power in his hand. “Spirit! I ask you to take her. Do you hear me, Spirit?
Will you take her? Spirit, I want you to take her, she is worthy!” He held the crown
poised above my head for a full minute. A profound silence held the room. Then he lifted
the veil from my face and let it fall behind my head and crowned me with power. He lit
my candle from me. But from then on I might be a candle lighter myself.
All the candles were reverently lit. We all sat down and ate the feast. First, a glass of
blessed oil was handed me by Samuel. “Drink this without tasting it.” I gulped it down
and he took the glass from my hand, took a sip of the little that remained. Then he
handed it to the brother at his right who did the same, until it went around the table.
Haiti-New Orleans Vodou Connection 129
1403971625ts09.qxd  28-9-06  1:10 PM  Page 129


--- PAGE 145 ---
“Eat first the spinach cakes,” Samuel exhorted, and we did. Then the meal began. It
was full of joy and laughter, even though we knew that the final ceremony waited only
for the good hour of twelve midnight.
We all piled into an old Studebaker sedan...O u t  r oad number 61 we
rattled...The sheets of typing paper I had been urged to bring were brought out and
nine sheets were blessed and my petition written nine times on each sheet by the light
from a shaded lantern. The crate containing the black sheep was opened and the sheep
led forward into the center for the circle. He stood there dazed while the chant of strange
syllables rose. I asked Samuel the words, but he replied that in good time I would know
what to say...A  knife flashed and the sheep dropped to its knees, then fell prone with
its mouth open in a weak cry. My petition was thrust into its throat that he might cry it
to the Great One. The broom was seized and dipped in the blood from the slit throat and
the ground swept vigorously—back and forth, back and forth—the length of the dying
sheep. The sweeping went on as long as the blood gushed. Earth, the other of the Great
One and us all, had been appeased. With a sharp stick Samuel traced the outline of the
sheep then the digging commenced. The sheep was never touched. The ground was dug
from under him so that his body dropped down into the hole. He was covered with the
nine sheets of paper bearing the petition and the earth heaped upon him. A white candle
was set upon the grave and we straggled back to the road and the Studebaker.
54
Obviously, Zora Neale Hurston’s gifts as a writer are exemplified in this moving
narrative of her initiation, as well as her professional ability as a fine ethnographer
who described the details of the ritual. However, the most striking quality of this
narration is Hurston’s transformation into a servant of the spirits, one of the true
spiritual folk who has decided to enter the liminal territory of Vodou initiation,
which re-creates the African ancestral bridge between black communities in Haiti
and New Orleans in the twentieth century. As an initiate of Vodou, Hurston has
stripped herself naked to shed her Western identities as a writer and anthropologist to
assume the serious responsibility of introspection into the African-diasporic spirit
world. The majesty and the awe of the Vodou Lwa inspire this narrative of initiation
as Zora Neale Hurston has been chosen to tap the wisdom of the ancestors and the
healing powers of Danbala Wedo and Shango!
Significance of Hurston’s Initiation 
for the African-Diasporic Spirit World
All of this analysis underlines the religious significance of Hurston’s narratives as a
lived religious experience. This is the first personal account of an encounter with the
religion of Vodou on a deeply personal level in the United States. It is also a record of
Zora Neale Hurston’s courage and insight as a woman of the spirit world. She was the
first African-American to put herself out there in the uncharted waters of Vodou ini-
tiation and to emerge from her profound experience as an authentically initiated
adept with a written record of her spiritual journey.
The spiritual journey of her initiation rites followed the three classic stages of
initiation: “separation,” “transition,” and “incorporation,” which were formulated by
Richard Brent Turner130
1403971625ts09.qxd  28-9-06  1:10 PM  Page 130


--- PAGE 146 ---
Arnold Van Gennep in The Rites of Passage.55 The new sense of folk community and
collective consciousness established among the Vodou initiates in early-twentieth-
century New Orleans is a source of continuity between Haitian and New Orleans
initiation rites. Here Victor T urner’s work is instructive.
Building on the ideas of Van Gennep, Victor T urner developed his theory of
“ritual anti-structure.” In this theory, he focused on the “liminal period” of initiation
in which initiates were considered as “betwixt and between” social statuses in soci-
ety.
56 T urner regarded this period, during which initiates learned new knowledge
about the structure of their community “as a [transitional] process, a becoming,
a n d...e v e n  a  transformation.” In the midst of the new social energy that emerged
among initiates during the liminal period, T urner proposed that “ritual often acted as a
form of protest against the existing social structure and contributed to social change.”
57
Connected to this ritual anti-structure was “communitas,” a new sense of com-
munity generated among initiates during the liminal period. T urner believed that
communitas transformed the structure of society by generating new moods, feelings,
and bonds among the initiates, which infused and revived the society with new anti-
structural values during and after initiation.
58 The ideas of communitas and liminality
are important ways of understanding the significance of Zora Neale Hurston’s initia-
tion as a transformative ritual that promoted racial self-definition, gender equality,
healing, and resistance to negative stereotypes of Vodou adepts in New Orleans and
Haiti.
Finally, Hurston’s initiation experience is a model for Beauvoir-Dominique’s
vision of Vodou “in which religion and magic...constitute a single body.”
59 In the
last stage of the rituals in the swamp, the Lwa and mother earth are fed with the sac-
rifice of a black sheep. 60 This is clearly “therapeutic magic” to insure that Hurston’s
initiation will promote protection, healing, and spiritual power for all the initiates
who performed the rites.
61 Here, the provocative connection between Vodou adepts
and the spirit world is highlighted in magical “techniques of manipulation” of the
cosmic energies of the “Great One,” who created the universe.
62
Conclusion
In the late 1930s, Zora Neale Hurston resumed her research and introspection into
the mysteries of Vodou with two years of fieldwork in Haiti and Jamaica. She wrote
T ell My Horsein 1938. Although she is celebrated primarily as a Harlem Renaissance
literary figure and a folklore collector in Florida, her research and religious experience
are also important for understanding the profound and enduring connection
between Haitian and New Orleans Vodou.
63
T oday, many Black New Orleanians seriously acknowledge the continuity of the
Haiti-New Orleans Vodou connection into a new millennium: well-known New
Orleans Vodou priestesses, such as Ava Kay Jones, have traveled to Haiti for initia-
tion as Manbos; “Haitian-style” Vodou services are conducted for initiates; and
Haitian Vodou supplies are sold in botanicas in the downtown neighborhoods of
the city.
64
Haiti-New Orleans Vodou Connection 131
1403971625ts09.qxd  28-9-06  1:10 PM  Page 131


--- PAGE 147 ---
Finally, in 1996, the annual New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival celebrated the
spiritual and musical connections between Haiti and Louisiana by showcasing the
music and culture of Haiti in its first International Pavilion. Festival organizers
explained their version of the Haiti-New Orleans connection:
Several Haitian musicians, bands, and dancers are performing at this year’s Festivals,
expressing the myriad of rhythms that distinguish their homeland: Compas, the dance
music genre...;  Rara, Carnival music highlighted by colorful parades that are similar
to New Orleans’ Second Lines; and Racine, a musical genre that enhances Voodoo’s
rhythms with electric instruments.
Serving as master of ceremonies for the pavilion is Aboudja Derenoncourt, a
respected priest and master drummer who leads audiences through an exploration of
Haitian history and cultural traditions—traditions that New Orleanians will find
complement those of their own.
65
Notes
1. Zora Neale Hurston, Mules and Men (New York: Harper Perennial, 1990); and “Hoodoo
in America,” The Journal of American Folklore, 44, no. 174 (October–December, 1931):
317–418.
2. Katie C. Canon, Black Womanist Ethics(Atlanta, GA: Scholars Press, 1988), 15 and back
cover.
3. Donald H. Matthews, Honoring the Ancestors: An African Cultural Interpretation of Black
Religion and Literature (New York: Oxford University Press, 1998), front flap.
4. Theophus H. Smith, Conjuring Culture: Biblical Formations of Black America (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1994), 6.
5. Anthony B. Pinn, Varieties of African-American Religious Experience (Minneapolis, MN:
Fortress Press, 1998), 1.
6. Ibid., 1 and back cover.
7. Vincent Wimbush, ed., African-Americans and the Bible: Sacred T exts and Social T exture
(New York: Continuum International Publishing Group, 2000); Walter F . Pitts, Old Ship
of Zion: The Afro-Baptist Ritual in the African Diaspora . (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1993); Karen McCarthy Brown, Mama Lola: A Vodou Priestess in Brooklyn
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1991); Robert A. Orsi, Gods of the City
(Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1999).
8. David C. Estes, “The Neo-African Vatican: Zora Neale Hurston’s New Orleans,” in
Literary New Orleans in the Modern World , ed. Richard Kennedy (Baton Rouge, LA:
Louisiana State University Press, 1998), 67–68; Brown, Mama Lola, 384.
9. Milo Rigaud, Secrets of Voodoo (San Francisco: City Lights Books, 1985), 8.
10. Hurston, Mules and Men, 183.
11. André Pierre, “A World Created by Magic: Extracts from a Conversation with André
Pierre,” in Sacred Arts of Haitian Vodou, ed. Donald J. Consentino (Los Angeles: UCLA
Fowler Museum of Cultural History, 1995), xxii.
12. Smith, Conjuring Culture, 33.
13. Zora Neale Hurston, T ell My Horse: Voodoo and Life in Haiti and Jamaica (New York:
Harper and Row Publishers, 1990), 120.
Richard Brent Turner132
1403971625ts09.qxd  28-9-06  1:10 PM  Page 132


--- PAGE 148 ---
14. Patrick Bellegarde-Smith, ed., Fragments of Bone: Neo-African Religions in a New World
(Champaign, IL: University of Illinois Press, 2005); Gerdès Fleurant, Dancing Spirits:
Rhythms and Rituals of Haitian Vodun, the Rada Rite (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press,
1996); Patrick Bellegarde-Smith and Claudine Michel, eds., Spirit, Myth and Reality in
Haitian Vodou(Indiana: Indiana University Press, 2006).
15. Hurston, T ell My Horse, 114.
16. Hurston, Mules and Men, 185.
17. Estes, “Neo-African Vatican,” 82.
18. Hurston, “Hoodoo in America,” 318.
19. Paul F . Lachance, “The Foreign French,” in Creole New Orleans: Race and Americanization,
ed. Arnold R. Hirsch and Joseph Logsdon (Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana State University
Press, 1992), 103–105; Gwendolyn Midlo Hall, “The Formation of Afro-Creole
Culture,” in Creole New Orleans: Race and Americanization, 59–65.
20. Jerah Johnson, Congo Square in New Orleans (New Orleans, LA: Louisiana Landmarks
Society, 1995), 9–11; Carolyn Morrow Long, Spiritual Merchants: Religion, Magic, and
Commerce (Knoxville, TN: University of T ennessee Press, 2001), 21; George Washington
Cable, “The Dance in Place Congo,” Century Magazine , vol. 31 (February 1986):
517–532; Michel S. Laguerre, “Voodoo as Religious and Revolutionary Ideology,” in
Freeing the Spirit 4 (1971), 24.
21. Joseph Roach, Cities of the Dead: Circum-Atlantic Performance (New York: Columbia
University Press, 1996), 56–58, 63–64.
22. Bobby Joe Neeley, “Contemporary Afro-American Voodooism (Black Religion): The
Retention and Adaptation of the Ancient African-Egyptian Mystery System,” PhD disser-
tation, University of California, Berkeley, 1988, 449.
23. Johnson, Congo Square in New Orleans , 25–26, 31.
24. Lachance, “Foreign French,” 101.
25. Ibid., 108–109.
26. Ina Johanna Fandrich, “The Mysterious Voodoo Queen Marie Laveaux: A Study of
Female Leadership in Nineteenth-Century New Orleans,” PhD dissertation, T emple
University, 1994, 82; Long, Spiritual Merchants, 44. The Vodou Queen’s name is spelled
both “Laveaux” and “Laveau” in historical records and scholarship. The author utilizes
“Laveau,” the spelling that is popular in contemporary Black New Orleans communities.
27. Long, Spiritual Merchants, 45–46. After Paris’s disappearance Marie Laveau had a long-
term relationship and several children with Louis Glapion.
28. Hurston, “Hoodoo in America,” 317.
29. Fandrich, “Mysterious Voodoo Queen Marie Laveaux,” 166–167.
30. Ibid.
31. Ibid, 82.
32. Daily Picayune, June 16, 1881.
33. Hurston, “Hoodoo in America,” 359.
34. Ibid, 327.
35. Ibid, 358, 360.
36. Long, Spiritual Merchants, 52.
37. Arnold R. Hirsch and Joseph Logsdon, “Franco-Africans and African-Americans,” in
Hirsch and Logsdon, Creole New Orleans: Race and Americanization, 190.
38. Fandrich, “Mysterious Voodoo Queen Marie Laveaux,” 257.
39. Hurston, “Hoodoo in America,” 358.
40. Long, Spiritual Merchants, 53. Ibid., 319.
41. Laennec Hurbon, “American Fantasy and Haitian Vodou,” in Consentino, Sacred Arts of
Haitian Vodou, 182–187.
Haiti-New Orleans Vodou Connection 133
1403971625ts09.qxd  28-9-06  1:10 PM  Page 133


--- PAGE 149 ---
42. Long, Spiritual Merchants, 53.
43. Ibid, 54. Hurston, “Hoodoo in America,” 319. Claude F . Jacobs and Andrew J. Kaslow,
The Spiritual Churches of New Orleans: Origins, Beliefs, and Rituals of an African-American
Religion (Knoxville, TN: University of T ennessee Press, 2001); Jason Berry, The Spirit of
Black Hawk: A Mystery of Africans and Indians (Jackson, MS: University Press
of Mississippi, 1995); Marcus Bruce Christian, “Manuscript for A Black History of
Louisiana,” in The Marcus Bruce Christian Collection (Earl K. Long Library: University of
New Orleans), and Rene Grandjean Collection (Earl K. Long Library: University of New
Orleans).
44. Hurston, “Hoodoo in America,” 358–359.
45. Long, Spiritual Merchants, 55.
46. Hurston, Mules and Men, 191.
47. Hurston, “Hoodoo in America,” 317.
48. Hurston, Mules and Men, 192–193.
49. Hurston, “Hoodoo in America,” 357.
50. Tina Girouard, Sequin Artists of Haiti (Port-au-Prince, Haiti: Haiti Arts, 1994); Robert
Farris Thompson, Face of the Gods: Art and Altars of Africa and the African-Americas(New
York: Museum for African Art, 1993), 28.
51. Donald J. Consentino, “Bizango Altar,” in Consentino, Sacred Arts of Haitian Vodou, 302.
52. Rachel Beauvoir-Dominique, “Underground Realms of Being: Vodou Magic,” in
Consentino, Sacred Arts of Haitian Vodou, 166.
53. Thompson, Face of the Gods, 21.
54. Hurston, “Hoodoo in America,” 358–360. There is also provocative analysis of Zora
Neale Hurston’s initiation and spiritual work in Robert E. Hemenway and Zora Neale
Hurston, A Literary Biography (Chicago, IL: University of Illinois Press, 1977); Alice
Walker, ed., I Love Myself When I am Laughin g...A n d  Then Again When I Am Looking
Mean and Impressive: A Zora Neale Hurston Reader. (New York: Feminist Press at the City
University of New York, 1979); Houston A. Baker, Jr., Workings of the Spirit: The Poetic of
Afro-American Women’s Writing(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991); Cheryl A.
Wall, “Mules and Men and Women: Zora Neale Hurston’s Strategies of Narration and
Visions of Female Empowerment,” in Critical Essays on Zora Neale Hurston, ed. Gloria L.
Cronin (New York: C. K. Hall, 1998).
55. Arnold Van Gennep, The Rites of Passage(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1966), 11.
56. Victor T urner, The Forest of Symbols: Aspects of Ndembu Ritual (Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University Press, 1957), 93, 94.
57. Bobby C. Alexander, Victor Turner Revisited: Ritual as Social Change (Atlanta: Scholars
Press, 1991), 1.
58. Victor T urner, The Ritual Process: Structure and Anti-Structure (Chicago: Aldine
Publishing, 1969), viii.
59. Beauvoir-Dominique. “Underground Realms of Being,” 166.
60. Hurston, “Hoodoo in America,” 360.
61. Beauvoir-Dominique, “Underground Realms of Being,” 166.
62. Hurston, “Hoodoo in America,” 360.
63. Hurston, T ell My Horse.
64. Ava Kay Jones, interview with author, December 1997, New Orleans, LA. Long, Spiritual
Merchants, 69. F & F Candle Shop on 801 North Broad Avenue is the largest botanica in
New Orleans.
65. Linda Bays Powers, “Haiti: Waves of Sound and Rhythm,” in The 1996 Official
New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival Program Guide Book, 36.
Richard Brent Turner134
1403971625ts09.qxd  28-9-06  1:10 PM  Page 134


--- PAGE 150 ---
Chapter 9
Water in Their Eyes, Dust on Their Land:
Heat and Illness in a Haitian Town
Pierre Minn
Author: “Does heat make people sick?”
Informant: “Yes, there’s no water.”
The man who spoke these words gave his answer with a slight shrug, as if it were the
most obvious response to my question. As I began to understand his statement, I was
struck by the enormity of what had previously seemed just another discomfort of liv-
ing in a poor, tropical country. This chapter is about the concept of chalè, or “heat”
as it appears in the medical discourses of rural Haitians. The term chalè is used to
refer to the physical phenomenon of heat as well as to an illness that affects various
parts of the body and is thought to be caused primarily by overexposure to heat and
physical labor. Drawing from interviews conducted with 30 residents of Bèlans, a
coastal town in northern Haiti, I will argue that an understanding of the illness chalè
requires recognition of environmental factors in the analysis of illness narratives.
1
Environmental factors such as contact with biomedically recognized pathogens and
toxic pollutants or the spread of previously isolated micro-organisms have already
been recognized as having an impact on human health, but environmental factors
must also be considered when examining the lived experiences of illness. Rural
Haitians generally do not attribute chalè to biomedical causes or social dynamics, but
focus instead on environmental problems when describing the illness. Although from
an outsider’s perspective, one can point to the social roots of poverty, underdevelop-
ment, and poor health, one must not overlook how Haitians link chalè to factors as
immediate and obvious as a dry riverbed and the sun’s blazing heat.
This study is intended primarily as a descriptive chapter. After a brief introduction
to the field site, methods of data collection, and humoral classification, I will describe
the causes, symptoms, and treatments of the illness. A short section devoted to the
1403971625ts10.qxd  29-9-06  12:40 PM  Page 135


--- PAGE 151 ---
biomedical perspective on chalè includes opinions expressed by two nurses who work
in the town’s clinic. I will then describe how the residents of Bèlans connect chalè to
the broader environmental problems that affect the majority of rural Haitians—
namely, drought and land degradation, arduous labor conditions, and extreme
poverty. Finally, I will argue that three categories commonly used when studying ill-
nesses cross-culturally (“folk illness,” “culture-bound syndrome,” and “metaphor”)
are inappropriate for chalè because they emphasize the social dynamics surrounding
illness and dismiss physiological, objectively measurable factors. T o understand
this illness in its appropriate context, it must be examined in a way that acknowledges
the importance of the physical environment in which it is experienced.
In recent years, social scientists have shown that health includes more than the bio-
logical processes of individual bodies. Medical anthropologists have established dis-
tinctions between illness and disease that have influenced how anthropologists
theorize about health and medicine. Kleinman writes, “By invoking the term illness, I
mean to conjure up the innately human experience of symptoms and suffering. Illness
refers to how the sick person and members of the family or wider social network per-
ceive, live with, and respond to symptoms and disability” (Kleinman 1988, 2–3). In
contrast, disease is “the problem from the practitioner’s perspective. In the narrow bio-
logical terms of the biomedical model, this means that disease is reconfigured only as
an alteration in biological structure or functioning” (1988, 5–6). I have chosen to refer
to chalè using the term “illness” because of its emphasis on the lived experience of
health. The term is limited, however, in its capacity to convey how chalè affects and
interacts with the physical environment beyond the bodies that experience it.
Background
Bèlans and its Inhabitants
Bèlans is situated about 25 miles west of Okap (Cap-Haïtien) on Haiti’s north coast.
The town is on a peninsula and lies alongside a small river that joins the ocean at the
edge of the town. Bèlans itself is relatively flat, but the terrain surrounding it is
extremely rocky and mountainous. The town has no paved roads, and its streets
become filled with muddy pits after rain. A few households own generators, but the
vast majority of residents have no access to electricity. A system of pipes collects
runoff from the hills and supplies water to several homes and two public spigots,
which provide water for drinking and cooking. The pipes often dry up because of
drought or damage, and people are forced to fetch water from wells or springs. The
majority of the residents bathe in the river, which has served the water needs of thou-
sands of people living in the mountains south of the town by the time it reaches
Bèlans. Aside from a small number of pit latrines, there is no sanitation system, and
the town is crossed by small canals filled with raw sewage. People also defecate on the
banks of the river, which is dark with filth by the time it reaches the ocean.
According to a 1995 government report, Bèlans has a population of 6,500, and its
surrounding “communal section” is home to some 60,000 people (Republique
Pierre Minn136
1403971625ts10.qxd  29-9-06  12:40 PM  Page 136


--- PAGE 152 ---
d’Haïti, Departement du Nord 1995). 2 Most of the town’s residents are dependent
on farming as their main source of income. Residents own small plots of lands in the
hills surrounding the town, where they grow plantains, bananas, breadfruit, man-
goes, and other crops. A few farmers cultivate rice, peanuts, and sugarcane in more
level areas, but level land is scarce. Others in the town earn their living as fishermen,
metalworkers, masons, vendors, teachers, and furniture makers. There is an open
market in the center of Bèlans where people sell staple foods every day from early
morning to early evening.
T wice a week, large market days attract traveling vendors from the surrounding
areas who come to sell kitchen utensils, used clothing, and other dry goods. A few fam-
ilies also run small stores stocked with pencils, notebooks, insect repellent, batteries,
and specialty food items such as crackers, candy, and cheese. Those with refrigerators
sell cold beverages and margarine.
Health conditions in Bèlans are marked by the area’s extreme poverty.
Malnutrition is widespread, as are diseases such as malaria, typhus, and parasitic
infections. The use of medicinal plants is common and usually serves as the primary
form of care for a wide variety of ailments. There is a government-run hospital just
outside of town that employs two Haitian doctors. The building is in a state of neg-
lect, however, and lacks basic supplies such as gauze, antiseptics, and hospital beds.
There is also a small clinic in the center of town, which is funded by an American
development organization and run by a Haitian staff of two nurses, a lab technician,
and a pharmacist.
Research Methodology
I first traveled to Bèlans in the summer of 1997 under the auspices of the develop-
ment organization that built and currently funds the town’s clinic. The organization’s
goals are to work in solidarity with the people of Bèlans to improve conditions for
those who live in the town and its surrounding areas.
During my first seven-week stay in Bèlans, I worked with the group’s education
outreach program and organized classes for students and teachers in various disci-
plines. During this time, I became interested in the concept of chalè, after observing
the use by local residents of a great number and variety of medicinal plants in the area
surrounding the town. In explaining a plant’s usefulness, informants often described
it as being “good for fyèv” (fever) or “good for chalè.” Although many plants could be
used to treat both fyèv and chalè, the illnesses were always listed as two separate con-
ditions, and some plants were good for only one of the two. Whereas fyèv was
described in terms of chills and generalized aches and pains, chalè was more localized,
often in the stomach.
I returned to Bèlans in the summer of 1998 to gain a better understanding of these
categorizations. During the second stay, which lasted five weeks, I conducted
30 interviews, which consisted of open-ended questions, and usually took place in
informants’ homes. Few interviews were prescheduled, but because I had already
established a visible presence in the town, no one seemed surprised by my questions.
No request for an interview was refused; rather, I was impressed by the informants’
W ater in Their Eyes 137
1403971625ts10.qxd  29-9-06  12:40 PM  Page 137


--- PAGE 153 ---
willingness to share information and details. The 15 female and 15 male informants
ranged in age from nine to late seventies. In choosing informants, I tried to choose
individuals from a wide variety of occupational backgrounds, who would have dis-
parate experiences and lifestyles. The group included farmers, students, homemakers,
carpenters, merchants, tailors, fishermen, teachers, and others. All were residents of
Bèlans, and almost all had always lived in the town or its surrounding areas. A few
had spent brief periods abroad, working either in the Dominican Republic cutting
sugarcane or in the Bahamas as domestic servants and construction workers, but
most had never left Haiti. Although I make no attempt to present my group of
respondents as a random sample, their disparate demographic attributes, especially in
terms of age and occupation, combined with the overall uniformity of their responses
convinces me that the information they gave me is representative of Bèlans’ general
population. I also interviewed the two nurses who staff the town’s clinic to evaluate
the local biomedical response to chalè. (All interviews were conducted in Haitian
Creole, without a translator.)
The Illness Chalè
Origins
The Haitian Creole term chalè derives from the French word chaleur and can
be translated literally as “heat.” The word is used as a noun, and its corresponding
adjective is cho (hot). The term chalè poses complications because it is used to refer
both to heat as an elemental force and to the illness caused by heat. For clarity, I will
use the English word “heat” to refer to the elemental force, and “chalè” when speak-
ing of the illness. It is questionable to what extent this distinction between the two
concepts exists for the people of Bèlans, since many believe that heat simply enters
the body and makes one sick. Some people used the term maladi chalè , or “heat
illness,” which indicates that some separation of the concepts exists.
3
At its most basic level, chalè can be described as an illness rooted in Greek-derived
humoral pathology. The traditional Greek categorizations of hot, dry, cold, and damp
have been preserved in Latin America with the damp and dry categories losing impor-
tance to create a binary opposition between the concepts of hot and cold. “The basic
outline of Latin American humoral medicine as described in . . . ethnographic accounts
is simple...all foods, all herbal and other remedies, and many other substances as well
(such as iron), have a metaphoric ‘quality’...a  humoral value of ‘hot’ or ‘cold’ (and
occasionally ‘temperate’) that serves primarily to distinguish classes of foods and reme-
dies” (Foster 1994, 2). Although humoral classifications are most prevalent in Spanish-
speaking Latin America, they are also present in the French Caribbean and Haiti. Foster
argues, “[In] Haiti, during its century of French domination...i t  i s  r easonable to
assume that French humoral ideas also played a role in implanting the Hot-Cold
concepts revealed by contemporary anthropological research” (176).
4 Several studies
have confirmed the existence of humoral classification among Haitians and Haitian-
Americans (DeSantis and Thomas 1990; Wiese 1976).
5
Pierre Minn138
1403971625ts10.qxd  29-9-06  12:40 PM  Page 138


--- PAGE 154 ---
Chalè’s Symptoms and Treatments
In Bèlans, when someone says, “M’gen chalè,” it is assumed that the person has been
exposed to an excessive amount of heat, which is causing negative effects within the
body. Chalè is one of the most common illnesses in Bèlans, and all but one of my
informants acknowledged that heat causes illness. (The exception was a nurse in the
town’s health clinic.) Chalè is most often experienced in the stomach and bowels; in
the head and eyes; and on the skin. Some informants linked the illness’ scope to two
or three body parts (usually those mentioned above), but many stated that chalè could
affect all parts of the body. One woman showed me her foot, the swollen and painful
condition of which she attributed to chalè. Each area of the body is affected in a par-
ticular manner, leading me to conclude that the illness is not conceived of as one sin-
gle type of disorder (such as too much blood or torn tissue) but as a painful and
uncomfortable deviance from normal functioning.
As stated before, I first noticed chalè as a condition about which people spoke in
terms of their stomachs and bowels. Chalè causes pains in the stomach, which the
informants described as sharp and severe. In addition, chalè in the stomach produces
a series of digestive problems, such as pouse (pushing): the inability to have a bowel
movement despite great effort.
6 Chalè also produces glè, a condition in which one’s
stools become clear and runny, but different from diarrhea. One man described glè as
“when you kill animals, when you’re cleaning their tripes, there’s a kind of garbage
you can see. That’s what it’s like.” Glè was described by one informant as being “like
bile.” Pains ( pouse) and glè were the generally agreed-upon effects of chalè in the
stomach, whereas only a few informants mentioned diarrhea and constipation as
symptoms.
T reatment of chalè in the stomach and bowels consists mostly of rafrèchi, or
“cooling,” which refers to the consumption of cold foods and beverages. It was in
this realm that traditional humoral classifications became most evident, because
informants listed food with cold properties that are used to cool down chalè inside
the body. These foods included coconut milk, cassava bread (made from ground
manioc), okra, cucumbers, sugar, bananas, and melon. All the foods mentioned by
my informants were classified as cool or cold by Jean Wiese’s informants in a 1976
study of traditional food behavior in Haiti (Wiese 1976, 196). Cooling beverages
are made from the leaves of a variety of plants, such as hibiscus, orange, and sour-
sop (a large tree that produces sweet, pulpy fruits), which are boiled and left to
cool.
7 All of these plants and foods are available in Bèlans, although they are
outside the staple diet of rice and beans and may be a financial burden for the
patient. Medicinal leaves are plentiful and gathered from hillsides by the patients or
their family members.
Chalè in the head produces dizziness, headaches, and a sensation that is hot but
not necessarily feverish. One man told me, “Chalè first works in your head. It makes
your head heavy, it gives you something like vertigo. The person gets dizzy.” The per-
son may have difficulty seeing because chalè can affect the eyes, producing soreness
and redness. “It makes you feel as though your eyes are burning, as if they are going
to fall out of your head and land on the floor,” one informant explained. Chalè in the
W ater in Their Eyes 139
1403971625ts10.qxd  29-9-06  12:40 PM  Page 139


--- PAGE 155 ---
head is treated by koule tèt, whereby the patient douses the head with cool water into
which medicinal leaves may have been infused. It is also common to tie leaves onto
one’s head with a damp cloth, so that their cooling properties may be absorbed
through the skin. One woman told me that after eating a banana, “you can tie it [the
peel] to your head with a rag, and it will pull out all the heat. You’ll see, after about
fifteen to twenty minutes, the peel is almost dry. It has pulled out so much heat, the
heat was so strong that the peel has a totally different appearance.”
The final major manifestation of chalè is on the skin. This condition is the most
obvious form of the illness and one of the most uncomfortable. Chalè on the skin
usually appears in the forms of bouton (bumps), which can occur on any part of the
body. They are generally small in size and may be filled with pus or clear liquid. It
can also appear as a rash over a larger area of skin. Chalè on the skin can last any-
where from a single day to long periods of time and is extremely itchy and painful.
A popular name for the condition is gran difè chalè (big fiery heat). This term is also
used to refer to chalè in the genitals, described below. Chalè on the skin occurs fre-
quently among infants. One young woman, showing me her baby son, said, “You
can see that he’s got a bunch of little bumps all over his body, that have water in
them. Some are big; sometimes they get bigger. They are usually pink. The heat
does that. Sometimes they have a lot of water in them. When you pop them, they
leave a mark.” Bathing is the most common treatment for chalè on the skin. In
addition, informants described a remedy that consists of mixing starch (usually
made from manioc) with klèren (a strong form of rum) and rubbing it on the
afflicted parts.
Aside from these major symptoms, individual informants spoke of many other
manifestations of chalè. A few mentioned chalè in the genitals, which can affect both
males and females, causing the urethra to burn and one’s urine to become darker.
This condition was referred to by the same name as the skin rash, gran difè chalè, and
is generally believed to be caused by sitting on something very hot, such as a metal
chair or concrete stoop warmed by the sun. Some informants also mentioned that
chalè in the genitals was sexually transmitted. This form of chalè was identified as very
serious and deadly if not treated by biomedical remedies. Other effects of chalè
include hair loss, hysteria, swelling in the stomach, and difficulty in breathing. In all
cases, chalè was described as an invasive force that originates outside the body and
affects the person negatively.
Causes, Consequences, and Classifications
Chalè is primarily caused by overexposure to heat, which is believed to create dis-
turbances within the body. The sun was identified as the primary source of heat but
others included hot rooms such as kitchens or crowded bedrooms and small char-
coal braziers used for cooking. A person becomes sick by spending too much time
exposed to one or more of these sources. Being in the sun for an extended period of
time, sitting close to a stove while cooking, and ironing clothes were all frequently
mentioned as common ways of being exposed to heat and getting chalè. Individual
informants told me of other ways one could get the illness: by driving a car, for
Pierre Minn140
1403971625ts10.qxd  29-9-06  12:40 PM  Page 140


--- PAGE 156 ---
example, because of proximity to a hot motor, or by welding metal. Surprisingly, not
a single informant connected chalè in the stomach with ingesting hot foods or
beverages.8
The other principal cause of chalè is physical activity, which not only heats up the
body but also weakens its resistance to heat. Activities such as walking or climbing a
hillside, carrying heavy loads, construction work, and playing soccer were all
described as activities that caused people to become ill. Sometimes this type of activity
is thought to preempt the presence of a heat source which causes illness. When
I asked a man if it were possible to get chalè even when the weather wasn’t warm, he
responded, “It depends on the activity of that person. There are some people who live
here, in Bèlans, but who go to school in Sen Jak [a nearby town]. That means that
every day they must go there and every afternoon come back. If they do that every
day during the year, they will feel something. Even if it’s not hot, it (chalè) will show
itself. Chalè will manifest itself in that person.”
Generally, however, heat and chalè are thought of in terms of seasons. “Heat is
something that has its time. It’s something that comes by season. There are times
when it’s hot and times when it’s not hot. During the hot months, the heat rises, and
when it goes down, the cold comes in.” The epok chalè, or “heat season,” lasts from
May to September with the winter months tending to be much cooler. Informants
were divided when asked if it were possible for people to have chalè during the win-
ter months. Most agreed that it was more likely to occur during the summer. “In the
hot months, that’s when it hits the body most. When it’s cold, it’s not too much, it’s
more in the hot months,” one woman told me. When I asked another informant,
however, if it were possible to get chalè in January or February, he replied, “It’s possi-
ble. As soon as you tire out your body, you can get it. You can get it anytime.
Whenever a person is tiring their body, they can get it.” As stated above, physical
labor can make the presence of heat superfluous in making a person ill.
Aside from these two principal causes of chalè, another theme that emerged from
the interviews was the question of hygiene. I was told, “If a person is in filth, if they
are in dirt, they don’t want to wash, they don’t want to bathe, that’ll cause it also.”
Another man explained it this way, “If you don’t take good care of your body, you
have little holes in your skin, called pores, there’s a lot of dirt there, if you don’t take
care of your body, chalè will kill you quicker.” This man was the only informant to
mention pores. Another statement concerning hygiene was made by two young boys,
who were the only informants to use the word mikwob (microbe or germ).
Author: Do you get chalè sometimes?
Informant: Yes.
Author: Where?
Informant 1: In our house. We take off our shirts at night. We like to wash so that we
don’t get germs.
Informant 2: So that we don’t have dirt stuck on us.
All of the informants who mentioned bathing and hygiene spoke of them as fac-
tors that could be controlled, and implied that failure to maintain cleanliness was
caused by a lack of desire or effort. However, plentiful dust and lack of water make it
W ater in Their Eyes 141
1403971625ts10.qxd  29-9-06  12:40 PM  Page 141


--- PAGE 157 ---
difficult for anyone to maintain strict standards of hygiene. Many people spoke of
excessive sweating during the summer months as well as the dust created by high tem-
peratures and scarce rainfall. One man told me that someone herding livestock might
get the illness if the animals passed gas and the person inhaled the fumes. There is an
association between chalè and discomfort: the sweltering heat and ever-present sweat
and dirt combine to create an environment that makes people ill.
Chalè is a relatively commonplace condition, and, ordinarily, people rarely con-
sider it worthy of a trip to the clinic or hospital. In general, people in Bèlans treat
most of their ailments with home remedies and medicinal leaves, turning to bio-
medical treatments only when their first attempts fail. Most people asserted that
biomedical treatments were available for chalè, but few were able to name specific
medicines. Those mentioned were antibiotics (as a blanket term), ampicillin, skin
creams (one woman mentioned “Calandrel,” presumably a calamine-based lotion),
and soaps. The hospital and clinic both charge fees for visits and medications, and
although both institutions are heavily subsidized, the home remedies for chalè
remain more economically advantageous. In addition, chalè on its own is simply
not considered a dangerous illness. Informants emphasized that it was not a gwo
maladi (big illness), and few believed that it is lethal. Chalè is thought to exacerbate
other sicknesses, though. As one informant put it, “Chalè can’t kill people. If a
person is already sick, chalè can kill. If the person already has another sickness, and
they get chalè, they might die, but it’s not chalè that killed them.” There is also the
threat that chalè will make the patient more susceptible to other, more serious
illnesses or that chalè itself can evolve into a more dangerous ailment, such as a
fever or infection.
Scholars have recognized the tendency of Haitians to incorporate biomedical con-
cepts into preexisting models of illness and health. In his book AIDS and Accusation,
Paul Farmer writes about the ways in which the residents of a small Haitian town came
to relate AIDS to a disease with which they had long been familiar—tuberculosis
(Farmer, 1994, 117). Another anthropologist, Michel Laguerre, writing on health
issues among Haitian Americans, says that “[s]pecific biomedical terms are often used
by poorly educated migrants as well, but often with meanings different from those
assigned by biomedical professionals” (Laguerre 1981, 201). Similarly, I found dur-
ing my interviews that biomedical terms and concepts existed with and influenced
the concept of chalè. The presence of the health clinic and the hospital attest to the
fact that despite their relative isolation, the people of Bèlans are in contact with bio-
medical disease models and remedies. Biomedical terms were most frequently men-
tioned when speaking of the dangers of untreated chalè or what could happen to a
patient in a worst-case scenario. As mentioned above, many believed that chalè could
render one more susceptible to more serious conditions. One man told me that
“[C]halè makes infection unleash itself faster on you”.
9 Other informants told me
that chalè led to fever and frequently mentioned malaria and typhoid. Another con-
dition often related to chalè was tansyon, or high blood pressure. Several informants,
including a biomedically trained nurse in the clinic, informed me that blood pressure
rose during hot weather.
10 Because most people in Bèlans resort to the clinic or
hospital only if facing a serious condition, it is logical that the more severe cases of
chalè would be conceived of in biomedical terms.
Pierre Minn142
1403971625ts10.qxd  29-9-06  12:40 PM  Page 142


--- PAGE 158 ---
The Biomedical Perspective
Biomedical Categorization of Chalè’s Symptoms
The symptoms of chalè can be linked to a wide variety of biomedically recognized
diseases and ailments, many of which are related to the conditions of water supplies
in Bèlans. Theorists have created a classification system that establishes five categories
of infectious diseases linked to water: water-borne infections such as typhus and
cholera, whose organisms spread in contaminated water; water-washed infections
such as scabies and trachoma that are caused by lack of water for personal hygiene;
water-based infections such as schistosomiasis and other worm infections; diseases
with water-related insect vectors such as malaria; and infections related to defective
sanitation such as hookworm, which move directly from contaminated soil to the
human body (Bradley 1977, 7–15). The symptoms of chalè can be biomedically
interpreted to include diseases in all five categorizations as well as conditions not
related to water supplies. Stomach pains and digestive disorders can be caused by
hunger, typhoid, and parasites. The condition called glè resembles a symptom of both
amoebic dysentery and giardia (Jelliffe and Jelliffe 1985, 122–23). Hunger is also a
cause of headaches, as are malaria and respiratory infections. Rashes on the skin can
be attributed to scabies, impetigo, fungal infections, and eczema. There is also a con-
dition called “prickly heat,” which causes a red, itchy rash. All of the skin ailments
mentioned here are linked to personal hygiene and hot temperatures (Harland 1985,
184). In addition, a burning sensation in the genital area is symptomatic of many
venereal diseases. Dark urine, as well as many of the above-mentioned symptoms can
also be caused or exacerbated by dehydration, an all-too-common condition in Haiti.
Finally, one must consider the wide range of effects on the body that result from
malnutrition, as well as the symptoms of heatstroke, which may include headaches,
dizziness, and fainting.
The Nurses’ Views
The two nurses in the town clinic each see over a hundred patients a week from the
town of Bèlans and its surrounding areas. Mis Leyoni is the head nurse, and has been
working at the clinic since it opened in 1995.
11 She told me that, on average,
60 patients visited the clinic each day, and, of those, 10 would claim to have chalè. She
herself denied the existence of the illness, saying, “They come and tell me that they
have chalè. But chalè isn’t really a sickness; it doesn’t exist as a sickness.” She added,
“I can tell you that it’s because the people aren’t informed. They don’t have informa-
tion. If the people were trained, if they were informed . . .” She compared chalè to
pèdisyon, a condition among rural Haitians in which a pregnant woman’s fetus is
thought to shrivel up and remain in her uterus in a state of suspended growth and can
be born several years later. In her mind, pèdisyon is also a result of ignorance. “We
know that it never happens! Either the person is pregnant or she isn’t! What happens
is that the person may have a problem, or they’ve performed a strenuous activity, or
W ater in Their Eyes 143
1403971625ts10.qxd  29-9-06  12:40 PM  Page 143


--- PAGE 159 ---
an infection can cause that [miscarriage]. They say that it is pèdisyon because they
haven’t learned that that word does not exist!” In the case of chalè, she attributed its
symptoms to parasites, acidity in the stomach, or high blood pressure. Surprisingly,
despite her firm denial of chalè as an illness, Mis Leyoni explicitly stated that heat
could negatively affect a person’s health. She believed that heat could cause people to
have difficulty breathing, become agitated (causing blood pressure to rise), and have
pains in their head.
Mis Jinyoz, the other nurse in the clinic, was less willing to attribute any deleteri-
ous effects to heat. She also felt that chalè was a condition a person would believe in
because he didn’t know any better. When asked how she would react to someone who
came into the clinic complaining of chalè, she said,
I would consider that person to be a profane person, so he may feel that his head is
hot, but it’s really an organic problem that he has, such as anemia or vitamin
deficiency. He can use the expression “ chalè in the head,” but it’s probably because
something is missing. People who talk about chalè in the stomach probably have
parasites, that sort of thing, or gas. The people feel that their stomach is hot, but it
has nothing to do with heat, it’s just a problem that they have and that’s how they
interpret it.
She dismisses heat as a simple fact of life in a tropical country. “Well naturally,
this is a hot country. Sometimes it’s not, but it’s a country that’s naturally warm. But
it’s not true when they say that heat kills people. Sometimes the temperatures do get
very hot, but when that happens, it doesn’t get hot enough to kill people. When it’s
hot, you feel normal heat. Some people might feel irritated when it’s hot.” She did
concede, however, that there were more cases of kriz during the summer months.
The term “kriz” refers to a condition that can involve agitation, hysteria, and
fainting.
The nurses’ view of chalè has been influenced by their biomedical training and
their social position, both of which foster a condescending view of the people they
are treating. Both nurses acknowledged that older people were more likely to com-
plain of chalè, with the insinuation that the latter were more old-fashioned and
ignorant of modern science. Brodwin has written about the ways in which Haitian
nurses publicly shame their patients, and I frequently observed this behavior in
Bèlans (Brodwin 1997, 82). It should also be noted that both nurses have a much
higher standard of living than most of the people they treat, especially in terms of
income, housing, and diet.
Despite their refusal to recognize chalè as an illness, both nurses approved of the
traditional remedies that patients usually use before coming to the clinic.
12 Both
nurses also recognize, however minimally, the existence of heat as a factor that can
influence health. As opposed to a condition like pèdisyon, which is completely impos-
sible within the context of biomedicine, patients coming into the clinic complaining
of chalè will not necessarily undergo the same repudiation of their beliefs. Because
heat originates outside the body, it can be collectively experienced and objectively
recognized as being “real.”
Pierre Minn144
1403971625ts10.qxd  29-9-06  12:40 PM  Page 144


--- PAGE 160 ---
Chalè and Larger Issues
Drought, Labor, and Poverty
Early in my interviewing process, it became apparent that there were larger issues
associated with chalè than the illness as experienced by individuals. The exchange
with which I opened this study (which took place when I asked a middle-aged farmer,
“Does heat make people sick?” and received the response, “Yes, there’s no water.”)
exemplifies the way informants moved the focus of my questions from embodied
states to large-scale problems. Three major themes emerged: lack of water and land
degradation, arduous labor and difficult working conditions, and poverty. An exam-
ination of how these topics appear in Haitian discourse on chalè gives a clearer pic-
ture of the illness, and provides insight into the struggles and suffering that are
routine in rural Haiti.
Lack of water and land degradation are thought by many to be the most severe of
Haiti’s many problems. “Nothing better symbolized the vicious cycle of poverty in
Haiti than the process of deforestation. Haiti was once a lush tropical island, replete
with pines and broadleaf trees; however, by 1988 only about 2% of the country had
tree cover” (Seyler 1991, 300). Charcoal is the only source of energy available for most
rural Haitians, and countless acres of land have been cleared to provide fuel. Because
the country is extremely mountainous, erosion is quick and severe. “Aerial photo-
graphs of the Haitian coast show huge buildups of sediment at the mouths of every
river, evidence of the loss of topsoil in the interior. Haiti’s topsoil is in the sea” (Wilentz
1989, 245). As the land becomes less and less fertile, farmers are forced to move their
cultivation to more and more remote areas of land, further perpetuating the erosion
cycle. In addition, sporadic rainfall causes severe flooding followed by long dry peri-
ods. Enduring drought has become a way of life for most Haitians. Many rivers have
completely dried up and those that remain are often muddy trickles.
At first sight, Bèlans and its surrounding area present a slightly different picture.
The hills around the town appear lush and green, and, compared to other parts of the
country, the area has a substantial amount of vegetation. One reason for this differ-
ence is the lack of roads in Haiti’s northern regions; few roads make it difficult for
trucks to transport out wood for fuel. At night, however, one can see fires glowing in
the hills as harvested trees are burned to make charcoal to sell in the immediate area.
All of the land surrounding Bèlans is cultivated, with virtually no original growth left.
Patches of bare land are beginning to appear, and there is little in terms of low
growth—such as bushes, vines, or grasses—that can retain soil. The area has been suf-
fering from severe drought. During my first summer there, it was reported that sev-
eral people in a nearby mountain village had died of thirst. One man told me, “Even
the animals don’t find anything to drink. So many people are in drought.”
It is not surprising that scarcity of water was a major theme in discussing chalè,
given water’s categorization as a cooling element. Lack of water makes it impossible
to bathe, one of the main ways of treating the illness. In addition, the resulting effects
on personal hygiene increase one’s susceptibility to chalè. Even the small amount
W ater in Their Eyes 145
1403971625ts10.qxd  29-9-06  12:40 PM  Page 145


--- PAGE 161 ---
needed to pour over one’s head or brew a herbal tea can make a significant dent in a
household’s water supply. When talking about scarcity of water, informants moved
from speaking about embodied illness to the area’s drought with no transition. One
informant told me, “In the summers, there’s a lot of sun, there’s drought, and during
those times, there’s a lot of fever. That’s when people get fevers. So it’s an epidemic.
This year, it’s the same thing. Since June and July, there’s a lot of sun and only a little
rain. And you see so many people with fevers, so many in the clinic. Myself, I’ve just
had a fever. So heat, it makes huge messes.” In addition, heat combined with
drought creates dust, which many informants identified as a carrier of disease. Finally,
drought created a situation in which people had to walk further to obtain water and
spend more time and energy carrying it back home. One man said, “When there’s no
water in the pipes, you have to go fetch water. All those people with their jugs, sun or
no sun, people who are sick, they are forced to go. The sun pulls up the waters, so you
have to travel through desert. Heat brings much, much, much difficulty.” The public
spigots in the center of town usually dry up during the summer months, and people
(usually women and children) must get water either from wells in private homes or
walk to springs in the hills, which can be up to an hour away.
Carrying water is only one of the many strenuous activities in which the people of
Bèlans engage as part of their daily routines. In a town where few have electricity and
even fewer have cars, human bodies are the main source of power, whether it be used to
cut down trees, wash clothes, or simply walk from one place to another. As previously
mentioned, physical labor and movement are factors that exacerbate and cause chalè. The
illness is closely linked to hard work. During the interviews, it was interesting to note
which activities and occupations were considered most likely to cause people to become
ill. Farmers were consistently identified as the most vulnerable to chalè, because their
days consist of climbing steep hills, digging, planting, harvesting, and other strenuous
activities. Construction workers were also identified as particularly vulnerable to chalè.
There are often small-scale construction or renovation projects underway in Bèlans, and
work for them includes mixing cement, carrying rocks, and making cinder blocks, usu-
ally without the protection of shade. These two occupations are predominantly male,
but women were identified as vulnerable when they were washing clothes at the river or
cooking in a hot kitchen. In addition, the majority of market vendors in Bèlans are
women, and, although a few have set up stalls that allow them to sit in the shade, most
sit on the ground and are exposed to the blazing sun for hours at a time, day after day.
Those pointed out as not likely to get chalè were people who worked in offices or indoor
shops, although the latter were thought to be at risk if they were constantly lifting and
moving merchandise. In general, there is an association between chalè and those who
must work with their bodies for a living, as well as those who work outdoors.
Many informants drew explicit links between heat, chalè, and poverty. The
following exchange exemplifies the connection that exists in the minds of many people:
Author: So you felt better today, because it hasn’t been so hot out?
Informant: Yes, it’s not too hot out. But later on, in the afternoon, around one or
two o’clock, I don’t know what will happen. It’s about money. Money gives you
more, you can see the doctor, there’s relief. Economically, we’re crushed. So heat,
many people don’t do well in heat.
Pierre Minn146
1403971625ts10.qxd  29-9-06  12:40 PM  Page 146


--- PAGE 162 ---
Even when it was not explained in detail, it seemed taken for granted that more
money would bring about a reduction of heat’s ill effects. Chalè is associated with
poor living conditions. One man spoke of his house, which he described as being so
“poorly constructed, with only two windows” that the heat was unbearable at night
and prevented anyone in his family from sleeping well. A mother holding her sick
child told me that the baby had difficulty breathing at night, and that houses with
low ceilings “provoked” chalè. Houses in Bèlans are generally constructed out of cin-
derblock and cement. Doors are generally left open, and there are no glass panes or
screens in the windows. Homes are usually crowded. A man told me, “If you sleep in
a house, in a room that has a lot of people, that produces chalè.” The man with the
poorly constructed house had said earlier, “Chalè affects people where electric energy
doesn’t work, and they can’t find any economic means of fighting it. That’s when it
goes up.” He added, “If our home had electricity, we could use a fan. It would give us
a little protection.” Another woman asserted that the type of iron she used (which
was filled with hot coals) is more likely to cause chalè than an electric iron. Although
the many discomforts caused by the heat and poverty in Bèlans are immediately obvi-
ous, it is only by talking to the people that one learns that they are also considered to
be sources of illness.
Chalè is recognized as a problem that affects the entire population of Bèlans.
Nevertheless, while speaking to some of the town’s wealthier residents, I noticed some
marked differences in their perceptions of the illness. The information given by two
young women gives insight into how one’s standard of living may influence attitudes
toward chalè. The first, Antwanèt, was 20 years old at the time of the interview. Her
family owns two stores, a large home, and employs a domestic servant. She is one of
the few students in Bèlans who attend high school and is also a leader of her church
youth group. When I asked her if heat made people sick, she answered,
In Haiti, heat doesn’t usually make people sick because the temperatures are not that
high. Really, it’s normal. It’s not the same as in that place where I heard that a thousand
people died, China, I think, where they died of heat. I don’t know exactly when, but I
heard it on the news. People died because the temperature was so high. And in New
York, for example, it’s very hot right now, so it’s not the same thing as in Haiti, where
the heat is normal, there’s sun, but it doesn’t kill people. It’s not serious.
Antwanèt’s discourse is reminiscent of the statements made by clinic’s nurse, Mis
Jinyoz, who described the heat in Haiti as “natural” and its effect on people as
“normal.” These answers are in sharp contrast with those of people who speak of the
constant torment of the oppressive heat and the misery it causes as it “beats” people.
Antwanèt later conceded that heat could cause chalè, and she knew how to treat it but
continued to de-emphasize the severity of heat in her country. Although Antwanèt
lived in the center of town and experienced many of the same discomforts as those
around her, it is unlikely that she walked great distances, washed clothes at the river,
or carried out any other activities that would expose her to harsh sunlight or
prolonged, strenuous labor.
Another young woman, Klodèt, spoke in terms that more closely resembled those of
the other informants. Although she had nearly completed high school in the city of
W ater in Their Eyes 147
1403971625ts10.qxd  29-9-06  12:40 PM  Page 147


--- PAGE 163 ---
Okap and lived in a spacious two-story house, she also spoke of the heat’s seriousness
and deleterious effects on health. One of her comments, though, was particularly
striking in relation to standard of living. When I asked her about people who worked
outdoors getting chalè, she answered, “Yes, those people get chalè. But you’ll find peo-
ple who have worked their bodies so much, they’re so used to work that they don’t get
chalè. People in the countryside, in the hills, who work in the sun.” Thus emerge two
contradictory interpretations: Klodèt and a few others suggested that one could
become less susceptible to chalè by exposure to heat and work, with the idea that the
body builds up physical resistance.
13 The majority of my informants, however,
tended to emphasize that they were being worn down after so much labor, and that
chalè was particularly harsh on their overworked bodies.
Conclusion
Folk Illnesses, Metaphors, and Culture-Bound Syndromes
At one level, chalècan be interpreted as a “folk illness,” in that it lies outside the realm
of biomedical diagnoses and has a distinct set of causes, symptoms, and cures. The
term is limited in its applicability to chalè, given that “folk-defined causes are gener-
ally in the psychological/social realm, and, not surprisingly, have treatments that have
psychological components” (Baer and Bustillo 1998, 246–247). Chalè’s symptoms
are overwhelmingly physiological in nature, and psychological aspects were not
emphasized by any of my informants. In their research on a folk illness called caída
de mollera among Mexican-American infants, Baer and Bustillo argue that “folk-ill-
ness research has focused too much on asking people how they cure the illnesses, and
too little on investigating how they treat the physiological symptoms of the illnesses”
(1998, 242). In addition to recognizing the physiological components of folk ill-
nesses and treatments, the example of chalè in Bèlans underscores the importance of
studying their physiological causes as well, especially when they are related to people’s
living environments. Attention to these causes would not make obsolete the recogni-
tion of social origins of sickness and the cultural processes surrounding illness.
Instead, the latter would be strengthened by a more informed position on the physi-
cal contexts in which ill people live. There are other ways in which the term “folk ill-
ness” proves inadequate in describing a condition such as chalè. Although the
adjective “folk” can be interpreted to mean simply that the condition lies outside of
biomedical classifications, there is an underlying suggestion that this type of condi-
tion represents a certain ignorance on the part of the people who experience it. As
Mis Leyoni put it, “it’s because the people aren’t informed.” Although the people of
Bèlans have limited access to formalized education, it is condescending to brush aside
the ways in which they give meaning to their experience and illness. The next logical
step, of course, would be deny that anything is being experienced at all, as do some
of the town’s wealthier residents. Until the term “folk illness” loses its connotation of
being fictional or imagined, it will be an inappropriate categorization for chalè.
Pierre Minn148
1403971625ts10.qxd  29-9-06  12:40 PM  Page 148


--- PAGE 164 ---
This raises the issue of whether chalè is a “real” condition. It is possible that some
people in Bèlans used the term chalè to describe ailments that they cannot explain.
Chalè therefore becomes a metaphor, and, like many metaphors, there is no way it
can be objectively studied and determined to be “real.” In addition to the metaphor-
ical uses, however, most of my informants believed that chalè is caused by heat enter-
ing their bodies, heat that cannot be considered a metaphor. Its effects are objectively
measurable in terms of the low level of the river, the dryness of the land, and the
undeniably high temperatures of summers in Haiti, from which there are few escapes.
By dismissing chalè as a metaphor, one risks dismissing with it the lived experiences
of a people who are suffering the effects of a prolonged environmental disaster from
which there currently seems to be little chance of escape.
Finally, the term “culture-bound syndrome” has been used to describe conditions
that lie outside the realm of biomedical diagnosis. One scholar defines these as
“a variety of syndromes which, because of their seeming uniqueness and exclusive fit
to local cultural conditions, are described as ‘culture bound’ ” (Hahn 1985, 165).
T wo culture-bound syndromes that have received significant attention are koro,
which occurs among ethnic Han Chinese, and latah, which is found primarily among
women in Indonesia and Malaysia. Anthropologists have identified what they per-
ceive to be social causes in both conditions. Koro, an illness that causes a person to
believe that their genitals are shrinking, is most often seen among single, poorly edu-
cated men who believe in the condition and live in a social environment that provides
them with little information about sex and sexuality (Cheung 1996, 79). Latah,
unusual and often obscene behavior among people who have been startled, is thought
to originate in Indonesian notions of propriety and sexuality (Kenny 1978, 210–211,
222). In these and other ethnographies, seemingly inexplicable conditions become
clear once they have been put into their proper social contexts.
Looking for social origins of chalè will lead the investigator beyond the rural
Haitians’ discourse. Informants simply do not make links between social interactions
and chalè. The links that they do make are more immediate and have been omitted
from anthropological analyses of the illness experience. Chalè is an illness condition
that emerges from and remains a part of a person’s interaction with his physical
environment. Scholars have pointed out the importance of recognizing the links
between environmental factors and disease, but have neglected those between the
environment and illness, or the human experience of being unwell. In pointing
out that “agents occurring naturally or as a result of human intervention in the
external environment may cause diseas e...unusual temperatures, electronic haz-
ards as well as trauma, may produce pathology” (Sheldon 1990, 210), anthropolo-
gists have neglected to point out how illness experiences are created in reaction to the
consequences of environmental degradation. It seems clear that most of the symp-
toms of chalè (stomach pains, skin rashes, and headaches) cannot be biomedically
defined as pathologies directly caused by overexposure to sun, excessive labor, or lack
of rain, yet these are the central factors in the illness experiences of the people in
Bèlans.
Disease (transmission of pathogens)
(biomedically recognized pathologies)
W ater in Their Eyes 149
1403971625ts10.qxd  29-9-06  12:40 PM  Page 149


--- PAGE 165 ---
Environmental Causes
(pollutants, new micro-organisms)
Social Causes
Illness (stressors pressures)
(human experience of suffering)
Environmental Causes
(land degradation, drought, poverty)
The illness chalè offers many opportunities to reexamine current ways of thinking
about bodies, illness, and the environment. Theorists have pointed out that medical
anthropology has “looked at issues such as bodily representation, sexuality and illness
from a political economy of suffering perspective, which has tended to produce an
incomplete portrait of the body (Green 1998, 4).” Chalè, with its clear links to phys-
ical factors beyond the political economy, provides the opportunity to begin mapping
out a more complete portrait of the body, and the space in which it resides. For
example, the illness calls into question the idea of the body as a bordered entity. If
heat can strike a person’s stomach in the same way that it can strike a river, what does
this say about the body’s permeability? Does this notion represent a type of relation
between bodies and the elements that lie beyond people’s skins?
The links that the people of Bèlans create between human bodies and environ-
mental phenomena stem from an intimate relationship with an environment on
which they depend for their most basic needs. In industrialized areas, this relation-
ship is often tangled in a web of plumbing, highways, and electric wires. There is lit-
tle room for romanticizing Haitians’ links to their land, given their daily battles with
overcrowding, deforestation, and irreversible erosion. Everyday realities grow harsher,
while solutions remain scarce, making it clear that drastic measures are necessary.
Rural Haitians will not be able to solve their problems simply through hard work and
a positive attitude, both of which are currently being carried out with few successes.
Without serious and far-reaching structural reforms, Haitians will continue to be
subject to the economic and political forces that have led to their current plight.
If a person with chalèaffecting every part of his body were to be admitted to a U.S.
hospital, it is likely that he would be released that same day. He would be prescribed
some antibiotics, ointments, and instructed to get adequate food and rest. Chalècon-
veys its full and troubling meanings only when it is put in the context in which it
occurs. A man in Bèlans told me, “Children are really affected by chalè. They are
unable to fight it, because they don’t have much water in them.” Haiti will only be able
to begin healing when it has enough water to refresh both its land and its people.
Notes
1. The names of all individuals, organizations, and towns mentioned in this article have been
changed.
2. This information is somewhat questionable given that the last actual census was conducted
in 1982, and the 1995 report was simply an assessment based on the earlier figures.
Pierre Minn150
1403971625ts10.qxd  29-9-06  12:40 PM  Page 150


--- PAGE 166 ---
3. Although I most often heard the words chalè and cho used in terms of heat or heat illness,
these terms and related words are also used to describe other phenomena. Karen Brown,
in her extensive research on Vodou practice in Haiti and the United States, has found that
the terms chalè (to heat) and echofe (to heat or reheat) are used in Vodou to describe the
creation of an atmosphere that will be conducive for shifts, changes, and transformations
(Karen McCarthy Brown, Mama Lola: A Vodou Priestess in Brooklyn[Berkeley: University
of California Press, 1991], 134–135). In ceremonies, creating this atmosphere is accom-
plished mainly by drumming, singing, and dancing. Such usage can be interpreted more
than in a purely metaphoric sense: movement increases physical temperature within the
worship space, usually a small, crowded room. I also heard the term used in this sense in
Bèlans at a Pentecostal worship service, when a woman mentioned that it had been a long
time since they had echofe in that church. She was referring to the ecstatic drumming and
spinning that often lead to possession by the Holy Spirit, and speaking in tongues, which
is characteristic of her particular congregation. I was also told that when a person is hot
about something, it refers to a particular enthusiasm or energy. One man told me that heat
referred to sexual desire. In general, there is a link between heat and activity/energy, which
also holds true for the illness chalè.
4. I was unable to find information on hot/cold classifications in Central and Western Africa.
However, given the widespread use of such classifications by medical systems around the
world (i.e., Chinese, Ayurvedic), it would be a mistake to discount the possibility of
African influences on Haitian humoral classification, particularly if one considers the
overwhelmingly African roots of Haitian culture in general.
5. A condition that appeared frequently in my informants’ discussion of heat and chalè was
called refwadisman (cooling or chilling). A person gets refwadisman when he moves too
quickly from a hot to a cold environment without giving the body time to adjust to the
change in temperature. The example most often given was of someone going straight from
a hot kitchen directly into the river to bathe. Refwadisman causes discomfort and aches
and, although not considered life-threatening, was identified as a fairly serious condition.
The prevalence of refwadisman in Bèlans testifies to the marked presence of a larger Latin-
American humoral tradition, which emphasizes the balance and stability of hot and cold
elements as a way of maintaining health. I was curious to know if moving from a cold
place to a hot one could also cause sickness. Whereas some people said that it would not
be a good idea to do so, most stated that sickness occurred only when going from
hot to cold.
6. Although the description of pouse resembles that of constipation, informants described
it with phrases such as “It’s as if you’re constipated,” and differentiated the two
conditions.
7. Few informants spoke of simply drinking water as a way of treating chalè. One young
woman even warned that a person with the illness should be careful not to drink, “any old
water,” by which she meant water that was visibly unclean or of questionable quality.
8. One man told me, however, that drinking water after eating hot corn would give one a
condition called gonfleman, or swelling. This is related to the rapid hot-cold transition
described above in refwadisman.
9. This man defined infection ( enfèksyon) as a lethal condition that could attack a person’s
bones, throat or skin. When I asked this same man what could protect children from
chalè, he made reference to white blood cells of unequal strength, which were visible “in a
laboratory,” but did not elaborate.
10. The nurse, however, stated that hot weather agitated patients, which caused the rise in
blood pressure, whereas the other informants linked it directly to the illness chalè.
11. Mis is the commonly used Haitian Creole word for “nurse.”
W ater in Their Eyes 151
1403971625ts10.qxd  29-9-06  12:40 PM  Page 151


--- PAGE 167 ---
12. There is an awareness in Bèlans of the value of medicinal leaf use even in the context of
biomedicine. Mis Leyoni, when I asked how she felt about patients making teas to treat
chalè, said, “Oh yes, it helps them. You know that all medicines are made from a base of
leaves.” Another woman in the town told me that she had heard that biomedical drugs
were simply leaves that had been processed in a laboratory.
13. These ideas have a long tradition in Haiti where slaves and darker-skinned individuals
were considered heartier and more resistant to work and the elements. It sadly persists
today: one young girl told me that I should not fetch my own water or lift anything heavy
because “whites” become sick if they work too hard or spend time in the sun.
Bibliography
Baer, Roberta D., and Marta Bustillo. 1998. Caida de Mollera Among Children of Mexican
Migrant Workers: Implications of the Study of Folk Illnesses. Medical Anthropology
Quarterly 12 (2): 241–249.
Bradley, D. J. 1977. Health Aspects of Water Supplies in T ropical Countries. In Water, Wastes
and Health in Hot Climates, ed. McGarry Feachem and Mara, 3–17. New York: John Wiley
and Sons.
Brodwin, Paul. 1997. Politics, Practical Logic and Primary Health Care in Rural Haiti.
Medical Anthropology Quarterly 11 (1): 69–88.
Brown, Karen McCarthy. 1991. Mama Lola: A Vodou Priestess in Brooklyn. Berkeley: University
of California Press.
Brown, Peter J., and Marcia C. Inhorn. 1990. Disease, Ecology and Human Behavior. In
Medical Anthropology: Contemporary Theory and Method , ed. Thomas M. Johnson and
Carolyn F . Sargent, 187–214. New York: Prager.
Cheung, Shueng-Tak. 1996. A Critical Review of Chinese Koro. Culture, Medicine and
Psychiatry, 20: 67–82.
DeSantis, L., and J. T . Thomas. 1990. The Immigrant Haitian Mother: T ranscultural Nursing
Perspective on Preventive Health Care for Children. Journal of Transcultural Nursing2(1):
2–15.
Farmer, Paul. 1994. AIDS and Accusation. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Foster, George M. 1994. Hippocrates’ Latin American Legacy: Humoral Medicine in the New
World. Langhorne: Gordon and Breach.
Green, Linda. 1998. Lived Lives and Social Suffering: Problems and Concerns in Medical
Anthropology. Medical Anthropology Quarterly, 12 (1): 3– 7.
Hahn, Robert. 1985. Culture-Bound Syndromes Unbound. Social Science and Medicine 21
(2): 165–171.
Harland, Erasmus. 1985. Skin Diseases. In Child Health in the Tropics , ed. D. Jelliffe,
183–186. London: Edward Arnold.
Jellife, Derrick B., and E. F . Patrice Jelliffe. 1985. Parasites. In Child Health in the Tropics, ed.
Jelliffe D, 110–123. London: Edward Arnold.
Kenny, Michael G. 1978. Latah: The Symbolism of a Putative Mental Disorder. Culture,
Medicine and Psychiatry, 2: 209–31.
Kleinman, Arthur. 1988. The Illness Narratives. New York: Basic Books.
Laguerre, Michel S. 1981. Haitian-Americans. In Ethnicity and Medical Care, ed. A. Harwood,
172–210. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
République d’Haïti, Département du Nord. 1995. Population totale par sexe estimée en 1995 au
niveau des differentes unités géographiques.
Pierre Minn152
1403971625ts10.qxd  29-9-06  12:40 PM  Page 152


--- PAGE 168 ---
Seyler, Daniel I. 1991. Haiti: The Economy. In The Dominican Republic and Haiti: Country
Studies, ed. R. Haggerty. Washington, DC: Federal Research Division, Library of Congress.
Sheldon. 1990. In Medical Anthropology: Contemporary Theory and Method , ed. Thomas M.
Johnson and Carolyn F . Sargent, 210. New York: Praeger.
Wiese, H. Jean C. 1976. Maternal Nutrition and Food Behavior in Haiti. Human
Organization, 35 (2): 193–200.
Wilentz, Amy. 1989. The Rainy Season: Haiti Since Duvalier. New York: T ouchstone.
W ater in Their Eyes 153
1403971625ts10.qxd  29-9-06  12:40 PM  Page 153


--- PAGE 169 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 170 ---
Chapter 10
How Houngans Use the Light 
from Distant Stars
LeGrace Benson
Qur’an and Bible traveled on the ships bound from Africa to St.-Domingue. So did
tracts of the European Enlightenment; copies of the Declaration of the Rights of Man;
abolitionist letters from the Abbot Grégoire; Christian catechisms; grimoires full of
instructions for magic rituals to insure love, good fortune, and victory. This print
material was spare and simple compared to the complex intellectual environment
carried around the minds of the people on board.
Some of the African captives chained below decks had in their minds the Qur’an,
how to read and write in Arabic, long passages of laws and poetry, the methods for
mathematically generating divinations, and the correct procedures for creating pro-
tective amulets—hatumere. Some of the sailors, especially the Bretons, had in their
minds Latin prayers, Breton didactic exhortations and images, and a range of talis-
manic notions related to the severities of their profession and their desires for love
and money. Desires for money even more than love seems to have been foremost in
the minds of the chief officers of the ship, to judge by their actions and some of their
reports. And there were the priests, their documents revealing minds full of devotion,
cruelty, incomprehension, dissolution, courage, sanctity, erudition, and ignorance.
The names of some voyagers appear on ships’ manifests: the captain and first
mate, some of the seamen, the plantation overseer, the priest come to baptize the
Africans with new names in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit.
Once on the plantation, some amanuensis inscribed the imposed names in fine
French script on the habitation inventaire du biens (inventory of goods): “Noël,”
“Minerve”; Christian words hiding the Mandinge name “Noël” knew to be his own,
the Kongo name Minerve received from her parents. “Noël” was worth 2,200 livres
to the Chavannes habitation, “Minerve” only 1,600.
1 Who knows what they were
worth to their companions? The inventories left aside any accounting for wisdom,
knowledge, and the techniques of the sacred.
1403971625ts11.qxd  29-9-06  7:11 PM  Page 155


--- PAGE 171 ---
On the ships, in the streets and markets of the ports, and on the plantations, the
people caught up in the traffic of human beings and raw products spoke with one
another, their pidgins and rapidly developing creoles, a linguistic triangulation
between owner, owned, and the daily conditions of life encountered by both. Their
several enlightenments necessarily had to be shared. Had there already been, on
board, little collusions between sailors and the cargo of captives? Both were wretched
of the earth, endangered by the sea, disease, hunger, thirst; indentured or enslaved,
their human conditions comparable though not equal. Did the sailors look the other
way if some captive had a precious burden of Qur’an? Some of the sailors were
Muslims passing as Christians: they surely would have protected the sacred objects. It
is certain that once in St.-Domingue portside, the books of magic that the Breton
sailors carried in their duffels went into circulation, quickly finding their way even
out into the forests with the maroons. What use might the sailors in turn have made
of the strong protective invocations and amulets of the Muslims? The fashioning of a
new religion using materials from African traditions, African and European forms of
Christianity, African Islam, Breton seafarers’ folklore and magic, vernacular Catholicism,
each luminous stand borrowing and giving light to the others, began on the boats and
in the ports. The New World houngans were cosmopolitans.
Material evidence for the braiding of so many strands is scant for the first century
and a half. T ropical weather and anti-superstition campaigns destroyed much. Only
toward the middle of the twentieth century when Haitian Indigenists called for new
valorizations of African heritages and of rural wisdom did there begin to be the delib-
erate photographic documentation, oral history, and preservations that allow firm
assertions. Yet certain patterns of graphic design, certain reiterated behavior elicit
queries important enough to merit study even in the absence of “answers.”
There are questions of continuity and restoration, in part a matter of narrative
strings and technical skills passed on from one person to the next, maybe as far back
as a bossal (African-born) fresh off the boat from Ibo-land, or as recent as the new
insight a manbo (priestess) passes on to her granddaughter. The formation of habits
of attention and habits of behavior results from Long Conversation in actual place
and time between and among specific individuals. Rather than being a non-observable
“collective memory” or “collective unconscious” operating in an elusive genetic
etherium, the exchanges take place between namable people and are a major means by
which they continue and transfer their degree and style of illumination.
T o call this a “Long Conversation” names only some of the processes taking
place. “Long Theater” encompasses the actions and ideas more generously, but
obscures the intimacy with which most such transfers occur. While carrying on
“conversation/theater” is absolutely crucial, the fundamental conditions upon
which this must rest are beyond as well as beneath the show-and-tell. The ground is
individual apprehension of the environment with all its possibilities and impossibil-
ities for human behavior. The conversation/theater is social. Yet, whatsoever habitu-
ations of attention and behavior result from shaping of the community present and
historical by the Long Conversation, the fundamental material—the ground stuff—
comes from singular persons, each one of whom needs to know and therefore dis-
covers where to walk safely, where to find shelter, what is safe and good to eat, where
the water is, where to rest, and where to find love and be powerful. Seeking these out
LeGrace Benson156
1403971625ts11.qxd  29-9-06  7:11 PM  Page 156


--- PAGE 172 ---
is accomplished by using senses and sensibilities; once found, the knowledge,
wisdom, or skill is secured for the single person and companions with the Long
Conversations. Habits of attention are generated in the Conversation/Theater;
attention itself is a perceptual function accomplished by one person at a time.
Objects and actions of Vodou demonstrate the reciprocity established between the
singular and the communal, creativity and continuation of the Long Conversation/
Theater.
The captives who were respected imams, Christian clergy, Yoruba or Arada or
Kongo houngans and manbos were exactly those members of a community or kingdom
who were most alert to the actual purities and dangers of a particular environment.
Their teachings, prayers, healings, and protections had to work satisfactorily in the
daily world. They had to be continuously attentive to material, plant, animal, and
human conditions and changes. The fundamental, ground content of their opera-
tions rested as much on astute gathering of information as on their spiritual compre-
hensions and received knowledge. The style of presentation and manner of operating
on behalf of a congregation or an individual petitioner might show the shaping marks
of the Long Conversation/Theater current in that particular locality and among a
particular people, but the traditional material and style had to be in resonant accord
with the immediate, real needs of a congregation. Metaphors and figures of speech
that are efficacious poetically and religiously are tied and bound to real affordances
for real behavior. The houngans know that. The drapo for Ezuli is waved about for real
love; that of Ogou for real victory. The houngans and manbos know the clients and the
environment well enough to tie each metaphoric emblem and gesture to real necessi-
ties. The imams, the houngans, the diviners, and seers may take a while to reacclimate
to a new environment as they did arriving in St.-Domingue, but fundamental
shrewdness and experience with exact and precise discriminations and detections of
the environment stands them immediately in good stead. They will use what is
familiar from old times and places, reintegrating into a present environment. Their
companions will regard them as leaders and sages.
The Long Conversation and Light from Islam
Stories from all over the Americas tell of the influence of devout Muslims, especially
those who were imams and marabouts. 2 By the time of slave trade Mende nations
already played a major role in the spread of Islamic ideas, images, and practices
throughout the elaborate trade systems of Africa. Where their trade flourished, so did
their religion and their style. Local residents in areas where they had a trade and cul-
tural hegemony are reported to have transformed histories and genealogies to show
connections with these successful people.
3 LaBelle Prussin has described how West
African centers of learning and commerce, such as Tambuctou, Djenné, and Kongo,
from thence south and west to the coasts, impressed their symbols, their ways of
ordering and arranging both time and space, their religious and domestic architec-
ture, and their religious practices upon the underlying local governances, religions,
and everyday objects and habits.
4
How HOUNGANS Use Light from Distant Stars 157
1403971625ts11.qxd  29-9-06  7:11 PM  Page 157


--- PAGE 173 ---
In Africa the Islamic Long Conversation coexisted with the cultures predating it.
West African history from the eighth century forward is one of the rise and fall and
rise again of Islamic hegemony in contest with or in assimilation with local ways. 5
The university city, Tambuctou, was a commercial nexus as well, lying as it did in the
geographically key point between sahel and savanna and on a river. Other important
transfer points developed at Chichit to the west, Gao to the east, and Djenné, Bobo
Dioulasso, and Kong to the south, a chief point of Islamic contact for Old Ghana. By
the time of Portuguese incursions, Islam and the original cults were intimately inter-
woven. So were the populations and so were the contentions between rulers of one
district and another; out-of-favor or war-captive Muslims were among the first slaves
sent to St.-Domingue from Senegal. Captives seized for slavery included a number of
impressively capable persons.
The role of imams and marabouts as advisors to rulers and as leaders of schools and
universities gave them an aura of authority in Africa that would cling to them despite
captivity. Notwithstanding their relatively small numbers and their cultural differences
from adherents of either traditional African religions or Christianity, their presence in
St.-Domingue as companions of the journey and as literate cosmopolitans with a well-
formed cultural and religious identity would have graced them on the plantations with
the prestige they held in Africa. Prestige was securely founded upon literacy, personal
discipline, command of contact languages, and their rich arcana of numerology,
astronomy, and mathematics; their insights into efficacious methods for divination
and healing. Rudely separated from the precious Qur’ans, their instruction boards,
and their mystical painted and embroidered fabrics, or having to hide the few things
they had smuggled in, they seem to have tried to re-create them.
Especially in the eighteenth century, manifests and inventories show heavy impor-
tation of Mende peoples to Hispaniola, as is related by Fouchard and others. In
Marrons du Syllabaire Fouchard notes observations as late as the twentieth century of
a continuing Muslim presence. He cites the example of a door, now lost, in the region
of Jacmel upon which Arabic signs and writing appear.
6 Thomas Madiou notes the
influence of Islam during the early uprisings as well as in the precipitating events of
the Haitian Revolution.
7 Contemporary historian Serge Fuertes attaches special sig-
nificance to Malinke (Mende) influence. 8 J. R. Emmanuel Francius Julien makes
interesting points in this regard, noting the prohibition of pork by Muslims as a sign
that the sacrifice of a pig during the proto-revolutionary Bois Caiman ceremony was
related to extreme breaking of tabu, thus indicative of the seriousness of the oath that
the revolutionaries took.
9
The imams had already been in Africa for centuries. 10 They arrived on the first
and last slave ships and put their great knowledge to the needs of survival first, then
of revolution—a jihad, one might claim.
These enslaved arrived in the New World centuries after the first Muslims to make
that landfall. Abubakri of the royal house of Mali led an expedition to what is now called
Brazil in 1312. Roger Bastide alludes to early Muslim contact in The African Religions of
Brazil.
11 The Malian colonizers may have sent emissaries to Hispaniola before the
fifteenth century, and early contacts between them and the Taino are a possibility.
The proto-revolutionary, Mackandal, whose name became synonymous with
“poison for enemies,” was not the last Muslim to cross the channel from Jamaica to
LeGrace Benson158
1403971625ts11.qxd  29-9-06  7:11 PM  Page 158


--- PAGE 174 ---
Haiti. From 1838 to 1924 planters in the British West Indies imported an estimated
half-million indentured servants from India. David Lowenthal estimates one-sixth of
those to have been Muslim.
12 While many of the indentured imports remained in
British islands, a number moved into Haiti over the decades. T oday near Cap
Haitian, there is a recently built mosque, perhaps the result of the work of a mission-
izing group active in Jamaica since earlier in the twentieth century. This group may
or may not be in close contact with another group nearby, who say they practice
“Mandingue” service rather than Vodou, and are described by their neighbors as
eating no pork and of reciting prayers each day at sunrise and sunset.
13
With so many opportunities for making a presence felt, questions arise as to why
the presence is attenuated and the evidence so discontinuous and elusive. Several cur-
rents pushed against the ship of “Imamou.” Especially vigorous were those of the
Reconquista, the anti-literacy campaigns that were waged from the beginning, the
power of the ancestors and the ancestral African faiths, and the colonial environment
of dangers, insecurities, and deprivation. These currents arrive with some of the same
tides that brought the Bretons, whether petty merchants, seafarers, or missionaries, to
St.-Domingue.
Reconquista
January of 1492 saw the final success of the reconquest of the Iberian Peninsula from
the Muslims. The Spanish crown had a papal mandate to overcome the “infidels”
wheresoever encountered. Pope Alexander VI specifically bound Christianity with
the exploration and conquest of “America.” Abdullah Hakim Quick outlines a
sequence in which Moriscos, nominally converted to Christianity, reverted to Islam
once in the new World, and actively sought to proselytize among the “Indians.” They
enjoyed enough success to motivate a series of anti-Muslim laws by King Ferdinand.
His decrees did reserve that “Moors” were not to be taken as slaves.
14 Later, in the era
of Pope Nicholas V , the French would apply the justification of religion to enslave-
ment of the Barbary Muslims, then eventually to Muslims of any provenience.
15 John
Thornton describes alliances between Europeans and West African politics, for example,
that while primarily economic in gestation and aims, attached religious fervor as
well.
16 Kongo kingdom was Christian before the Columbian expedition, and Elmina
in Old Ghana had a church dedicated to Sant’Iago (St. James the Greater, patron of
the Iberian Catholics) in 1480.
17 Christian slaves, especially those from Congo,
enjoyed preference by missionaries as catechists to other slaves.
William B. Cohen describes French colonization and slavery enterprises as having
much the same motivation as that of Spain’s Ferdinand, adding that especially in
response to events of the Counter Reformation in France “expansion was seen not
only as the expansion of the king’s domain and of the state’s wealth, but also as a mis-
sionary effort. In 1603 the French King declared that his main aim in supporting
expansion in the New World was the conversion of the Indians.”
18 Ironically the
“Indians” to be converted in St.-Domingue were either dead or hidden in maroon
enclaves in the mountains. The missionaries sent from France would encounter
How H
OUNGANS Use Light from Distant Stars 159
1403971625ts11.qxd  29-9-06  7:11 PM  Page 159


--- PAGE 175 ---
Muslim, Christian, and T raditional Religions adherents. European toleration of
Muslims and Jews during the era of Reconquista extended only to those willing to
convert, and only to about 1500. Subsequently, suppression and “purification” of
Islam continues to the latter decades of the twentieth century. Muslims in 
St.-Domingue would find it impossible to observe any of the five pillars of the faith,
except perhaps almsgiving in the form of sharing what little they had. The obligation
to make ha’j, the pilgrimage to Mecca, was beyond even a symbolic journey. The
tenacity of Islam in the face of such repressions is remarkable even as vestiges.
Anti-literacy in the Americas
Islam is missionizing and universalist, dependent upon pan-societal literacy. (In the
West African lands, as in the time of Muhammed himself and immediately thereafter,
literacy included women and girls.) In the Americas where the Muslims had to relin-
quish their books, they set about re-creating them from memory, painstakingly, for
an error was an error against Allah.
19 Colonists saw literacy in any language as con-
trary to their interests. Some clergy and religious people in St.-Domingue supported
literacy, but only the French and Latin of the Mass. T o set up ulaama—Qur’an
schools––would be exceptionally difficult. Moreover, benefits of literacy are long-
range: slave conditions required immediate response to demands from the masters
and the often terrible exigencies of the environment. Anti-literacy in fact became an
enduring condition in St.-Domingue and in Haiti.
Human speech evolved as a genetic ground-condition; reading and writing as intel-
lectual invention without any apparent genetic continuity. The mystical and esoteric
qualities that get attached to writing probably derive in part from being based in a social
contract. Literacy can by social contract be extended or withheld. In contrast, perceiving,
acting, and speaking are universal competencies. Where literacy is proscribed, orality and
theater become more fully exploited. So it was in St.-Domingue/Haiti. Slaves from
cultures where orality and theater, including music and dance, predominated had
competencies better suited to leadership in an anti-literate environment.
Symbols and representations likewise survive despite injunctions against reading
and writing. In the case of the time-consuming and complex verbal and mathemati-
cal operations needed for a true gemmatria to generate an authentic hatumere or
magic square, an imam or someone taking the place of the now absent imam could
draw a representation, something that had the look of the magical device, and fill out
the spirit and desire with hope and prayer. Complexity and depth evaporated, but the
trail where they once were remains marked.
The Endurance of the Folk Beliefs and Practices
In the plantation environment hostile to literacy, spoken, sung, acted-out, and
symbolized sensibilities came to the fore. Since needs served by the literate imams
LeGrace Benson160
1403971625ts11.qxd  29-9-06  7:11 PM  Page 160


--- PAGE 176 ---
were more pressing than they had been in Africa, the Islamic experts continued to
exercise their skills as seers, diviners, makers of protective amulets against dangers
and witchcraft, healers of animals and people; continued to be active in religious and
“magical” everyday life, developing a range of practical actions and symbols oriented
more to everyday needs than to transcendencies. The healing and divination designs
associated with them probably lingered on into the present because they were in good
accord with Fon, Ibo, Congo, and other ancient traditional practices. Evidences of
material culture from the plantation era enduring into the present reveal the probable
power of the engagement.
Pierre Pluchon cites from the letter of Jesuit missionary to the French colonies,
R. P . Mongin, a description of the sortileges of slaves who were called “marabouts,”
in which he particularly takes note of patterned belts used for protection against the
pains from beatings.
20 Such belts continue to be made in western Africa to the
present.21 The pattern on the belts sometimes directly encodes names of Allah,
sometimes only a graphic representing the positions of the names. The pattern appears
in modern Haiti without the names and on objects other than belts. Further studies of
Bizango societies (where they use binding chains, some of them claimed to be from the
slave era) may turn up related belts or other tied or tying items showing this old
Islamic pattern. Continued study of the society in the north of Haiti calling their
ceremonies “Mandinge” may also yield artifacts with Islamic protective devices.
22
The Power of the Ancestors
Reports on African religions from earliest European contacts to the present often
characterize the adherents as “worshipping ancestors.” Perhaps this error results from
the contrast of regard for ancestors and recognition of their continuing presence with
Christian practices of consignment of their dead, incommunicado, to an unknowable
Beyond: Purgatory, Heaven, or Hell. Christian’s beliefs concerning those “fallen
asleep in Christ” are complex and variable, but in general, the notion of direct com-
munication and daily contact in the dwelling, the yard or the marketplace is uncom-
mon or even proscribed. Community engagement with the ancestors is thus striking
to Christians, who denote it as “worship.” Christianity and Islam, stressing the divin-
ity of the One God, see heresy in attention to ancestors.
Yet, those Christians who venerated saints (who are, after all, ancestors); where
they invoked their assistance for guidance, protection, and healing; and especially
where there were special images, processions, and services in their honor, Christian
habits of attention could easily be assimilated into the attentive veneration of the
deceased family. The so-called worship of ancestors was practically and theologically
compatible with the notion of the communion of saints embracing those living visi-
bly or invisibly in the many mansions of Bon Dieu. The banners of the Christian
saints could make the African ancestors flutter in the breeze, releasing doubled power.
Islam, less attuned to the harmonics of societies living with the presence of their
ancestors, was less amenable to such assimilations. Instead of conversations with the
dead, or invocations to the saints, the sacred, written word of Allah as transmitted to
How H
OUNGANS Use Light from Distant Stars 161
1403971625ts11.qxd  29-9-06  7:11 PM  Page 161


--- PAGE 177 ---
Mohammed by Jabril was the ever present help in time of trouble. But the trauma of
separations not only by death but also by captivity intensified a desire to re-create and
rebind the absent back into one’s habitual attention; the Surahs were insufficient
comfort. On the other hand, slaves could be rounded up for Sunday Mass, where
they would encounter the ancestor whose Body and Blood were consumed by the
faithful. The Mass was integrated into the New World African religion, Vodou, early
on and continues to be so. Allah was a Name of God and Sacred Word; Allah was
Inconceivable Creator; not Brother and not Sacrifice.
The Power of Attention to Environmental 
Inspiritedness
Another major misperception of African religious practices on the part of Europeans
was the notion that objects in the environment—trees, animals, rivers, thunder were
“worshipped”; it is called “animism” to this day. Perceiving the world with its myriad
transformations and metabolisms, traditional attitudes throughout sub-Saharan
Africa recognized Being-existence as lively Presence in all things. With such a per-
ception, each thing is understood as an actual or potential mediator or intermediator
of forces and tensions of the environment. While sacredness of the created environ-
ment is adumbrated in T orah, Bible, and Qur’an, the West African traditions devote
far greater attentiveness to the inspiritedness of water, tree and grain, beast, sun and
storm. St. Francis of Asissi and T eilhard de Chardin among Christians are notable
exceptions to the trend. Both Islam and Christendom would turn their attention to
discerning order and causality as means of explanation, prediction, and control. This
orientation of attention contrasts with that focused upon living in harmony with the
forces present in the world.
In St.-Domingue/Haiti, the various styles of African sensibilities would have been
resonant with Taino belief and practice. Maroons fleeing into forests would have found
a new but compatible mode of attending to, understanding, and coexisting with the an
deyò (back-country) environment. The oldest of the African habits of attention would
have been a more readily useful and fortunate legacy in such circumstances.
Yet the Imams’ Signs Survived
Despite all pressures to the contrary, the presence of the imams is still fleetingly
visible. Writing as mystical power in itself, coupled with the power of the Names of
Allah and inscriptions in magical diagrams of His Sacred Words, came to be appreciated
as efficacious. The protective belt seen by the Jesuit exemplifies a common practice.
Even if the belts and amulets themselves disappeared in tropical damp and the
bonfires of the suppressions, the design devices persisted.
The Flagg Collection of Haitian Art of the Milwaukee Art Museum includes a
painting by Valcin, “Ceremonie.” It depicts a Vodou service taking place on what
LeGrace Benson162
1403971625ts11.qxd  29-9-06  7:11 PM  Page 162


--- PAGE 178 ---
appears to be a tiled floor, which may not “mean” floor at all since contact with the
earth is essential for the ceremonies. On the checkered tiles is a vèvè—one of the
sacred signs drawn at the beginning of each Vodou ceremony. The grounding of this
painting thus really has two sets of sacred symbols, one the tiling, the other the vèvè.
Divinatory technique in West Africa involves such a checkered pattern: the painting
alerts us to look for its source and implications.
An example far from Haiti can illustrate how such a drawn device implicates
action in space and time. A flat, sand-painted mandala of Namgyal Monastery,
extrapolated by Cornell computer programmers, reveals a dimensional sacred temple
mountain, the site of particular spiritual events, and the stage setting for playing out
the balance and harmonization of cosmic forces.
23 In Tibet, as in Haiti, divination,
more than a means for telling a future, is a means of bringing spiritual and earthly
forces into proper balance and harmony. Karen McCarthy Brown has extensively
analyzed cosmic forces similarly encoded in vèvè.
24
The Valcin painting and the mandala each exemplify signs used to point to vast,
complicated events and to relationships between ordinary humans and transcendent
forces observed to work on and through them. In the Haitian example, the checkered
pattern is almost certainly more than just a stylish background. It looks like the famil-
iar game board, which is in turn a destiny board: the magic squares of Islamic
divination.
25 It is these squares that appear on the drapo—the Vodou ceremony
banners. Like the game of chess from which they may ultimately descend, they are
symbols for and ground of warfare. They are the layout for the Great Battle: literally,
figuratively, and spiritually the battle of life against death; against that shadow of
death, sickness; against death’s other terrible shadow, failed love.
Senegalese and Malian imams or marabouts were among the first arrivals in 
St.-Domingue and may have been the first “peoples’ priests” after those of the Taino.
They functioned in Africa and presumably in Diaspora as teachers, advisors, healers,
diviners, and makers of amulets, in each of these operations continuing their African
practice of using designs from al-shah mat, the game of chess (al-shah mat /H11005shah is
dead; hence checkmate, the king is dead). The design was a checkmate against ene-
mies. It is highly likely that the functions of the magic destiny squares, known well to
the earliest slaves, became wholly subsumed into the fabric of Vodou. The checkered
pattern along with certain other arcane Islamic signs, the khawatim, appear in many
vèvè and (much) later in drapo. Such drapo perpetuate tacit knowledge (from the
Long Conversation/Theater) of the destiny squares of the imams. T o swing and rip-
ple the banners within a sacred space, to wrap up in them as though in armor, is to
pass their protective force against death and its two shadows into the bearers and into
the congregation.
Anna Wexler in “The Artistry of a Haitian Vodou Flagmaker,” describes the
houngan’s process of designing, executing, and using the drapo in ceremonies.
Religiously devoted attention to detail secures the efficacy of the flags. The circum-
stances of conceiving, making, and using are strikingly similar to those reported of
imams and marabouts of West Africa, making their talismans and divinations over
matters of life and death. Wexler reports deep mediations and prayers before any
work is begun. She relates, “As active presences during important ceremonies, the
flags extend the vigilance of the houngan or manbo (female priest).”
26 Delores
How HOUNGANS Use Light from Distant Stars 163
1403971625ts11.qxd  29-9-06  7:11 PM  Page 163


--- PAGE 179 ---
Yonkers corroborates: “Carrying and caring for the expensive banners involves
considerable knowledge and responsibility. They are believed to possess a magical
power which can be activated in the movements of the ritual and must be revitalized
by being stored furled in closed shrines, leaning upon the altar when not in use.”
27
Reverence for the drapo is close to the Islamic belief that writing and embroidery in
and of themselves hold spiritual power. Is this a continuation of a Long Conversation
about proper action to insure efficacy? Unmistakably it shows a link between graphic
symbol and physical actions so distinctive to Vodou.
Yonkers emphasizes that “the military tone of the use of the flags in vodoun cere-
monies is implicit. When the paired figures appear so suddenly and so aggressively,
they flank the sword of Ogun [who is also St.-Jacques Majeur] ...D efender of the
besieged, representing the ideals of justice and liberty, his representatives direct the
movements of the entourage in a choreographed ballet of blade and fabric.”
28 In
“Sacred Banners and the Divine Calvary Charge,” Patrick Polk calls attention to the
strong resemblance of some drapo to banners of Napoleon’s army, citing the latter as
a probable source for many of the devices and emblems of the former.
29 While
Yonkers and Polk both rightly emphasize the often bellicose strivings that impel par-
ticipants in a ceremony, the war game of chess may move us deeper into both
Napoleon’s territory and the universe of Vodou discourse, informed by Islamic Long
Conversations.
When the Arabs conquered Persia, they picked up the game of chatrang in which
winning was al-shah mat (the king is dead). This phrase became Sheik mate, check
mate, échec. In the centuries of their domination of North Africa, a period coinciding
with the spread of Islam, Arabs carried the game along with their religion across the
Mzab and Magreb, down to Tambuctou, and from there into Kong Goa, Djenné,
perhaps eventually even as far as the Ghanaian port city Elmina—everywhere there
was Muslim trade and hegemony. The Moors took their game into Iberia, al-andalus.
There are drawings in the Al-hambra palace of people playing the game. The check-
ered board and its playing pieces came to appear on European battle flags and coats
of arms, perhaps for some of the same reasons these emblems would later appear on
Vodou flags. The magic square version begins to appear also in alchemy and other
books of esoterica. The visual documentation available from the sahel and savanna
and south indicates its use primarily for protection, healing, and assuring victory. Yet,
in western Africa, where present evidence ties it to victories and healings, there is an
old tradition of playing the game. In Ghana, today, men are reported to play chess
“for hours, not even stopping to eat.”
30 The Asofo regimental flags from the era when
Ghana was a British colony show the checkered pattern in a number of interesting
deployments, one of which has a British lion playing chess with a Ghanaian leopard,
possibly related to a proverb expecting eventual victory for the leopard.
31 One of the
Asofo banners in a traveling exhibition depicts al-Burak. In this case the Islamic influ-
ence is unmistakable, as this beautiful mare with the face and streaming hair of a
woman is the steed who carried Muhammed to the Seventh Heaven in the Night
Journey. She will appear in Haiti.
A Qur’an board now in the Brooklyn Museum
32 shows the checkered pattern
flanked by battle tents, thus underscoring the association of the pattern with warfare,
and by metaphoric extension, any agonic contest. It is reasonable to conjecture a
LeGrace Benson164
1403971625ts11.qxd  29-9-06  7:11 PM  Page 164


--- PAGE 180 ---
more than coincidental parallel between such an image and St.-Jacques/Ogun
caracoling his white charger over or within a checkered field. Such a drapo, devised
out of mediations and dreams of a Vodou houngan, appears for certain in its shining
sequined version only after 1960, and in urban areas. But there are much earlier
examples of modest painted drapo that show the patterns of the magic squares and
the hatumere amulet designs. Erika Bourguinon collected two such patterns during
field work in rural Haiti in the late 1940s and in the 1950s.
33
The chessboard layout was an excellent war game field and instrument for divina-
tion because the possible moves on the bicolored board are factorially large. In the
medieval era the board and its pieces served to encode secret messages. The pattern
and its variants, lozengy (diamond) and fusilly (elongated diamond) appeared on
European war banners and on the costume of Harlequin. In Africa the three patterns
became ubiquitous, often but not always associated with Islamicization.
Of the pattern and its variants J. E. Cirlot has written of how they express duality
and contest of counterpoised dynamic forces. “It is significant,” he writes, “that the
costume of Harlequin (a chthonian deity) is actually made up of lozenges, which
proves beyond a doubt that the harlequin is related to the gods of destiny.”
34 This
intriguing claim parallels the use of the pattern in, for example, the Kufulo subgroup
of Islamicized Senufo of Côte d’Ivoire where the “harlequin” costume clothes dancers
for the funeral of blacksmiths. The patron deity for blacksmiths in African lands as
well as in St.-Domingue/Haiti is Ogun. In Haiti variations of the pattern appear on
recent banners for Ogun/St.-Jacques, but much earlier on vèvè for the lwa (spirit)
Azaka Médé. But we run ahead of the story.
Henry Gough and James Parker, writing in 1894, suggested that the checkered
pattern might have come from a counting board, called a “chess,” widely used in
English inns and pubs.
35 This anachronistic supposition reveals a numerical function
associated with the pattern from its beginnings. Islamic mystics, by a process called
“gemmatria,” allied numbers and letters to the pattern so that either could be added
or aggregated in all directions, yielding the names of Allah. The gemmatria became
further related to astrology and alchemy.
People throughout western Africa regarded both writing and calculation as mysti-
cal, portentous acts. Destiny, divined by means of these was tied to financial matters,
to health of people and cattle, and to the fortunes and misfortunes of love. The board
and its games and divinations had implications for the essential facts of life. Little
wonder then that the pattern and its variants appeared and continue to appear in a
wide range of protective and good fortune objects. The enduring regard for its power
is evidenced in power signs currently in use in Africa and wheresoever Africans and
their descendants are in diaspora. Maude Wahlman reports a quilt made by Arester
Earl of Georgia, United States of America, called a “mojo” quilt. It consists of small
squares in contrasting colors, aggregated in larger squares in turn aggregated into the
square quilt.
36 She discusses mojo bags, often used as amulets, and containing various
herbs and other substances to ward off evil or attract good fortune. This is similar to
Azaka Médé’s checkered bag and its contents. These would sometimes have a nine-
piece mojo square painted on the outside, sometimes the outline of a hand. Eli Leon
asserts that most block-style quilts of America relate back to African rather than
European models.
37 Perhaps the ultimate African source is the magic squares/destiny
How HOUNGANS Use Light from Distant Stars 165
1403971625ts11.qxd  29-9-06  7:11 PM  Page 165


--- PAGE 181 ---
game. The checkered pattern appeared frequently in British heraldic devices, yet
seems to have been ignored by quilters there and in the American colonies. A possi-
ble reason for this lies in the accustomed use of the pattern on the one hand to denote
families of the peerage, and on the other to invoke and control great forces imping-
ing upon ordinary life. The parallels with aid, destiny, and even the healing herbs
contained in the check-marked sack of Azaka is strongly suggestive of the actuality of
a Long Conversation continuing throughout the African diaspora.
Susan Tselos notes that borders of squares and lozenges only begin to appear on
Vodou drapo around the late 1960s at the same time sequins became plentifully avail-
able. She surmises that the attention given these borders was “possibly a reflection of
the ‘op art’ and graphic textile designs so popular in the United States and Europe at
the time.”
38 Flags older than the 1930s are extremely rare, in part due to the ravages
of the anti-superstitions campaigns, and Tselos documents the change in those
remaining from no borders to small ones to those that are wide and richly colored.
The object described by Drouin de Bercy in the late eighteenth century, which was a
large cloth sprinkled with blood, feathers, and the talons of birds may have been an
early version of drapo.
39 Drapo made after 1960 are “cooler” in their materials, and
Tselos’s comparison with contemporaneous garment industry chic is appropriate on
several counts. This was a period when drapo began to be made for sale, not simply
for ritual, and when market factors such as the tastes of tourists began to exert influ-
ence.
40 Yet some of the flags continued to be made by houngans for Vodou cere-
monies, including some that later came up for sale in the art market. The patterns
perhaps look like “op art” in the same way and for some of the same reasons the lwa
Ezuli looks like Our Lady of Perpetual Help.
Let us catch sight again of Azaka’s checkered straw sack filled with healing herbs
to follow him back into an an deyò of time and place. In photographs made in the
1930s in rural (an deyò) districts by Courlander, Herskovits, Deren, and others, the
magic squares, destiny squares, mojo squares—whatsoever they may be called––appear
on the vèvè for Azaka Médé himself, Bossou, Ezuli, Ogou Badagris, Gran Bois, and
Gedé the brother of Azaka.
41 Milo Rigaud in Secrets of Voodoo illustrates a quadrille
heart of Ezuli, centered in a pentangle (seal of Solomon in both Islam and
Freemasonry) within a square, the result looking much like a hatumere-Islamic
amulet. Rigaud translates the incantation associated with it as “Sakpata /H11005
Impurity.”
42 Sakpata is the spirit (some say healer) of smallpox encountered in
western African lands. The Haitian version suggests yet another exchange in the Long
Conversations. Unpublished designs photographed by Herskovits also show a
houngan drawing a vèvè around a bier, in which khawatim appear, again designs of
some antiquity, of Islamic provenience, and associated with life and death matters.
43
In the post-United States Occupation of Haiti there was an energetic refocus of
attention away from French heritage coupled with counterreaction to the perceived
racism of the Marines. Educated urbanites began to pay attention to the an deyò
African traditions of the rural people, “Ayiti T oma.” Some ancient African patterns
for drapo and other ritual objects survived out in the an deyò, and were at hand to
be used. In western Africa there are war shields and weapons marked with
“arabesques” that only appear to be writing, an inscription representing writing.
44
LeGrace Benson166
1403971625ts11.qxd  29-9-06  7:11 PM  Page 166


--- PAGE 182 ---
Similarly, the squares and lozenges of Vodou drapo and vèvè could be representations
of the quadrilles of the Qur’an boards and amulets: outward and visible signs to
invoke an inward and spiritual presence. The houngan-drapo artist, Clotaire Bazile,
said of his wide, multicolored borders surrounding Ogun/St.-Jacques, “Oh, we’ve
always done it that way.”
45 He went on to say that he dreamed the designs before
he drew them out on cloth. Bazile’s designs are distinctive, as are those of other
skilled artist-houngans, yet they are drawn from old times, and in a process that is
entirely comparable to the procedures used by the imams and marabouts to create
an amulet or a divination. The harmonies of the drapo made in this way are them-
selves signs of intent of good destinies, to be understood as implying time and
space related to a larger cosmology. The habits of attention are profound and
ancient. In some ways this parallels glossolalia which sound like language but have
no grammar or syntax, yet are understood to be inspirited in ways similar to the
inspiritedness of scriptures or spoken ritual formulae. Someone thoroughly famil-
iar with the langaj of Vodou ceremonies might listen attentively for Arabic or
pseudo-Arabic vocables. “Pater noster in coeli . . .” or “Ave, Maria, gratia
plena . . .” as well as the Aramaic phrase from the New T estament, “Lama sah-bha-
k-than-ni,” are reported. So are “ar-ch-allah” and “ku-m-bha-lah-dya.”
46 “Allou
akbar” is clearly sung in the Mandingo ceremony Rénald Clérismé recorded in the
north of Haiti in 1997.
47
Continuities from Islamic West Africa were probably first transposed from
amulets such as the belt seen by Mongin, directly in the process of invention of cer-
tain of the vèvè. The seven signs of the khawatim may have moved from the amulets
to the Vodou signs in the same way and at the same time. The khawatim “are myste-
rious marks said to represent the excellent names” or symbols of God. Only the first
sign, the pentacle, appears to be understood: it is known as the seal of King
Solomon.
48 The pentacle appears in some old photographs of vèvè as well as on mod-
ern drapo. Djinka cloths discussed in several books on African Islamic art, including
those by Bravmann and Prussin, show both the checkered patterns including those
crossed with the names of Allah or pseudo-writing in the same mode, as well as the
pentacle and other khawatim. Their overall arrangements are highly similar to many
of the drapo . A series of photographs by Herskovits taken near Mirabalais show a
houngan making a funeral vèvè that includes the seventh of the khawatim signs.
49
Such design arrangements appear along with certain Hebrew phrases in the grimoire
and books of alchemy, later in the handbooks of Freemasonry. (The role of
Freemasonry in the Haitian Revolution and subsequent history is well recognized.)
These symbols, then, are deeply integrated with one another, are intimately bound
into matters of life and death and with the destiny of independence. Where such
devices were similar to the banners of the French army, they could be easily conflated.
Sapping power from an enemy by using his own symbols is a common strategy.
Might it be said that the uprising slaves made mojo banners in the face of
Napoleon? Dessalines had Catherine Flon make the first Haitian flag—the most
important drapo in any Vodou hounfo—from the deliberately torn French banner.
Dessalines presented it on the feast of his patron lwa, Allou-mandia. Was that a mojo
action too?
How H
OUNGANS Use Light from Distant Stars 167
1403971625ts11.qxd  29-9-06  7:11 PM  Page 167


--- PAGE 183 ---
The Long Conversations and the 
Light from Brittany
The barque of Agwe sails into port. Just as all the participants in the slave and raw
materials trade coexisted on the trans-Atlantic ships, so too do they coexist on the
drapo, the vèvè, the hounfoobjects and the services for the Kreyol lwa, Agwe. The mod-
ern drapo for the lwa typically feature a ship, often a sailing vessel, on whose side is
written “Imamou.” This Islamic word, written in Roman letters, signals the presence
of a spiritual leader. It remains to be discovered when the word came to be written in
a “foreign” orthography, or even when the first such drapo might have been fashioned.
It is possible the writing came to Haiti with Muslims arriving in the late nineteenth
century from the British West Indies. The vèvè probably predate the drapo, and some
of them show the checkered pattern in addition to or instead of the word. The very
earliest sign of the lwa may have appeared in Vodou hounfo; a small model ship sus-
pended from the roof in a position near the poto mitan, the central pillar around which
the sacred signs are written, ritual objects placed, and the ceremony circulates.
The ship would have been a highly charged symbolic object especially for those
who had endured the Middle Passage. It was charged intensely for Breton seafarers,
or for any who make their way in life over the waters. In Breton coastland chapels
there is nearly always a model sailing vessel suspended from the ceiling or the rood-
beam in close proximity to the chancel and altar. The antiquity of the practice is evi-
dent in the styles of the miniatures. Portuguese chapels often have such model ships,
placed in the same way. Such votive ships may well have appeared in the numerous
Christian chapels founded along the western African coasts. It is likely that mission
churches in Cap Français (now Cap Haïtien), Port-au-Prince, St.-Marc, and other
port cities could have included such votives.
50 An old vèvè for Ibo Lele, a lwa from
Africa’s Ibo people, used for funerals, depicts a ship as well, echoing this mortal sig-
nificance. The Ibo were famous in colonial times for committing suicide rather than
submitting to slavedom.
Not only would the ship be highly charged, but the stories and legends told would
be as well, thus bringing up the matter of Agwe’s consort, the Ezuli who takes the per-
sona of Lasirenn. She is the mermaid, a figure that appears in African sea lore only
after European arrival. In Brittany the famous mermaid is Arhes, the princess who
disobeyed her father, the King of Is, by giving the royal keys to her diabolical lover,
causing the entire city to sink into the Atlantic. Along this seismically active littoral,
there is indeed a city that subsided, probably in Roman times, as there is a Roman
road leading out into the ocean toward the site. Arhes appears in stone on the cornice
of the parish church at Sizun, a look-alike of Lasirenn. It is Lasirenn who leads the
faithful dead down under the sea to the mystical Lan Giné, sacred Guinea, the holy
African homeland. (“Lan” is usually translated as a variant of “nan,” Kreyol for “in”
or “within.” In Breton, “lan” means “holy” or “sacred,” and the possibility that in this
particular phrase it carries that meaning should be considered.)
Images of the ships, their prow ornaments, and their chains, the images and sto-
ries of the sea and of mysterious postmortem cities waiting to receive the faithful dead
into the palaces of Is or Lan’ Giné; the Long Conversation of Breton sailors telling of
LeGrace Benson168
1403971625ts11.qxd  29-9-06  7:11 PM  Page 168


--- PAGE 184 ---
Arhes the mermaid who sinks an entire city into the waters joins the actualities of awe
and dread on the high seas; joins with the hope of return to the African homelands,
down under the sea where Lasirenn will lead the dead to Agwe’s holy kingdom. Pagan
Arhes smiles down upon the Catholic faithful entering their church in Sizun. Agwe’s
sacred boat, “Imamou” and Lasirenn, or Ibo Lele, picked out in sequins, glitter sparks
of light from Brittany, Mali and Ibo-land into a Vodou ceremony.
There are other snatches from the Breton Long Conversations and Theater; the
heart, for example. The heart may be the oldest of all poetic synecdoches, standing
easily for all of life, for the excitement of love, for the soul and spirit of a person. The
“heart” shape, a fairly late graphic symbol bearing only slight resemblance to its
anatomical referent, is the sign of the preeminent female lwa, Ezuli (or Erzulie). Not
a symbol among Africans at the time of the Slave T rade, it probably came to Haiti in
the duffels of sailors and the trunks of missionaries.
By the time of the T rade, images of the Sacred Heart of Jesus and the Immaculate
Heart of Mary were to be found all over Europe, in churches and homes, and peo-
ple carried them about as souvenirs. St. Marguerite-Mary Alocoque saw visions of
the Sacred Heart of Jesus from 1673 to 1675, and a cult of the image was promoted
by the Jesuits, eventually with papal approval in 1765. This Counter Reformation
image elaborated upon hearts already current in Europe, including in books of
alchemy. Anne Sauvy in Le miroir du coeur calls attention to its use in fifteenth-
century images of Venus, like Ezuli, associated with love, and in playing cards, used
for divination as well as gaming. Authorities forbade the use of anatomically correct
hearts as too explicitly gory.
51 Contemporaneous example of the sacred hearts of
Jesus or Mary range from a simple “heart” shape to depictions of its piercing by
up to seven swords or punctured with a wreath of thorns, sometimes flaming,
sometimes bleeding.
In Brittany the image of the heart became one of the most widely used of all
images, especially in popular set of visual aids to the instruction of the faithful.
Unusually, the laity themselves received instruction in using the posters to spread the
instruction to their neighbors. Sauvy’s book documents and explains how Michel
LeNobletz devised the set of “moralised” heart images and promulgated them
throughout Brittany. Remarkably durable, the images, as Sauvy shows, are in use in
modernized versions in mission stations around the world as late as mid-twentieth
century. The heart is sometimes shown surmounted by the face of a beautiful woman.
Sometimes it includes implements of the Passion of Christ, and sometimes the ani-
mal emblems of the seven deadly sins. While none of the images shows the quadrille
that frequently appears on the heart for Ezuli in Haiti, many are banded horizontally,
indicating the Christian’s progress to higher and higher states of goodness and
moral virtue.
The images would have come into Haiti via the Breton sailors, instructed in their
parishes by means of LeNobletz’s images. It would have come in with Breton priests
and religious as part of their teaching materials, or remade from memory once in the
mission. It may have come quite early in the case of the sailors, later in the case of
mission schools. Upon independence, Haiti was pariah in the Catholic Church, yet
there were missions there, many of them Breton. Formal missions from the Brothers
of Christian Instruction from the Grand Séminaire d’Haiti in Lampaul-Guimiliau in
How H
OUNGANS Use Light from Distant Stars 169
1403971625ts11.qxd  29-9-06  7:11 PM  Page 169


--- PAGE 185 ---
Finistère came later. The Concordat was signed with the Papal See in 1860, and the
second archbishop of Port-au-Prince (effectively of all Haiti) appointed shortly after,
was the renowned Breton priest, Alexis-Jean-Marie Guilloux. T rained in Brittany, he
was a great admirer of the work of Michel LeNobletz.
52 Considering the archbishop’s
concern for instruction and the founding of schools, it would be surprising not to
find the LeNobletz images in all the Breton missions of Haiti by the late nineteenth
century and into the twentieth.
Evidence that this is the case appears not only in the banners of Ezuli, but
perhaps more indicatively in the paintings of the artist Préfète Duffaut who taught
in his early youth at the Jacmel mission of the Breton Brothers of Christian
Instruction. In an interview in 1996,
53 Duffaut was evasive about the source of his
images, claiming, as he had to others, that he dreamed them or had visions of them
and then he painted. What is the source for the dream images? Duffaut saw pictures
at school. His paintings show precise elements that are features of the Breton mor-
alized hearts. In one work from the 1950s, a woman who is probably at once the
Virgin Mary and Ezuli stands upon a heart. Attached to it are instruments of Vodou
and of the Passion of Christ. In the background of another painting is a Breton
church of the sort not built in Jacmel, but appearing often in the moralized heart
posters. Parallels abound, including rays streaming from the hands of Ezuli/Mary
like those seen on images of Our Lady of Carmel or Our Lady of the Miraculous
Medal. Several of Duffaut’s later works show a similar woman, but this time draw-
ing into her hands all the strands of a great web. She is Anansi, that trickster from
the Akan people whose stories are in the Long Conversation of Diaspora people
from Atlanta to Caracas.
The Breton priests especially may have brought their regional festival, the
Pardons, to Haiti. Most parishes in Haiti have processions at special times of the year,
but the Pardons have distinctive features that may have been taken up into Vodou. A
Pardon service will include a salute of the banners to the four points of the compass,
perhaps a vestige of the Long Conversation with the solstice and equinox services of
the Druids. This is followed by the “kissing” of the banners with the crucifix around
the compass points of the plaza in front of the church. Later there is a procession
into the fields along stations of penance and forgiveness, or similarly toward the sea
if the parish church lies shoreside. The orientation, the kissing of the banners, and the
procession into the environment strongly parallel certain features of particular types
of Vodou services, as does the use of splendid banners integral to the ceremony. (In
Brittany too embroidery was held to be a sacred art, and Breton religious taught
Haitian schoolgirls how to do the stitches.) In former times, the Pardon procession
route might feature an elaborate “carpet” made of flower petals worked into a design
of symbolic significance. Like the vèvè, and like the sand mandala of the Buddhists,
it was meant to be walked upon, thus obliterated, by the faithful. The custom seems
to have disappeared in Brittany, but in Haiti it may still be seen. As late as 1991, in
Aquin (one of the parishes especially designated by Archbishop Guilloux for educa-
tional mission services) for the feast of Corpus Christi the youth of the parish created
a design of flower petals depicting the Sacred Heart of Jesus on floor in front of a side
altar. Had it appeared in a Vodou hounfo, it would have been immediately taken for
a vèvè for Ezuli Dantor.
LeGrace Benson170
1403971625ts11.qxd  29-9-06  7:11 PM  Page 170


--- PAGE 186 ---
Breton and Muslim Long Conversations Tied
The Imamou of Agwe is one of several bindings of Breton and Islamic images and
those of even older religious sensibilities. The sacred tree provides an example. Pre-
Christian Bretons were mostly Druids, according primary significance to solar events,
water sources, and trees. The sensibility is well grounded in environmental realism.
Likewise, many traditional African religions held this set of worldly circumstances
and objects to be paramount. In each case, the older habit of attention lies under the
newer ones brought in on the one hand by Christians, on the other by Muslims.
(There is a degree of traceable Moorish influence in Brittany as well, but that is
another story.) The tree is taken up into West African Muslim practice, a sacred tree
being a prominent feature of many Islamicized villages, and of certain graveyards.
Minarets there usually include tree branches projecting from their surfaces, and a tree
branch will be planted with each departed person, practices apparently borrowed
from religions predating Islam and continuing as an undergirding.
54 In Brittany cer-
tain trees were honored from the time of the Druids, and continue to have certain
mystical aura today. In Haiti they cut off ends of branches to allow free range to spirits,
and tell that certain trees are the resting place of the powerful African lwa, Danbahlla.
The motif of a sacred tree, including the national tree, the royal palm, is one of the
most frequent of all Haitian painting, going back to works done in the first years of
the Haitian Republic up until and including the present. It is a complex Kreyol motif
with multiple penumbras from Africa, multiples from Brittany. At the time of the
Haitian Revolution, the T ree of Liberty was an emblem of the people of France, and
there was a counter emblem in Brittany, where liberty was seen by some as liberty
from any French government, Royal or Republican.
55
In Dieu dans le vaudou Haïtien , Laënnec Hurbon discusses the “dialectic of life
and death around the symbol of the tree.” He cites the force of the tree as a ubiqui-
tous symbol that conjoins the potency of creation and its destruction, of chaos and
order—a prevalent motif in Haitian life, literature, and religion.
56 The tale is told
(and argued) that General Pétion, along with Dessalines, one of the heroes of the
Haitian Revolution, insisted that the flag of the new country would include on
its blazon the tree of liberty, the royal palm, which was the device symbolizing also his
patron lwa, Aizan. Aizan, a female lwa associated with crops and with markets, is
depicted as an older woman. It is she whose palm branches are shredded to cover the
new initiates to Vodou, the hounsi kanzo. The historical Aizan was a powerful dowa-
ger queen who secured a large territory for her sons. In Haiti she came to be mare-tied
to St. Anne, the grandmother of Jesus Christ and patron of an independent Brittany.
Old feasts of St. Anne include processions with green branches, an event depicted in
Haitian paintings.
Herskovits photographed services of offerings to trees, services observed in the
present. Many Haitian paintings that depict Vodou services will include a tree with
signs at its base, and those representing healings will often show the sick person being
aided at the base of such a tree. A postcard-sized painting by J. C. Auguste done
sometime before 1984 to be sold in the museum shop of the Musée d’Art of the
College St.-Pierre in Port-au-Prince may be a version of such a healing. A hounsi
How H
OUNGANS Use Light from Distant Stars 171
1403971625ts11.qxd  29-9-06  7:11 PM  Page 171


--- PAGE 187 ---
seated by a tree on the right raises her arms in supplication. The tree is devoid of any
leaves and the ends of its branches are cut. At the far left is an assotor, the largest of
the Vodou ceremonial drums. Between assotor and hounsi rides a magnificent steed,
half woman, her hair streaming in the wind. She carries a sword in her right hand and
flaming scales of justice in the other. Around her neck is a Christian cross. That is a
strange detail, for otherwise this appears to be not a Christian figure at all, but al-
Burak, she who carried the Prophet Muhammed to the highest heaven. In Haiti
many luminous strands come together in mutual illumination.
The drapo with checkered patterns, the power points that so closely resemble
Islamic khawatim, the figures of Christian saints that are at the same time figures of
Kongo, Ibo, Yoruba, Mende, Akan deities and heroes are fascinating material evidence
of the Long Conversations, and also of another complex human equation: the cre-
ativity of the maker of objects, theater, songs that comprise the Long Conversations.
It is the makers, the artists, who select the materials, the images, the styles. Moreau
de St.-Mery’s often cited descriptions of the slaves dancing around their “King” and
“Queen” with brightly colored scarves aflutter is a theater without precedence in the
European world. These slave artists had limited materials. They lived under repres-
sion. In the face of deprivation they created a visibility for their most cherished tra-
ditions out of new materials to suit the new condition. From slave times forward,
military banners from Napoleon, op art from Seventh Avenue, Islamic magic squares,
and Breton seafarers magic they took and take whatever is useful to reshape for
purposes that suit the moment and the present companions, living and dead.
Notes
A substantial portion of the paper is based upon field observations in Haiti, Brittany and west-
ern Africa; review of film and photographic documents; and interviews with artists, houngans,
dancers, historians, curators, and gallery directors in Haiti from 1981 to 1997.
1. Boite T201 Archives Nationales, Paris, France. (These archives are now in Archives d’Outre
Mer, Aix-en Provence.)
2. See, e.g., T erry Alford, Prince Among Slaves (New York: Oxford University Press, 1977).
Alford tells the story of Abd al-Rahman, son of a Fulbe ruler, sold into slavery in 1788,
impressive to both fellow slaves and to owners.
3. M. Elfasi, ed., General History of Africa (London: Heineman, UNESCO, University of
California Press, 1988), 2:112–115.
4. LaBelle Prussin, Hatumere: Islamic Design in West Africa(Berkeley and Los Angeles, CA and
London: University of California Press, 1986).
5. Anonymous, multiple authors, “Colloque sur Religions,” in Presence Africaine (Abidjan
and Paris: Editions Présence Africaine, 1961), 62.
6. See Jean Fouchard, Marrons du Syllabaire (Port-au-Prince: Editions Henri Deschamps,
1988), 22. On page 20, he cites early observations of slaves making ink and finding scraps
of paper or even palm leaves to write down phrases that were then venerated. The phrases
were most likely from the Qur’an. They could also have included magic squares, hatumere
and khawatim.
7. Thomas Madiou, Histoire d’ Haiti T ome I; 1492–1799 (1847; repr., Port-au-Prince:
Editions Henri Deschamps, 1989). See especially I:35.
LeGrace Benson172
1403971625ts11.qxd  29-9-06  7:11 PM  Page 172


--- PAGE 188 ---
8. Serge Fuertes, Wol Vodou nan Bwa Kaiman(Ottawa: Kawonabo, 1992).
9. J. R. Emmanuel Francius Julien, La Cérémonie du Bois Caiman (Port-au-Prince: Editions
l’Ordre Nouveau, 1991), see 58, “Témoignage de Dédée Magritt,” a recollection by a wit-
ness to the ceremony.
10. See Jean Fouchard, “Les Negres Islamistes,” in Marrons du Syllabaire; Jean Fouchard, “Les
Origines Africaines de l’Homme Haïtien,” in La Nouvelle Revue du Monde Noir (Port-au-
Prince: L ’Institut d’Etudes et de Recherches Africaines d’Haiti, 1986), vol. 1, no.1,
181–223; La Merengue, danse nationale d’Haïti (Port-au-Prince: Editions Henri
Deschamps, 1988). On pages 78–80 he notes the importance of thousands of slaves
brought in from the eastern coasts and the island of Madagascar, attributing the name of
Haiti’s national dance to their language. Fouchard does not mention their Islamicization
in this passage, but the Arab-Islamic presence along that coast was early and durable.
11. Roger Bastide, trans. Helen Sebba, The African Religions of Brazil ([Baltimore and
London:Johns Hopkins University Press, 1978], originally published as Les Religions Afro-
Brésiliennes: Contributions à une sociologie des interpénétrations de civilisations[Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France, 1960]). See especially chapter 7, “Black Islam in Brazil.”
12. David Lowenthal, West Indian Societies (London: Oxford University Press, 1972), 145.
Cited in Abdullah Hakim Quick, Deeper Roots: Muslims in the Caribbean Before Columbus
to the Present (Nassau, Bahamas and London: Association of Islamic Communities in the
Caribbean and Latin America [AICCLA], 1990), 33.
13. The information concerning dietary prohibitions and the twice-daily ritual prayers comes
from Donald Cosentino, in a conversation corroborating ideas that the Muslim influence
might be more extensive in Haiti than had been supposed. Personal communication,
October 1994. For further corroboration of this presence see below Dr. Rénald Clérismé,
untitled, unpublished video documentation of Mandingue ceremony for deceased, taken
near Cap Haitian, 1997, videocassette.
14. Quick, Deeper Roots , 21–22.
15. Ibid.
16. John Thornton, Africa and Africans in the Making of the Atlantic World 1400–1680
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992), 25.
17. Noel Q. King, African Cosmos: An Introduction to Religion in Africa (Belmont,
CA: Wadsworth Publishing Company, 1986), 90.
18. William B. Cohen, The French Encounters with Africans: White Response to Blacks
1530–1880 (Bloomington and London: Indiana University Press, 1980), 42–47.
19. There is inspiring, even touching, evidence from all over the Americas, including
St. Domingue of Islamic captives reciting surahs by heart even years after captivity, and in
face of severest repressions and strongest exhortations to convert to Christianity. See
Fouchard, Marrons du Syllabaire, and Alford, Prince Among Slaves, for several examples. A
German television broadcast in 1990 showed Qur’an boards in a “Museum of Slavery”
then open in Charleston, South Carolina. Attempts to examine the boards met first with
the closure of the museum, then of their apparent sequestering in a private home off the
coast. Making these invaluable documents accessible again is highly desirable.
20. Pierre Pluchon, Vaudou sorciers empoisonneurs de Saint-Domingue à Haïti (Paris: Editions
Karthala, 1987), 14–15.
21. René Bravmann, African Islam (Washington, DC and London: Smithsonian Institution
Press and Ethnographica, 1983). See illustration no. 40, 56.
22. Clérismé, untitled unpublished video documentation of Mandingue Ceremony for
deceased in 1997, shown privately during the May, 1998 Congress of Santa Barbara, The
Spirit and the Reality: Vodou and Haiti, at Brooklyn College. I am grateful to Dr. Clérismé
who very graciously offered to show me this tape upon hearing my paper in which I
How HOUNGANS Use Light from Distant Stars 173
1403971625ts11.qxd  29-9-06  7:11 PM  Page 173


--- PAGE 189 ---
suggested that phrases from the Qur’an, prayers, and praise songs might be embedded in
the langaj of Vodou. The participants in the ceremony clearly were chanting “Allah
al-illah.” They wore white garments which may, like certain candomble costumes in
Brazil, be related to Muslim burial costume.
23. Daniel Cozort, The Sand Mandala of Vajrabhairava(Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion Publications,
1995). Centerfold, colored illustrations of the mandala and the three-dimensional
computer generation.
24. Karen McCarthy Brown, The “Veve” of Haitian Vodou: A Structural Analysis of Visual
Imagery, thesis submitted to T emple University Graduate Board, 1975. (Ann Arbor:
University Microfilms, 1976). See especially chapter 4, “The Center and the Edges,”
in which she discusses the relationship of the symbols to the arrangements in Haitian
society.
25. LeGrace Benson, “Observations on Islamic Motifs in Haitian Religious Art,” Journal of
Caribbean Studies, (1 and 2) (Winter/Spring 1993). In this article, the squares are called
“magic squares.” Further research has revealed them to be “destiny squares” more specifi-
cally.
26. Anna A. Wexler, “The Artistry of a Haitian Vodou Flagmaker,” in Sacred Possessions:
Vodou, Santeria, Obeah and the Caribbean, ed. Marguerite Fernández Lomos and Lizabeth
Paravasini-Gebert (New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 1997), 69.
27. Delores Yonkers, Sequinned Surfaces: Vodoun Flags from Haiti . Exhibition Catalogue
(Northridge: California State University, 1991). Unpaginated catalogue for exhibition
curated by Yonkers.
28. Ibid.
29. Patrick Polk, “Sacred Banners and the Divine Cavalry Charge,” in Sacred Arts of Haitian
Vodou, ed. Donald Cosentino (Los Angeles: UCLA Fowler Museum of Cultural History,
1995), 325–347.
30. Constance Abikuba, personal conversation concerning her father and other men in the
family. She told that they thought the game was “very old,” and that they said the Islamic
people to the north had brought it in.
31. Peter Adler and Nicholas Barnard, Asafo! African Flags of the Fante. Exhibition catalogue,
heavily illustrated in color (New York: Thames and Hudson, 1992). Flags viewed at
Johnson Museum of Art, Ithaca, NY, February, 1997. Variations on the checkered pattern
and variants as well as depictions of a chess board or game in progress appear on a large
number of the flags.
32. Bravmann, African Islam, 61. See illustration 44.
33. Erika Bourguignon, unpublished photographic documentation, 1997.
34. J. E. Cirlot, A Dictionary of Symbols (New York: Philosophical Library, 1962), 43.
35. Henry Gough and James Parker, A Glossary of T erms Used in Heraldry(1894; repr., Oxford
and London: Gale Research, 1996), 103.
36. Maude Southwell Wahlman, “African Charm T raditions Remembered in the Arts of the
Americas,” in African Impact on the Material Culture of the Americas, conference proceed-
ings (Winston-Salem: Old Salem, 1998). Figure 88, 9.
37. Eli Leon, “African Influence on the American Block-Style Quilt,” in African Impact on the
Material Culture of the Americas , conference proceedings (Winston-Salem: Old Salem,
1998).
38. Susan Tselos, “Haitian Drapo Vodou; Imagery, Ritual and Perception,” in Sacred and
Ceremonial T extiles(Chicago: T extile Society of America, 1995), 58–67.
39. Drouin de Bercy, De St. Domingue, de ses guerres, de ses ressources (Paris: Hoquet, 1814),
cited by Emmanuel C. Paul, Panorama du Folklore Haïtien(Port-au-Prince: Imprimerie de
l’Etat, 1962), 143.
LeGrace Benson174
1403971625ts11.qxd  29-9-06  7:11 PM  Page 174


--- PAGE 190 ---
40. Several owners of boutiques in Haiti confirm this. A private video tape done in the 1960s
documents a discussion between a houngan/artist and director of an atelier, and other shop
managers relate similar events. A musical group of the earlier 1960s commissioned ban-
ners for display behind their group, requesting that they have authentic Vodou symbols.
Anna Wexler, in an unpublished doctoral dissertation, Harvard University, 1998,
describes such a process from the standpoint of houngan/artist Clotaire Bazile. It is clear
from reports and especially from Wexler’s investigations that traditions are carefully con-
tinued, despite creative use of available new materials and new graphics styles.
41. See, e.g., illustration 32 in Harold Courlander’s The Drum and the Hoe: Life and Lore of
the Haitian People (1960; repr., Berkeley, LA and London: University of California Press,
1973), where the vèvè drawn on the occasion of a bull sacrifice for Simbi shows the check-
ered pattern on the flanks of the bull. The design is highly similar to that used by the
Islamicized Senufo for the checkered bush-cow costume, woven of raffia and painted with
checks or fusilly. Illustrations in Déita [Mercedes Foucard Guignard], Objets au
Quotidien: Art et Culture Populaire en Haïti Port-au-Prince: Imprimerie Le Natal S. A.,
1993; Chapter 16 concerning amulets and talismans, 103–112 show the pattern on
Boussou T rois Cornes and one of the Agwe boats.
42. Milo Rigaud, Secrets of Voodoo, trans. Robert B. Cross (1953; repr., San Francisco: City
Lights Books, 1985), 148.
43. The unpublished photographs are currently held in the African-American Museum
section of the Smithsonian Institutions, property of the Estate of Melville Herskovits.
Scholars may review the photographs upon request. Dr. Maude Wahllman, a former stu-
dent of Dr. Herskovits kindly allowed me to review and take notes from a notebook of
photocopies of the documents, June, 1998.
44. Bravmann, African Islam. See illustration no. 37, 54.
45. Clotaire Bazile, interview, Brookline, MA, September 1993.
46. Rigaud, Secrets of Voodoo, 151.
47. Clérismé, untitled, unpublished video documentation of Mandingue ceremony for
deceased shown in 1997.
48. Bravmann, African Islam, 50.
49. Herskovits photographic archives, Smithsonian Institutes, African-American Museum,
pictures 45, 46, 47.
50. A search through numerous inventories of churches and the personal belongings of mis-
sionaries includes only items that had some monetary value, and lack mention of a range
of objects that probably were there, but not part of the formal valuation. Votive objects of
all sorts were common in the era of the slave trade and into the present, but seldom appear
in inventories. Exceptionally, a votive in precious metals and stones might make the list.
Other evidence should be sought.
51. Anne Sauvy, Le miroir du coeur (Paris: Les Editions du Cerf, 1989), 48–50. The
entire work is an invaluable resource for studying the imagery of the heart and missions
instructions.
52. P . A. Cabon, Mgr. Alexis-Jean-Marie Guilloux, Deuxième Archevêque de Port-au-Prince
(Lampaul-Guimiliau and Port-au-Prince: Archevêché de Port-au-Prince, 1929), 23.
Cabon indicates Guilloux took LeNobletz as one of his role models.
53. Duffaut, interview, Centre d’ Art, Port-au-Prince, Haiti, November 1996. The artist
brought in current pieces that had none of the imagery under discussion here, but rather
were versions of his mountain villages. Some of his other village or city images contrast the
city of good with the city of evil, and do show elements of the good/evil moralizations of
the Breton teaching materials.
54. Prussin, Hatumere , 168.
How HOUNGANS Use Light from Distant Stars 175
1403971625ts11.qxd  29-9-06  7:11 PM  Page 175


--- PAGE 191 ---
55. A regional museum in Plougastel, Brittany in 1989 had a special exhibition for the
Bicentennaire of the French Revolution. Among other aspects, there were several docu-
ments and prints showing the multifariousness of the liberty tree in Brittany. It was clearly
an important emblem, contested by pro-French and pro-regionalists.
56. Laënnec Hurbon, Dieu dans le vaudou Haïtien (Port-au-Prince: Editions Henri
Deschamps, 1987), 129–137.
Bibliography
Adler, Peter, and Nicholas Barnard. Asafo! African Flags of the Fante . Exhibition catalogue,
heavily illustrated in color. New York: Thames and Hudson, 1992.
Alford, T erry. Prince Among Slaves. New York: Oxford University Press, 1977.
Archives d’Outre Mer. Archives Nationales de France, Aix-en-Provence, France. These archives
include all Moreau de St. Méry’s writings, and collected materials for St.-Domingue as well
as the other French Caribbean colonies. There are documents of notaries; inventories; mil-
itary records; some family records and various official correspondences. Materials directly
referring to religious practices of any kind are scant. The Archives include documents from
other nationalities having contact with the French colonies, including some interesting and
informative engravings of flora, fauna, plantations, sugar planting, and processing.
Bastide, Roger. African Religions of Brazil. T rans. Helen Sebba. Baltimore and London: Johns
Hopkins University Press, 1978. Originally published as Les Religions Afro-Brésiliennes:
Contributions à une sociologie des interpénétrations de civilisations . Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France, 1960.
Benson, LeGrace. Observations on Islamic Motifs in Haitian Religious Art. Journal of
Caribbean Studies, 9 (Winter/Spring 1993): 59–66.
———. Some Breton and Muslim Antecedents of Vodou Drapo. In Sacred and Ceremonial
T extiles. Proceedings of the Fifth Biennial Symposium of The T extile Society of America,
68–75. Chicago: T extile Society of America, 1996.
de Bercy, Drouin. De St. Domingue, de ses guerres, de ses ressources. Paris: Hoquet, 1814. Cited
in Emmanuel C. Paul, A Processus de la formation du Vodou. In Panorama du folklore
Haitien, 238–239. Port-au-Prince: Imprimerie de l’Etat, 1962.
Blakely, Thomas D., Walter E.A. van Beek, and Dennis L. Thompson. Religion in Africa .
Monograph Series of the David M. Kennedy Center for International Studies at Brigham
Young University. London: James Curry and Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann, 1994.
Bravmann, René A. African Islam. Washington, DC and London: Smithsonian Institution
Press and Ethnographica, 1983.
———. Islam and Tribal Art in West Africa. 1974. Repr., Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1994.
Bourguignon, Erika. Unpublished photographic documentation. Haiti, 1944–1954.
Brown, Karen McCarthy. The Vèvè of Haitian Vodou: A Structural Analysis of Visual Imagery .
Ann Arbor: University Microfilms, 1976.
Cabon, P . A. Mgr. Alexis-Jean-Marie Guilloux, Deuxième Archevêché de Port-au-Prince. Lampaul-
Guimiliau and Port-au-Prince: Archevêque de Port-au-Prince, 1929.
Centre d’ Art. Uncatalogued archives include letters, photographs, and newspapers. Collection
of works from 1947 and current exhibitions. Port-au-Prince, Haiti.
Cirlot, J. E. A Dictionary of Symbols. New York: Philosophical Library, 1962.
Clérismé, Rénald. Untitled, unpublished video documentation of Mandingue ceremony for
deceased, taken near Cap Haitian, 1997, videocassette.
LeGrace Benson176
1403971625ts11.qxd  29-9-06  7:11 PM  Page 176


--- PAGE 192 ---
Cohen, William. The French Encounters with Africans: White Response to Blacks, 1530–1880 .
Bloomington and London: Indiana University Press, 1980.
Colloque sur les religions. Conference proceedings. Abidjan and Paris: Les Editions Présence
Africaine, 1961.
Cosentino, Donald J., ed. Sacred Arts of Haitian Vaudou. Catalogue of exhibition circulated to
museums in the United States. Heavily illustrated. Los Angeles: Fowler Museum of the
University of California at Los Angeles, 1995.
Courlander, Harold. The Drum and the Hoe: Life and Lore of the Haitian People. 1960. Repr.,
Berkeley, LA and London: University of California Press, 1973.
Cozort, Daniel. The Sand Mandala of Vajrabhairava . Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion Publications,
1995.
Déita, Mercédès Guinard. Objets au quotidien; Art et culture populaire en Haïti. Port-au-Prince:
l’Imprimerie LeNatal S. A., 1993.
———. La Légende des Loa du Vodou Haïtien. Port-au-Prince: Private Printing, 1993.
Delbeau, Jean-Claude. Société, culture et médicine populaire traditionnelle . Port-au-Prince:
Imprimerie Henri Deschamps, 1990.
Deren, Maya. Divine Horsemen. London and New York: Thames and Hudson, 1953.
Desquiron, Lilas. Racines du Vodou. Port-au-Prince: Editions Henri Deschamps, 1990.
Dunham, Katherine. Island Possessed. Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press, 1969.
Elfasi, M., ed. General History of Africa. Vol. 2. London: Heineman, UNESCO and University
of California Press, 1988.
Fombrun, Odette Roy. Le Drapeau & les armes de la République d’Haiti . Port-au-Prince:
Editions Deschamps, 1987.
Fouchard, Jean. Marrons du Syllabaire. Port-au-Prince: Editions Henri Deschamps, 1988.
———. La Merengue, danse nationale d’Haiti . Port-au-Prince: Editions Henri Deschamps,
1988.
———. Les Origines Africaines de l’homme Haïtien. In Nouvelle Revue du Monde Noir .
Port-au-Prince: L ’Institut d’Etudes and de Recherches Africaines d’Haiti, 1986.
Fuertes, Serge. Wol Vodou nan Bwa Kaiman. Ottawa: Kawonabo, 1992.
Glaze, Anita J. Art and Death in a Senufo Village. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1981.
Gough, Henry, and James Parker. A Glossary of T erms Used in Heraldry. 1894. Repr., Oxford
and London: Gale Research, 1996.
Herskovits, Melville. Life in a Haitian Valley. New York and London: Alfred A. Knopf, 1937.
———. African American Museum Photographic Archives. Smithsonian Institutes:
Washington, DC.
Holas, B. Arts Traditionnels de la Côte d’Ivoire. T ours: Imprimerie Rellure, 1967.
———. L ’Art Sacre Sénufo. Abidjan: Les Nouvelles Editions Africaines, 1985.
Hurbon, Laënnec. Dieu dans le Vodou Haïtien . Port-au-Prince: Editions Henri Deschamps,
1987.
———. Le Barbare imaginaire. Port-au-Prince: Editions Henri Deschamps, 1987.
Journal of Caribbean Studies. Lexington, KY: Association of Caribbean Studies.
Journal of Islamic Studies. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Journal of Haitian Studies. Boston: Haitian Studies Association.
Julien, J. B. Emmanuel Francius. La Cérémonie du Bois Caiman . Port-au-Prince: Editions
l’Ordre Nouveau, 1991.
King, Noel Q. African Cosmos: An Introduction to Religions in Africa. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth
Publishing Company, 1986.
Kroch Rare Book Library, Cornell University Libraries, Ithaca, NY. The collections include,
inter alia those devoted to Freemasonry in Europe and the Americas, the French
Revolution, Slavery, Witchcraft, and chess. The Witchcraft collection has multiple copies
How HOUNGANS Use Light from Distant Stars 177
1403971625ts11.qxd  29-9-06  7:11 PM  Page 177


--- PAGE 193 ---
of the numerous grimoires published in Europe from the fifteenth through the nineteenth
centuries, examples of which still appear in contemporary Haiti.
Leon, Eli. African Influence on the American Block-Style Quilt. In African Impact on the
Material Culture of the Americas . Conference Proceedings. Winston-Salem: Old Salem,
1998.
Lerebours, Michel-Philippe. Haïti et ses peintres de 1804 à 1980. Vols. 1 and 2. Port-au-Prince:
Imprimeur II, 1989.
Lowenthal, David. West Indian Societies. London: Oxford University Press, 1972.
Madiou, Thomas. Histoire d’Haiti T ome I; 1492–1799. 1847. Repr., Port-au-Prince: Editions
Henri Deschamps, 1989.
Maximilien, Louis. Le Vodou Haitien; rites radas-canzo . Port-au-Prince: Imprimerie
H. Deschamps, 1945.
Métraux, Alfred. Le Vaudou Haïtien. 1958. Repr., Paris: Editions Gallimard, 1968.
Musée d’Art Haïtien. Collections from 1947 and exhibitions of current works. Port-au-Prince.
MUPANAH. The national museum includes a permanent historical exhibition as well as art
works from all periods and current exhibitions. Port-au-Prince.
Nouvelle Revue du Monde Noir. Port-au-Prince: L ’Institut d’Etudes et de Recherches Africaines
d’Haiti (IERAH).
Olmos, Fernandez, and Lizabeth Paravisini-Gebert, eds. Sacred Possessions; Vodou, Santería,
Obeah and the Caribbean. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 1997.
Paul, Emmanuel C. Panorama du Folklore Haïtien. Port-au-Prince: Imprimerie de l’Etat, 1962.
Pluchon, Pierre. Vaudou sociers empoisonneurs de Saint-Domingue à Haïti . Paris: Editions
Karthala, 1987.
Polk, Patrick. Sacred Banners and the Divine Cavalry Charge. In Sacred Arts of Haitian Vodou,
ed. Donald Cosentino, 325–347. Los Angeles: UCLA Fowler Museum of Cultural History,
1995.
Prussin, LaBelle. Hatumere: Islamic Design in West Africa. Berkeley and Los Angeles, CA and
London: University of California Press, 1986.
Quick, Abdullah Hakim. Deeper Roots: Muslims in the Caribbean before Columbus to the Present.
Nassau, Bahamas and London: Association of Islamic Communities in the Caribbean and
Latin America (AICCLA), 1990.
Qur’an. Arabic T ext, English rendering Abdul Aziz Kamal. Lahore, Pakistan: Islamic
Publications, 1982.
Quattara, Abdoulaye. La Danse [de Côte d’Ivoire]. Abidjan: Les Nouvelles Editions Africaines,
1985.
Rigaud, Milo. Secrets of Voodoo. T rans. Robert B. Cross. 1953. Repr., San Francisco: City Lights
Books, 1985.
Sauvy, Anne. Le miroir du coeur: quatre siècles d’images savantes et populaires. Paris: Les Editions
du Cerf, 1989.
Searing, James F . West African Slavery and Atlantic Commerce: The Senegal River Valley,
1700–1860. African Studies Series No. 77. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993.
Thornton, John. Africa and Africans in the Making of the Atlantic World, 1400–1680 .
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992.
———. The Kingdom of the Kongo: Civil War and Transition, 1641–1718. Madison: University
of Wisconsin Press, 1983.
Tselos, Susan. Haitian Drapo Vodou: Imagery, Ritual and Perception. In Sacred and
Ceremonial T extiles. Chicago: T extile Society of America, 1995.
Wahlman, Maude Southwell. African Charm T raditions Remembered in the Arts of the
Americas. In African Impact on the Material Culture of the Americas . Conference proceed-
ings. Winston-Salem: Old Winston, 1998.
LeGrace Benson178
1403971625ts11.qxd  29-9-06  7:11 PM  Page 178


--- PAGE 194 ---
Wexler, Anna A. I am going to see where my Oungan is: The Artistry of a Haitian Vodou
Flagmaker. In Sacred Possessions: Vodou, Santería, Obeah and the Caribbean, eds. Marguerite
Fernández Olmos and Lizabeth Paravisini-Gebert. New Brunswick: Rutgers University
Press, 1997.
———. For the Flower of Ginen: The Artistry of Clotaire Bazile, A Haitian Vodou Flagmaker.
PhD dissertation, Harvard University, 1998.
Yonkers, Dolores. Sequined Surfaces: Vodoun Flags from Haiti . Exhibition Catalogue.
Northridge: California State University, 1991.
How HOUNGANS Use Light from Distant Stars 179
1403971625ts11.qxd  29-9-06  7:11 PM  Page 179


--- PAGE 195 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 196 ---
Chapter 11
Vodou in Haitian Literature
Carrol F . Coates
Senator Jesse Helms, that staunch defender of “American values” and Chair of the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee, recently accused the United States Agency for
International Development (USAID) of “subsidizing witchcraft,” according to a
report by Don Bohning in the Miami Herald (March 15, 1999). It is apparent in
Bohning’s report that the honorable senator equates Vodou with “witchcraft.” From
his own standpoint, Helms was undoubtedly justified in that the 1995 “Annual
Report” of the International Planned Parenthood Federation in Haiti stated that it
had undertaken an educational “campaign to reach voodoo followers with sexual and
reproductive health information.” I admit that I struggle with my demon to keep
from throwing hard, sharp objects at the television set when the senator appears on
news reports, but his equation of Vodou with sorcery is probably not far from the
view held by a significant number of U.S. citizens, especially those who are capable
of coining a variety of satirical and deprecatory terms using “voodoo” as an adjective
implying irrational and manipulatory procedures—giving us such useful neologisms
as “voodoo economics.”
Unlike Karen McCarthy Brown, whose Mama Lola is listed in my “Bibliography
on Vodou,” I am not an initiate, but I feel that I am close to her position in that I too
operate in a space between that of the faithful of Vodou, those who “follow the spirits,”
and that of a white North American, raised and educated in the Oklahoma plains.
I have come closer to appreciating Vodou as a legitimate religion over a period of
some ten years as I undertook translating Haitian literature from French to English
and, eventually, teaching courses on Haitian Literature and Culture, as I have done
several times at Binghamton University. I discovered, gradually, that many, if not all
Haitians, have had some kind of contact with Vodou, at least through other family
members. A majority of Haitian novelists make reference to Vodou, and I will give a
rapid analysis of several works in which that culture is either central or at least an
important aspect of the work. I hope to articulate a suggestion or two for further
reflection as to what functions various writers may be assigning to Vodou in their
creative work.
1403971625ts12.qxd  29-9-06  12:42 PM  Page 181


--- PAGE 197 ---
It is necessary to take a distance, first of all, from the prevalent Anglo-Euro-
American view that Vodou is simply witchcraft, sorcery, or “black magic.” The tenth
edition of Merriam Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary still retains the pejorative associa-
tion with “necromancy,” hexes, and sorcery. “Voodooism” is defined as “the practice
of witchcraft.” I might note, without further comment, that the terms “voodoo” and
“voodooism” fall between the words “vomitory” and “voracious”—as if Senator
Helms’s genie had some mystical control over the “accidents” of Webster’s selection
and alphabetization of its lexicon.
Even Webster’sbrief descriptive phrase is less objective than it might appear: “a reli-
gion that is derived from African polytheism and ancestor worship and is practiced
chiefly in Haiti.” T raditional African and Caribbean religions are not “polytheistic” in
the Western sense and a number of other prejudicial terms are still commonly used—
“animism,” “fetishism,” “paganism,” “primitivism,” among others. Filmmakers and
popular novelists continue to conjure up images of cannibalism and zombification as
prevalent practices.
Let us turn to what Vodou is and distinguish it from the simple practice of sorcery
and witchcraft.
In her recent study, Aspects éducatifs et moraux du Vodou haïtien, Claudine Michel
(UC Santa Barbara) characterizes Vodou as a “global vision of the world” (1995, 24).
She states that Vodou is “a way of life for the majority of people in Haiti” (1995, 28).
Karen McCarthy Brown sees Vodou as “the system [Haitians] have derived to deal
with the suffering that is life” (1991: 10). From these, and many other statements by
credible researchers and observers, we might derive two aspects of Vodou: it emerged,
early on in Haiti, as a traditional religion, preserved, modified, and systematically dis-
guised in order to survive under the daily cruelty and deprivation of the plantation
system. Vodou was at once a view of the world that evolved with many different local
adaptations in accordance with the experience of the communities of slaves and it
served (1) to preserve memories and traditions of the Africa from which the slaves or
their ancestors came; (2) to develop the capacity to endure the hardships of daily exis-
tence; and (3) eventually, to rally fellow slaves to revolt against the inhumanity of the
plantation system.
In Haiti: The Breached Citadel, Patrick Bellegarde-Smith states that, in Vodou,
everything in the world—be it plant, animal, or mineral—shares basically similar
chemical, physical, and/or genetic properties. This unity of all things translates into an
overarching belief in the sanctity of life, not so much for the thingas for the spirit of the
thing. The cosmological unity of Vodun further translates into a vaunted African
humanism in which social institutions are elaborated and in which the living, the dead,
and the unborn play equally significant roles in an unbroken historical chain. (1990, 12)
This is important in that it underscores the basic trait of Vodou as a “cosmology,” a
comprehensive view of the world that involves a basic respect for all being, whether
animate or inanimate, human or animal, plant or mineral. Bellegarde-Smith further
stresses that sex and gender are not prejudicial matters for those who serve the spirits:
both men and women can be priests; homophobic prejudices and violence are
absent (13).
Carrol F . Coates182
1403971625ts12.qxd  29-9-06  12:42 PM  Page 182


--- PAGE 198 ---
Vodou has no Bible or Qur’an—that is, no written compilation of sacred writings.
It was a simple, perhaps natural matter for the slaves to accept the images of Catholic
saints as equivalent to the lwa or spirits of Vodou and the chromolithographs of
Christian saints are often found on Vodou altars. As numerous people, both scholars
and those who serve the lwa, have pointed out, this does not mean that the servants
of the spirits equate the saints with the lwa. The spirits, as well as symbols and the
actual spaces of the ounfò, or Vodou places of worship, may change and new spirits
may appear and be welcomed on a local basis, so that there is no comprehensive
compendium of lwa, for instance.
Let me simply suggest a rapid list of the realms of knowledge and belief that are
involved for the faithful in Vodou. Vodou is a religion, a set of beliefs about the
nature of being and the universe. Vodou involves complex and highly imaginative
forms of art that have grown up through sincere religious practices—visual arts and
sculpture, dance, music, and dramatic representation. Since the ounfò is fundamen-
tally a family affair—Vodou has no pope and no bishops or archbishops—it involves
social values and morality for the individual, the family, and the surrounding or con-
joined community. Especially in the rural regions of Haiti, but also in the cities,
doubtless, Vodou has its influence on commerce and business—thus, a national
impact on the economy.
T wo important functions of Vodou remain to be stressed. First of all, Vodou is “a
system whose purpose is to minimize pain, avoid disaster, cushion loss, and
strengthen survivors and survival instincts” (Brown, 1991). It is a religion of healing:
the manbo and the oungan are basically healers who know and deal with herbs and
specifics. There is a forthright and unambiguous belief in the power of the spirits and
the need to deal with them generously, respectfully. Second, Vodou is a system for
education, and this is the basic message of Claudine Michel’s overview of the “educa-
tional and moral aspects of Haitian Vodou.” Just as it involves respect for everything
that exists in the universe, Voudou is an important system for communicating the
beliefs of the family and the community to the young. The values taught include
respect for the elders and for the ancestors, from which the distorted view of Webster’s
can derive the simplistic trait of “ancestor worship.”
It is true that Haitians belonging to various fundamentalist sects have, along with
Jesse Helms, demonized the faithful of Vodou as Satan-worshippers, sorcerers, and
werewolves. There is a grain of truth to this in that some oungan and manbo have
undoubtedly practiced with both the right and left hands—that is, operated as both
healers and sorcerers. I occasionally consider contacting an oungan to see whether I
cannot concoct a deal to put a hex on certain individuals whom I consider a disgrace
to the human race, but I have resisted the temptation for fear of ending up in disfa-
vor with the spirits, who can be merciless when offended.
One of Hollywood’s favorite topics is that of zombi. Many people have reported
meeting zombi and I have on rare occasion met a person who struck me as being
zombified, as showing no sign of having a soul, no spark of life in the eyes. I can
recommend one serious study for anybody interested who reads French. It is entitled
Le phénomène zombi and was written by a Haitian neuropsychiatrist living in France,
Dr. Yves Saint-Gérard, who recognizes, along with the sensational Wade Davis, that
there are pharmaceutic substances that can reduce vital functions to a level that makes
Vodou in Haitian Literature 183
1403971625ts12.qxd  29-9-06  12:42 PM  Page 183


--- PAGE 199 ---
life undetectable. Other products might reduce the aggressivity of victims being held
by an individual bòkò, oungan, or members of a secret society. Dr. Saint-Gérard ends
up recognizing that the Haitian phenomenon of zombification is a combination
of the possibility of drugs or pharmaceutical products, psychological intimidation or
hypnosis, a belief in the spirits, a certain level of social acceptance of the reality
of such practices, and, finally but perhaps most importantly, the political abuse of the
integrity of human rights and the manipulation of widespread social fear and appre-
hension. In response to a series of postings on werewolves on the Haiti e-mail net,
Leslie Desmangles posted the basic theme that I have taken in my introduction,
namely that Vodou is basically a legitimate religion. He makes the distinction
between the main traditions, which include service for the spirits and healing, and
the “little traditions” such as zombification that are not part of Vodou properly speak-
ing. The zombi phenomenon “is not part of Vodou and never was, as Max Beauvoir
himself has often noted. If it exists, zombie-making should be regarded as a
‘folk’...r eligious practice that derives from Vodou beliefs but is not part of them.”
Desmangles’s message is basically a criticism of the book by Wade Davis, The Serpent
and the Rainbow , which is faulted for viewing zombification as part of Vodou
(Desmangles, e-mail, April 1, 1999).
Vodou and those who serve the spirits have been perpetual objects of hatred, fear,
and persecution, from colonial times to the present. The practice of African religions
was forbidden on the plantations and the colonialists lived in justified fear of poison-
ing and revolt by the slaves. The Haitian Revolution began with a Vodou ceremony
at the Bwa Kayman, in the mountains close to the Dominican border and quickly
spread throughout the colony. Following Haitian Independence, relations between
the Haitian state and Rome were not formalized until the Concordat was signed in
1860, under President Geffrard. There were periodic efforts by the Roman clergy to
counteract the importance of Vodou in Haiti, most importantly under President Élie
Lescot in the anti-superstition campaign of 1941–1942. Many, if not all, Haitian
presidents practiced Vodou, along with Christianity, whether openly or secretly.
Jacques Stephen Alexis says that President Vincent went, during his presidency, to
consult a famous oungan. Élie Lescot’s grandmother took her newborn grandson to
the oungan, Papa Pierre, who predicted that that little Élie had a political future
(Rigaud 1953b, 48). It is well known that François Duvalier followed the spirits and
that some of his close associates were oungan, but Karen McCarthy Brown says that
he was himself an oungan (1991, 95). Vodou became such an instrument of repres-
sion and political abuse with the Duvaliers, father and son, that there was an eruption
of vengeful attacks on oungan, manbo , and the Vodou sanctuaries, following the
ousting of Baby Doc in 1986.
***
I am going to survey a selected number of works in which Vodou plays a significant
role. The first group includes works in which sorcery and the abuse of Vodou by the
head of state during the two Duvalier regimes. The second category includes just one
poem where the vision of Vodou becomes a revolutionary discourse. In the third cat-
egory, I include several novels in which Vodou is represented as an important aspect
Carrol F . Coates184
1403971625ts12.qxd  29-9-06  12:42 PM  Page 184


--- PAGE 200 ---
of the people’s vision of the world. Finally, there are four novels in which Vodou or
the supernatural constitute the most important informing reality.
A number of works have presented Vodou as a tool in the hands of the Duvaliers,
father and son. A capital scene in René Depestre’s Festival of the Greasy Poleis the cer-
emony that is organized by a bòkò in the National Palace in order to seek the support
of the spirits in bringing about the defeat of the rebel Henri Postel in the contest of
the greasy pole. During the nocturnal ceremony, the naked President Zoocrates (the
caricature of Papa Doc) is carried around the hall of the Palace on the backs of
sorcerer, Simon-Seven-Days, various tonton makout , and Monsignor Wolgondé
(a caricature of the Archbishop, François-Wolf Ligondé). Needless to say, Depestre’s
hero will win the contest by reaching the top of the greased pole, only to be mortally
wounded when he grabs a machine gun and attacks the President-for-Life. Gérard
Étienne also portrayed Duvalier’s close advisors as tonton makout and oungan at the
same time in his fourth novel, La Reine Soleil levée (1988). The late Franck Fouché
wrote a bitterly satirical play, Général Baron-la-Croix, conceived as a ceremony in
which the impotent president (Duvalier, of course) concludes a bargain with Baron
Lacroix to mount his wife in order to give him an heir and successor.
Franketienne’s Dezafi, the first novel written entirely in Kreyòl, was rewritten in
French as Les affres d’un défi(1979) (in the grip of a challenge). Franketienne explains
the meaning of his original Kreyòl title in the glossary of Les affres:
Dézafi: a sort of fair organized in certain Haitian provinces; along with orgiastic festi-
vals, cockfights are the main attraction. The word “dezafi,” in a broader sense, would
mean a great gathering, a popular movement, the ferment of a crowd. (1979, 232)
The story that is told, in both the Kreyòl and the French versions, is that of a group
of men who have been zombified by the bòkò, Saintil. They are made to walk through
the country at night to work in various rice paddies. They are underfed and, for the
least word or protest, are severely punished, by beatings, maiming, and even execu-
tion. The scene alternates between the inhuman existence of the zombies, disorderly
crowd scenes at cockfights, and interludes in which we are witness to the anguish of
several characters who are in hiding in Port-au-Prince. In fact, however, there is no
traditional plot, with full character development and dramatic sequencing. The seg-
mentation of the novelistic discourse is marked by three fonts—Roman, italics, and
bold face, each representing a different “voice.” This is an essential technique of
Franketienne’s “spiralism,” in which he shifts from one voice (or set of voices) and
one scene to another without transition or explanation.
It is fairly evident, in this 1979 French version (the original Kreyòl text was pub-
lished in 1975), that the zombi, as well as the various characters who are living in
mortal fear as they hide in their apartments, represent Haitians under the regime of
Baby Doc. Saintil could be a figure for the young President-for-Life, not by direct
portrayal, but by his brutal exercise of power and the mercilessness with which he
commands his daughter and his henchman, Zofer, to control and punish the zombi.
The striking feature of the text, however, is that it foregrounds the alternately coher-
ent and incoherent murmur of voices of the zombified. The reader is drawn into this
confused buzz of suffering and muted revolt that will be broken toward the end of the
Vodou in Haitian Literature 185
1403971625ts12.qxd  29-9-06  12:42 PM  Page 185


--- PAGE 201 ---
novel when the bòkò’s daughter, Sultana, falls in love with a stalwart zombi and puts
salt into his stew, the antidote that releases the victim from the state of zombification.
Franketienne does not himself serve the spirits, according to his own testimony.
He told me he regretted not having been initiated, however, and I read his presenta-
tion of sorcery, in Les affres, as strictly a symbol of religion and magic used as instru-
ments of fear and repression by Baby Doc, or perhaps, more broadly, by both
Duvaliers. I see no sign of an attack on Vodou as a religion.
Stanley Péan, a young Haitian writer living in Québec City, likes to establish a fic-
tional world that partakes both of historical reality and of the supernatural. The scene
of the first, introductory part of Zombi Blues (1996) is Port-au-Prince in 1971, just
prior to the death of François Duvalier. At a moment when she was starving, a young
Haitian mother agreed to let Mèt Minville have her marasa, twins, in exchange for
food. The woman’s dying husband told her to get the boys back. She is wounded,
however, either by the makout or by the henchmen of Mèt Minville. Evading her pur-
suers, she gets a Canadian woman to take charge of the one baby that she has gotten
away from Mèt Minville. The Haitian mother dies and the rest of the novel takes
place in Montréal in 1986–1987.
There is not time to deal with the intricately woven plot of the novel. Let it suf-
fice to say that two apparently unrelated groups of characters turn out to be associ-
ated with the two separated marasa, who are now young men. Gaby d’ArqueAngel is
a jazz musician working in Montréal. Caliban, or “Gran Blan,” is the albino servant
of Mèt Minville, who has come to Montréal to seek asylum, after the dechoukaj of
Baby Doc, in 1986. The reader eventually finds out that Gaby’s visions and Caliban’s
headaches result from their marasa relationship and the fact that, when they were
babies, Mèt Minville administered a potion that gave each virtually superhuman
strength. The denouement of the novel is a fight between the two marasa, a titanic
struggle between good and evil.
Stanley Péan has inscribed the power of the spirits and the supernatural in a novel
that is completely based in the contemporary realities of Haitian history and the
Montréal jazz scene. An aspect of the novel with which I do not have the expertise to
deal is that Stanley Péan has structured his novel not only within the culture of
Haitian sorcery but also within the culture of jazz, naming each unnumbered chapter
after a specific work played by well-known musicians such as Theolonius Monk,
Duke Ellington, Winston Marsalis, Herbie Hancock, Miles Davis, and others. The
important aspect of the Vodou ambiance is that Péan posits the reality of psychokinetic
relations between the marasa.
In his long, dramatic poem, Un arc-en-ciel pour l’occident chrétien (1977), René
Depestre gave voice to a number of the principle Vodou spirits, who express their own
strength and essence in a series of 16 “epiphanies.” Dambala-Ouedo, for example,
Here I am, Dambala-Ouedo
Aquatic black man, black river
I am the beating heart of the water
I am the erect penis of the water
I wet a sprig of basil
In a glass of white wine
Carrol F . Coates186
1403971625ts12.qxd  29-9-06  12:42 PM  Page 186


--- PAGE 202 ---
And I spray your wan faces
I spray your pale hysterias
I water the terror that coils up in your eyes
I water the cardinal points of your vices
I slither on my back I drag my rada
I slide I dance my yanvalou in your home
If you see a green serpent
Dance with your oldest daughter, it’s me! (T ranslation mine.)
For Depestre, Vodou is at once “one of the active elements that enter into the formation
of the national culture of the Haitian people” and “a very rich mythology that is able
to give a marvelous fertility to the creative efforts of the poets and writers of Haiti”
(Arc-en-ciel 1977, 139). I would suggest that Depestre modernized, in the mid-
1960s, the revolutionary discourse of Boukman in order to inspire the Black peoples
of the world to stand firm against the domination and abuse of the white, industrialized
nations, with their nuclear weapons.
There are a number of novelists who have included respectful depictions of Vodou
as a daily part of the existence of rural Haitians. When Manuel returns from the cane
fields of Cuba to his village, in Jacques Roumain’s Gouverneurs de la rosée (1944), his
mother is duty-bound to organize a ceremony to thank the lwa for her son’s survival
and return. In Marie Chauvet’s third novel, Fonds-des-Nègres (1960), Marie-Ange is a
city girl who goes to spend the vacation with her grandmother in the mònof Grande
Anse. The abrupt death of her mother forces Marie-Ange to remain permanently in
Fond-des-Nègres, but it is through the Vodou ceremony that she reawakens to her
own culture and begins to feel that this is her home. The likelihood is that she is going
to serve the lwa and live in Fonds-des-Nègres. Although Hilarion Hilarius, the pro-
tagonist of Jacques Stephen Alexis’s first novel, Compère Général Soleil(1955), is con-
demned to a month in prison for breaking and entering into a bourgeois house in Bois
Verna, he is basically an honest and intelligent young man lacking in education and a
regular job. After he is freed and finds work, his mother decides that it is time to
organize a ceremony of thanksgiving for the spirits. Hilarion is a city kid who resents
being dragged off to the country to participate in a costly manje lwa for no visible
return. He begins to observe and appreciate the simple life of the people, however,
from the moment that a mother asks the taptap driver to stop so her son can take a
leak to the point when he renews acquaintance with his ailing uncle and his cousin,
who has grown from a spindly girl to an attractive young lady. During the evening cer-
emony, he finds himself under the influence of the peasant culture and beliefs from
which he had become estranged. Jacques Stephen Alexis and Marie Chauvet both
wrote their descriptions of Vodou culture and ceremonies in the light of Roumain’s
Gouverneurs de la rosée, and the ethnological research that had preceded it.
The fourth category of works is that in which Vodou and the supernatural are
fundamental aspects of the novelistic world. Pétion Savain’s novel, La case de
Damballah (1939–1943), certainly came in the wake of the indigenist novels of the
1930s, but Max Dominique’s accusation that Savain presents a “touristic” view of
Vodou is exaggerated (1988, 143). The action of the novel is inscribed within the
vision of the peasants of the mountains and high plateaus in southeastern Haiti, in
Vodou in Haitian Literature 187
1403971625ts12.qxd  29-9-06  12:42 PM  Page 187


--- PAGE 203 ---
the region of the villages of Bodari, Oriani, and Savann Zombi, not far from the
border. Rebelné sets up housekeeping with Céline and they cultivate a garden.
Rebelné acquires a champion rooster. However, misfortune falls upon Rebelné and
the region. The price of coffee falls and they can no longer make a living. The serpent
disappears from the dwelling of Danbala. Rebelné returns to Port-au-Prince to try to
eke out an existence for himself and his family, but he succumbs to the rigors of over-
work. T oward the end of the novel, however, Rebelné’s mother, Sor Mée, feels that
the lwa have punished them because Damballah’s sanctuary was desecrated and aban-
doned. That sanctuary is restored and the gray snake that lived in it returns. This is a
sign that the fortunes of the village will take a turn for the better. The novel is divided
into just two parts: “Ceux d’en haut” (The people of the plateau) and “Sous l’emprise
du Vodou” (Under the sway of Vodou). References to past history, the U.S. occupa-
tion and the campaign to check the Caco rebellion, and to the troubled economy,
when the bottom falls out of the coffee market, are passing allusions while the world
is recounted from the standpoint of the peasants of the plateau.
I would like to quote from just one passage to give a sense of the depiction of a
Vodou ceremony. Rebelné leaves his work in Port-au-Prince, early in the novel, to go
up to the village to see Céline. He arrives at the moment when a Vodou ceremony is
beginning. The bòkò (the term is not used pejoratively to designate a sorcerer here),
Alcinoüs, is described:
He was a short, dirty man. Covering his large belly, he was wearing a yellow hemp
beard.
His drooping shoulders supported an enormous, bushy head with the powerful jaws
of a stubborn old man. His expressionless face jealously hid his thoughts just as the
gloomy, humid thickets of the Vault of the Black Maroons kept their mysteries.
His lifeless eyes, bilious and bloodshot, had a strange aura that changed everything
around him. He uttered incomprehensible words, in a husky voice, as he ran about the
sanctuary with lowered head, constantly shaking his copper bell.
People had brought red-bordered napkins and tablecloths that the nervous ounsi
were spreading on the floor. With the place setting finished, Alcinoüs placed a hand-
some red rooster in the middle of the peristil and drew a vèvè around him: a large circle
traced in cornmeal. Then the ounsi, dressed in red, presented the djòk to him: an earth-
enware dish with bits of raw sweet potato, banana, and yam that was set in front of the
rooster with magic incantations. A tremendous sigh rose to the peak of the arched trees
of the enclosure and reverberated for some time between the mountains. Without mov-
ing, the rooster ate in the middle of the vèvè. The lwa were content and would certainly
enter the heads of the ounsi. (1939, 36–37)
Perhaps what troubled Max Dominique is that this description is so low-key,
without stressing in any way the actual possession of the bòkò or the ounsi, the assist-
ing initiates. In fact, this matter-of-fact approach strikes me as underscoring, first of
all, the naturalness with which the peasants live their Vodou culture and its reality in
their lives.
Martin T oma(1991), by Margaret Papillon, is a fairly recent novel. The protago-
nist of this novel is a young man who has been raised by exploitative, dishonest rela-
tives. Martin T oma is finally deluded by a sharpster into buying a “passport” that will
Carrol F . Coates188
1403971625ts12.qxd  29-9-06  12:42 PM  Page 188


--- PAGE 204 ---
allow him to go to Port-au-Prince to look for work. Arriving in Port-au-Prince, he
discovers that he has been duped—the “passport” is a false document for which he
had no need. On the other hand, of course, he discovers that it is difficult to find any
honest work in the vicinity of Port-au-Prince, but he begins to find odd jobs. Forced
to sleep in the open at times, he discovers the secret entrance to a well-stocked and
comfortable apartment in the basement of the burned Cathedral. He takes the risk of
eating his fill, for the first time in a long while, and falls asleep. When the person who
lives in the hidden apartment returns, Martin learns that his host is Bertrand
Delbeau, who died on July 10, 1964, a little over a month prior to the “Vespers of
Jérémie,” when Duvalier’s makout and the army took vengeance on the mulattoes of
Jérémie for the invasion in which some of their sons had participated . By some mys-
terious means, Bertrand’s spirit has continued to be present on the earth with a mys-
terious mission that has not been revealed to him at the moment when he takes
Martin under his tutelage. The greater part of the novel is given over to the education
of Martin, the beginning of his career as a lawyer, and his marriage. Bertrand’s mis-
sion was to mentor this orphan, with his rare combination of intelligence, physical
strength, and courage. Margaret Papillon’s vision for Haiti goes from the year of the
big emigration of Haitian intellectuals, 1964, to the year 2004, when Martin has led
the revolutionary movement that establishes a true democracy in Haiti and has
become the wise, disinterested counselor of the new president. At that point,
Bertrand dies definitively, in a great cataclysm of cosmic force that completely
destroys the semi-ruined Cathedral.
Margaret Papillon’s novel is never specifically inscribed in the traditions of Vodou
and Bertrand Delbeau is not presented as a lwa, but through the enveloping presence
of the supernatural and the visionary prediction of the triumph of a true popular
democracy, guided by enlightened wisdom, this fictional vision is certainly neither
hostile to nor alienated from a spiritual vision of a peaceful existence in harmony with
the spirits. When I spoke with Mme Papillon last fall, she told me that the idea of the
novel came to her in a dream and we concurred in the fervent hope that the bicente-
nary of the Haitian Revolution might see a dramatic change in the Haitian state.
Lilas Desquiron’s novel Les chemins de Loco-Miroir (1990) begins at the same
moment as the novel by Margaret Papillon, just before the Vespers of Jérémie, and
ends at an indeterminate future moment in the twenty-first century. This novel, how-
ever, is pervasively inscribed within the traditions of Vodou, which begins with the
birth of two daughters, Cocotte to a peasant mother in the mòn and Violaine, to a
bourgeois family in Jérémie. The lwa have decreed that these two girls, not related by
blood, are marasa and both mothers accept this decree and participate in the cere-
mony that consecrates the special status of the marasa “sisters.” The two girls will be
raised together when Cocotte is brought down from the mòn to live as a restavèk with
the Delavigne family. Violaine, the upper-crust daughter, is the twin with the nature
of a wild cat and who has untameable red hair, while the peasant sister, Cocotte, is the
more sensible twin, endowed with insight and with a forbearing character. The
Vodou practices of the people are presented as a normal part of the culture to which
all classes (bourgeois and peasant) subscribe.
Violaine falls in love with Alexandre, a young man of completely African features
and, in addition, a member of a revolutionary movement that has organized an invasion
Vodou in Haitian Literature 189
1403971625ts12.qxd  29-9-06  12:42 PM  Page 189


--- PAGE 205 ---
to overthrow the Duvalier dictatorship. Unable to control the behavior of an impulsive
daughter who rejects a proper, mulatto suitor, Violaine’s mother calls a family counsel.
Mother and aunts decide that this scandal cannot be allowed to destroy the family’s dig-
nity and they call in a bòkòto zombify Violaine. She puts on a mysterious pair of treated
house slippers that evening and immediately falls into a zombified state. After the bur-
ial, the bòkò secretly removes Violaine’s body from the isolated tomb and she is left in
the care of her old nurse. The rejected, love-crazed suitor has received permission from
the family council to “possess” the inanimate body of his fiancée. In scenes of virtually
insane rage, he rapes the unresponsive body repeatedly, without managing to provoke
the least reaction or sign of life. In revulsion at this situation, the old nurse feeds her
protégée salted lamb stew and sends her wandering off into the mountains before the
family can discover the act of rebellion. The wandering, semiconscious Violaine
encounters a sympathetic oungan who takes her to a manbo. Through a healing
ceremony, Violaine is brought further back toward consciousness, without regaining
memory and the full use of her faculties. The manboleads Violaine to Port-au-Prince,
where Cocotte is working as a vendor in the Iron Market. Through this cosmic coinci-
dence, the marasaare reunited and the novel ends at a future moment when Cocotte is
telling the story of her life, after the death of Violaine and all other actors in the drama.
The only vision of a future is that of the 80-year-old marasa who hopes that they have
finished with both makoutand the world of the spirits.
Although the novel is simply divided into sections narrated by one voice and,
toward the end, groups of voices, it falls naturally into three parts (in keeping with
the tripartite nature of the vèvè for the marasa): the first part is the history of the
marasa sisters, Violaine and Cocotte; the second part is the passion of Violaine, who
is forced to abort the child conceived out of wedlock and is finally zombified by her
bourgeois family; the third part is the burial, the secret removal from the tomb, the
subsequent wanderings of the partly conscious Violaine, and her eventual reunion
with her marasa in Port-au-Prince.
The late Guy Laraque, a native of Jérémie, wrote a long and scathing review of Les
chemins de Loco-Miroir, expressing primarily his judgment that Lilas Desquiron had
composed a vicious attack on the mulattoes of Jérémie. As perceptive as Guy Laraque
was, in general, I think that he was misled in taking the novel as a roman-à-clefs. First
of all, the novel is clearly an anti-Duvalier narrative, although Lilas Desquiron’s pri-
mary intention was probably not to write a “political” novel. Second, even the
mulatto family of Violaine is presented, along with the peasant mother of Cocotte,
within the framework of those Haitians who sincerely serve the spirits. Their crime,
or sin, according to one’s perspective, is their willingness to achieve a desired end by
any means, including sorcery and the use of poison. After publishing an article in
which I probably erred in underscoring the historical framework of the novel, I have
come back to viewing the novel as a very personal work, deeply inscribed in Vodou
traditions, in which the author’s personal relations with the spirits must be sensed and
left somewhat to the individual imagination.
I have kept Jacques Stephen Alexis’s second novel, Les arbres musiciens(1957), as the
final example for my discussion because I find in it both historical vision and a dramatic
narrative of an infamous era of Haitian history, the anti-superstition campaign of 1941.
The Catholic Church had never given up in its attempts to eradicate Vodou from
Haiti. The fact is, however, that President Élie Lescot was, early in his career, secretly
Carrol F . Coates190
1403971625ts12.qxd  29-9-06  12:42 PM  Page 190


--- PAGE 206 ---
planning to evict the peasants of certain areas in order to allow U.S. agricultural offi-
cials to carry out an experiment for cultivating rubber plants in Haiti, the kòn kabrit
or cryptostegia, a kind of weed from which they hoped to make latex rubber for
wartime use. The anti-superstition campaign, preached with new fervor by Catholic
priests, brought about the destruction of some Vodou sanctuaries and served as a
cover for the seizure of land from the peasants. Under the fictitious name of Pierre
Roumel, as in Compère Général Soleil , Alexis evokes the opposition of Jacques
Roumain to the anti-superstition campaign.
Alexis (1957) had undoubtedly witnessed Vodou ceremonies in his childhood since
his maternal grandmother had her own ounf ò, at Souvenance, near Gonaïves. Alexis
himself says, however, that he consulted ounganin conjunction with the composition
of Les arbres musiciens. This intimate view of Vodou shows through clearly. In chapter
7 of Les arbres, there is a great council of ounganat Nan Remanbrans. They have come
together to consult about how to survive the new campaign against their religion. One
oungan speaks up, saying that “Vodou is the soul of the people, its true faith and only
resource.” He continues, “Politics, production, commerce, industry, education, sports,
culture, and the dreams of men are all influenced by the people’s religion. By what
right do the whites assert that their religion is the only valid religion?” (1957, 174).
When Danger Dossous, a treacherous bòkòattempts to enter the assembly, Papa Bois-
d’Orme hypnotizes him and turns him away. When Bois-d’Orme speaks to the assem-
bled oungan, he foresees that their ounf ò will be burned but this will not destroy
Vodou. “The ounfò are indestructible, like the grass that is burned to the ground in
order to produce a better crop. The ounfò will grow up once more during the spring-
time of life! Laugh at the flashing, rapid arms. Ago ye!” (1957, 179). T oward the end
of the novel, Bois-d’Orme sets fire to his own sanctuary of Nan-Remanbrans. When
the Reverend Diogène Osmin, who has been a leader in preaching the destruction of
the Vodou temples, arrives, Bois-d’Orme addresses him in no uncertain terms:
The lwa are immortal, priest! Look, look with your two eyes. The lwa have not allowed
your sacrilegious hands to be lifted against the ancient Remanbrans. The old sanctuary
is nothing but flames and ashes, and the lwa still live! Look at the light shining in the
ashes, Nan Remanbrans lives! Bois-d’Orme can now march off to his death, for the for-
mer sanctuary will reemerge one day, in the same place, grander, taller, more beautiful,
eternal like the lwa of eternal Africa. For your own misfortune, you will survive, but
nobody will be more lifeless than you. When you look at the trees, you will see in their
swaying the invisible and mystical body of the spirits. When you listen to the wind
groaning over the countryside, it will be their voices cursing you. When you smell the
aromas of the seasons and the perfume of the crops, you will be unable to tolerate
the reproach that springs from the entrails of the earth that is no longer your earth. In
the least fruit born of the soil, the essence of the lwa will seize you by the throat. Your
very hands will be unable to grasp anything without the lwa devouring you with a liv-
ing fire. For you have failed to respect the right of men to believe according to their own
heart. Go, homeless child! Man without a race! Man without a land! Man of no nation!
The hands of the spirits are upon you! (1957, 359).
***
Let me rapidly summarize the categories covered of the creative use of Vodou in
Haitian literary works.
Vodou in Haitian Literature 191
1403971625ts12.qxd  29-9-06  12:42 PM  Page 191


--- PAGE 207 ---
There are, first of all, the fairly numerous depictions of the abuse of sorcery, some-
times associated with Vodou. In this category I cited the novels by René Depestre (Le
mât de cocagne), Franketienne (Les affres d’un défi), Gérard Étienne ( La Reine Soleil
levée), Stanley Péan ( Zombi Blues ), and Franck Fouché’s play ( Général Baron-la-
Croix). It is probably significant, in the realms of social psychology and historical evo-
lution, that the 30-year dictatorships of Papa Doc and son Baby Doc have provoked
such a number of intense and sometimes satirical works.
Second, I mentioned Depestre’s long poem, Arc-en-ciel pour un occident chrétien,
as the only example that came to mind of a Vodou-inspired revolutionary discourse.
There are numerous individual poems in honor of various lwa by Depestre,
Morisseau-Leroi, and other Haitian poets.
With regard to Vodou presented, along with other aspects of peasant culture as an
integral part of everyday life, I mentioned Jacques Roumain (Gouverneurs de la rosée),
Jacques Stephen Alexis ( Compère Général Soleil ), and Marie Chauvet ( Fonds-des-
Nègres). The work of Roumain, along with that of Jean Price-Mars, was seminal in
the ethnological materials he published and by the example he gave of incorporating
Haitian folk culture into creative literature.
Finally, in a noncomprehensive survey, I gave rapid glimpses of several novels that
are virtually inscribed in the Vodou vision—Pétion Savain ( La case de Damballah ),
Margaret Papillon (Martin T oma), Lilas Desquiron (Les chemins de Loco-Miroir), and
Jacques Stephen Alexis (Les arbres musiciens).
I should give credit in closing to Léon-François Hoffmann, who, in some sense,
blazed a trail for subsequent readers and critics of Haitian literature with his Le roman
haïtien. In his chapter on “Les dieux” (1982, 248–272), he summarized the presentation
of Vodou in Haitian fiction by those novelists who recognized it as a legitimate religion.
What most novelists seem to ask of the elites is not that they convert to Vodou, but to
assume it, to the same extent that they assume Negritude and...the Kreyòl language;
to recognize its beauty and poetry; to assume a degree of responsibility for its obscuran-
tist and occasionally criminal aspects; to understand that to scorn Vodou by perpetuating
the misery and alienation that nurture it is the height of insincerity. (1982, 269–270)
I have to admit that, at a moment when I had not begun working seriously in the area
of Haitian literature, Hoffmann preceded me in sensing the exceptional nature of
Alexis’s second novel: “I think that no novelist (with the possible exception of
Jacques-Stephen Alexis) was able to integrate Vodou in a coherent vision of the
world” (1957, 270).
In conclusion, I note that to my knowledge (and Hoffmann mentions no exam-
ples either), there have been no Haitian novelists who were themselves sèvitè of the
lwa, none who have admitted it, at least. Jacques Roumain, Jacques Stephen Alexis,
and the still living novelist, Lilas Desquiron, are among those who were most
knowledgeable and the most careful to offer serious depictions of Vodou and to
separate the religion from its abusive use by heads of state or sorcerers. Among
the effects of creative presentations of Vodou, it is necessary to recognize that the
language, and the culture, have been enriched by the terminology of Vodou and the
names of its spirits.
Carrol F . Coates192
1403971625ts12.qxd  29-9-06  12:42 PM  Page 192


--- PAGE 208 ---
A Hasty Glossary of Vodou and Other 
Cultural Terms in Kreyòl
bòkò: a priest who practices sorcery; sometimes used in earlier literature as a
synonym for an oungan.
dechoukaj: the ouster of a Haitian president by a popular revolt; Baby Doc was the
target of the most recent dechoukaj.
kòn kabrit: cryptostegia americensis—a species of weed that the United States intro-
duced into Haiti in 1941–1942, hoping to develop an alternate source of latex for
rubber; the project was a dismal failure.
lwa: spirit(s) of Vodou.
manbo: a Vodou priestess.
manje lwa: a ritual meal for the spirits.
marasa: twins in Vodou; the twins are highly honored, but they are capable of great
mischief if they feel that their importance has not been properly recognized at a
ceremony or a ritual meal. The dossou/dossa (male/female child born after the twins)
is also highly respected and figures in the vèvè of the marasa (see example).
mòn: mountain(s), hill(s).
ounfò: a sanctuary.
oungan: a Vodou priest.
restavèk: a child who is taken into virtually indentured service by a well-to-do family
in Haiti; many poor parents have felt forced to place children as restavèk; the children
may be relatively well treated but are never (to my knowledge) given the same privi-
leges as the children of the family and there are many attested cases of abuse. The
practice still continues, in spite of much adverse publicity.
tonton makout: member(s) of the François Duvalier’s militia, the VSN (Volontaires
de la Sécurité Nationale); authorized to use any form of violence at their own
discretion.
vèvè: the symbol of specific lwa, drawn on the ground with coffee grounds, flour,
and corn meal before the beginning of a ceremony.
zombi: a person whose soul has been captured by a sorcerer, leaving the individual
without a will of their own.
Bibliography on Vodou
Fiction
Alexis, Jacques Stephen. 1955. Compère Général Soleil. Paris: Gallimard.
T ranslation: General Sun, My Brother. Intro. and trans. Carrol F . Coates. University Press of
Virginia, CARAF Books (2005).
Vodou in Haitian Literature 193
1403971625ts12.qxd  29-9-06  12:42 PM  Page 193


--- PAGE 209 ---
T ranslation: General Sun, My Brother. 1957. Les arbres musiciens. Paris: Gallimard.
———. 1960. Romancero aux étoiles [short stories]. Paris: Gallimard.
T ranslation: “The Enchanted Second Lieutenant” (“Le sous-lieutenant enchanté”). T rans.
Sharon Masingale Bell, Callaloo, 20 (3) (Summer 1997): 504–515.
Carpentier, Alejo. 1989. El reino de este mundo. New York: Farrar, Strauss and Giroux.
T ranslation: The Kingdom of This World . T rans. Harriet de Onis. New York: Noonday
Press/Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1989.
Casséus, Maurice. Mambo, ou la Revanche des collines. Port-au-Prince.
Chauvet, Marie. 1960. Fonds-des-Nègres. Port-au-Prince: Henri Deschamps.
T ranslation: Excerpt from Fonds-des-Nègres. T rans. Carrol F . Coates with notes, Callaloo, 14 (3)
(Summer 1991): 564–568.
Chevallier, André, and Luc Grimard. 1950. Bakoulou. Port-au-Prince: Soc. d’Édition et de
Librairie.
Colimon Hall, Marie-Thérèse. 1974. Fils de misère. Port-au-Prince: Éds. des Caraïbes.
Dartiguenave, Edith. n.d. L ’héroïsme d’une Haïtienne. Port-au-Prince: [sans éditeur].
Defay, Louis. 1953. Ceux de Bois-Patate. Port-au-Prince: Impr. de l’État.
Depestre, René. 1988. Hadriana dans tous mes rêves. Paris: Gallimard.
T ranslation: Excerpt from Hadriana in All My Dreams . Carrol F . Coates, Callaloo, 15 (2)
(Summer 1992): 546–549.
———. 1979. Le mât de cocagne. Paris: Gallimard.
T ranslation: The Festival of the Greasy Pole. T rans. and intro. Carrol F . Coates. University Press
of Virginia.
Desquiron, Lilas. 1990. Les chemins de Loco-Miroir. Paris: Stock.
T ranslation: Reflections of Loko Miwa. Intro. Marie-Agnès Sourieau; trans. Robin Orr Bodkin.
University Press of Virginia, “CARAF Books,” 1998.
Étienne, Gérard. 1979. Un ambassadeur macoute à Montréal. Montréal: Nouvelle Optique.
———. 1983. Une femme muette. Montréal: Nouvelle Optique.
———. 1988. La Reine Soleil levée. Montréal: Guérin Littérature.
Fignolé, Jean-Claude. 1987. Les possédés de la pleine lune. Paris: Seuil.
Frankétienne. 1979. Les affres d’un défi. Port-au-Prince: Henri Deschamps.
T ranslations: “Defiance and Dread” [beginning of novel]. T rans. J. Michael Dash.
Callaloo 15 (2) (Spring 1992): 393–397; excerpt from “Les affres d’un défi” [the fol-
lowing section]. T rans. Carrol F . Coates with a note, Callaloo, 19 (3) (Summer 1996):
756–761.
Godart, Jacques. 1987. Pourquoi les campêches saignent-ils?. Port-au-Prince: Henri Deschamps.
Greene, Graham. 1966. The Comedians. London/NY: Penguin Books.
Innocent, Antoine. 1906. Mimola ou L ’histoire d’une cassette. Petit tableau de moeurs locales .
Port-au-Prince: V . Valcin.
Laferrière, Dany. 1997. La Chair du maître [short stories]. Montréal: Lanctôt.
T ranslation: “A Country Wedding” (“Un mariage à la campagne”). T rans. Carrol F . Coates,
Callaloo 22 (4) (Autumn 1999): 900–909.
Léon-François Hoffmann. 1982. Le roman haïtien. Idéologie et structure. Sherbrooke: Éditions
Naaman.
Lesage, Aimard [Desaix Baker]. 1926. L ’Amant idéal. Port-au-Prince: Impr. Chéraquit.
Papillon, Margaret. 1991. Martin T oma. Port-au-Prince: L ’Imprimeur II.
Péan, Stanley. 1996. Zombi Blues. Montréal: La Courte Échelle.
Pierre, Romulus. 1978. Les Zombis en furie. Port-au-Prince: Fardin.
Roumain, Jacques. 1944. Gouverneurs de la rosée. Paris: Éditeurs Français Réunis.
T ranslation: Masters of the Dew. Intro. J. Michael Dash, trans. Langston Hughes and Mercer
Cook. London: Heineman, 1978.
Carrol F . Coates194
1403971625ts12.qxd  29-9-06  12:42 PM  Page 194


--- PAGE 210 ---
———. 1931/1987. La montagne ensorcelée , récit paysan in La montagne encorcelée [recueil
d’écrits en prose et en vers], 52–116. Paris: Messidor.
Savain, Pétion. 1939/1943. La case de Damballah. Port-au-Prince: Impr. de l’État; 2e éd., Paris:
Les Oeuvres Nouvelles; repr., Heinemann, 1970.
Thoby-Marcelin, Philippe and Pierre Marcelin. 1944. Canapé-vert. New York: Éds. de la
Maison Française.
———. Canapé Vert. T rans. Leonart Thomas. New York: Farrar and Rinehart, 1944.
———. 1980. T ous les hommes sont fous. Montréal: Nouvelle Optique.
Poetry
Depestre, René. 1977. Arc-en-ciel pour un occident chrétien, poème-mystère vaudou . Paris:
Présence Africaine.
T ranslation: Rainbow for the Christian West . T rans. Joan Dayan. Boston: University of
Massachusetts Press.
Theater
Fouché, Franck. Général Baron-la-Croix ou le Silence masqué. T ragédie moderne en 2
calvaires, 28 stations et une messe en noir et rouge. In Francophonie Vivante. Montréal,
Leméac.
T ranslation: Excerpt from Général Baron-la-Croix ...T rans. Carrol F . Coates, Callaloo 15 (3)
(Summer 1992): 680–686.
Vieux, Isnardin. 1974. Mackendal, drame historique. Port-au-Prince: Imprimerie Centrale.
Studies
Antonio, Louis-Jean. 1970. La crise de possession et la possession dramatique. Montréal: Leméac.
Apollon, Willy. 1976. Le Vaudou, un espace pour les “voix.”Paris: Éds. Galilée.
Bastide, Roger. 1967. Les Amériques noires. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.
———. African Civilizations in the New World . T rans. Peter Green. New York/London,
Harper and Row.
Bellegarde-Smith, Patrick. 1990. Haiti. The Breached Citadel. Boulder, CO: Westview Press;
2nd ed., T oronto: Canadian Scholars Press, 2004.
Benoît, Max, ed. 1978? Cahier de folklore et des traditions orales d’Haïti. Port-au-Prince, Impr.
La Phalange. (Mémoires présentés par des élèves du Prof. Max Benoît.)
Bijoux, Legrand. 1990. Coup d’oeil sur la famille haïtienne . Port-au-Prince, Éditions des
Antilles.
Brodwin, Paul. 1996. Medicine and Morality in Haiti: The Contest for Healing Power .
Cambridge University Press.
Brown, Karen McCarthy. 1991. Mama Lola. A Vodou Priestess in Brooklyn. Berkeley: University
of California Press; 2nd ed., Berkeley: University of California Press, 1994.
Cabon, P . A. 1933. Notes sur l’histoire religieuse d’Haïti. De la Révolution au Concordat
(1789–1860). Port-au-Prince: Petit Séminaire, Collège Saint-Martial.
Caplain, Jules. La France en Haïti. Catholicisme, vaudoux, maçonnerie. Paris.
Comhaire-Sylvain, Suzanne. 1938. A propos du vocabulaire des croyances paysannes . 
Port-au-Prince.
Vodou in Haitian Literature 195
1403971625ts12.qxd  29-9-06  12:42 PM  Page 195


--- PAGE 211 ---
Cosentino, Donald J., ed. 1995. Sacred Arts of Haitian Vodou. Los Angeles, CA: UCLA Fowler
Museum of Cultural History.
Courlander, Harold. 1939. Haïti Singing. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
———. 1960. The Drum and the Hoe. Life and Lore of the Haitian People. Berkeley: University
of California Press.
Courlander, Harold, and Rémy Bastien. 1966. Religion and Politics in Haiti. Two Essays by H.C.
and R. B. [ “Vodoun in Haitian Culture,” by Harold Courlander; “Vodoun and Politics in
Haiti,” by Rémy Bastien]. Washington, DC: Institute for Cross-Cultural Research.
Dash, J. Michael. 1981. Literature and Ideology in Haiti, 1915–1961 . NY: Barnes and Noble
Books.
Davis, Wade. 1986. The Serpent and the Rainbow. London: Harper Collins.
Dauphin, Claude. 1986. Musique du Vaudou. Fonctions, structures et styles . Sherbrooke:
Naaman.
Dayan, Joan. 1995. Haiti, History, and the Gods. Berkley: University of California Press.
Déita [Mercédes Foucard Guignard]. 1993. La légende des loa, Vodou haïtien. Port-au-Prince:
[sans éditeur].
Delbeau, Col. Jean-Claude. 1990. Société, culture et médecine populaire traditionnelle. Étude sur
le terrain d’un cas: Haïti. Port-au-Prince: Henri Deschamps.
Deren, Maya. 1949. Divine Horsemen. The Living Gods of Haiti . London and NewYork:
Thames and Hudson.
Desmangles, Leslie G. 1992. The Faces of the Gods. Vodou and Roman Catholicism in Haiti .
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Desquiron, Lilas. 1990. Racines du Vodou. Port-au-Prince: Henri Deschamps.
Dominique, Max. 1988. L ’arme de la critique littéraire: litérature et idéologie en Haïti . Eds.
Montréal: CIDIHCA. [T wo chapters are particularly relevant: chapter 7, “Questionner
Dezafi,” on Franketienne, and chapter 8, “Vodou et littérature.”]
Dorsainvil, J.-C. 1931. Vodou et névroses. Port-au-Prince: Impr. La Presse.
———. 1937. Psychologie haïtienne. Voudou et magie. Port-au-Prince.
Dunham, Katherine. 1969. Island Possessed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Fleurant, Gerdes. 1996. Dancing Spirits. Rhythms and Rituals of Haitian Vodun, the Rada Rite.
Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Fouchard, Jean. 1953. Les marrons du syllabaire. Port-au-Prince: Henri Deschamps.
Fouché, Franck. 1976. Vaudou et théâtre: pour un nouveau théâtre populaire. Montréal: Leméac.
Foubert, Alain. 1990. Forgerons du Vodou. Port-au-Prince: Deschamps.
Greene, Anne. 1993. The Catholic Church in Haiti. Political and Social Change. East Lansing,
MI: Michigan State University Press.
Herskovits, Melville J. 1937. Life in a Haitian Valley. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Hoffmann, Léon-François. 1982. Le roman haïtien. Idéologie et structure. Sherbrooke, Canada:
Éditions Naaman.
———. Haïti: couleurs, croyances, créole . Port-au-Prince/Montréal, Henri Deschamps/Éds.
CIDIHCA.
Holly, Arthur. 1918. Les Daimons du culte vodou. Port-au-Prince, Edmond Chenet.
Honorat, Michel Lamartinière. 1955. Les Danses folkloriques haïtiennes. Port-au-Prince, Pubs.
du Bureau d’Ethnologie de la République d’Haïti, Sér. 2, No. 11.
Hurbon, Laënnec. 1987. Le barbare imaginaire. Port-au-Prince: Henri Deschamps.
———. 1987. Comprendre Haïti. Essai sur l’État, la nation, la culture . Port-au-Prince: Henri
Deschamps.
———. 1987. Culture et dictature en Haïti. L ’imaginaire sous contrôle. Port-au-Prince: Henri
Deschamps.
———. 1987. Dieu dans le vaudou haïtien. Port-au-Prince: Henri Deschamps.
Carrol F . Coates196
1403971625ts12.qxd  29-9-06  12:42 PM  Page 196


--- PAGE 212 ---
———. 1989. Le phénomène religieux dans la Caraïbe. Guadeloupe—Martinique—Guyane—
Haïti. Montréal: Éds. CIDIHCA.
———. 1993. Les mystères du vaudou. France: Gallimard “Découvertes.”
———. Voodoo. Search for the Spirit. T rans. Lori Frankel. New York: Harry N. Abrams.
Hurston, Zora Neale. 1938. T ell My Horse. Voodoo and Life in Haiti and Jamaica. New York:
Lippincott.
Kerboull, Jean. 1973. Le Vaudou. Paris: Robert Laffont.
Kergoz, Jean. 1921. L ’expulsion des Vaudoux. Paris: Lib. Générale Cahtolique Arthur Savaete.
Laguerre, Michel. 1979. Études sur le Vodou haïtien. Montréal: Université de Montréal.
———. 1980. Voodoo Heritage. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications.
———. 1989. Voodoo and Politics. New York: Saint Martins.
Lanternari, V . 1962. Les mouvements religieux de liberté et de salut des peuples opprimés . Paris:
Maspéro.
Laroche, Maximilien. 1991. Musique, Danse, Religion. In La double scène de la représentation.
Oraliture et littérature dans la Caraïbe , 85–114. Collection, “Essais,” no. 8. Université
Laval, GRELCA.
Léveque, Karl. 1971. L ’interpellation mystique dans le discours duvalierien. Nouvelle Optique,
December: 5–32.
Louis-Jean, Antonio. 1970. La crise de possession et la possession dramatique. Montréal: Leméac.
Marcelin, Milo. 1949–1950. Mythologie vaudou. 2 vols. Port-au-Prince.
Mars, Louis. 1946. La crise de possession dans la Vaudou. Essai de psychiatrie comparée. Port-au-
Prince: Impr. de l’État.
Maximilien, Louis. 1945. Le Vaudou haïtien. rite Radas—Canzo. Préf. du Dr. Pierre Mabille.
Port-au-Prince: Impr. de l’État.
McAlister, Elizabeth, ed. 1996. Angels in the Mirror. Vodou Music of Haiti. Roslyn, NY: Ellipsis
Arts (includes CD).
Mennesson-Rigaud, Odette. 1958. Le rôle du Vaudou dans l’indépendance d’Haïti. Présence
Africaine, February–March, 17 and 18: 43–67.
Métraux, Alfred. 1958. Le Vaudou haïtien. Paris: Gallimard.
———. Voodoo in Haiti. T rans. Sidney W . Mintz. New York: Pantheon, 1989.
Michel, Claudine. 1995. Aspects éducatifs et moraux du Vodou haïtien. Port-au-Prince: Le Natal.
Montilus, Guérin. 1968. Les repas sacrés haïtiens. Essai d’interprétation théologique. Paris.
Moreau de Saint-Méry. 1954. Description topographique, physique, civile, politique et historique
de la Partie Française de l’Isle Saint-Domingue. 3 vols. Nouv. éd. par Blanche Maurel et Éti-
enne Taillemite. Paris: Société de l’Histoire des Colonies Françaises.
Murray, Gérald. 1980. Population Pressure, Land T enure, and Voodoo. New York: Academic Press.
Nérestant, Micial M. 1994. Religions et politique en Haïti (1804–1990) . Préface de Louis de
Vaucelles. 2nd ed. Paris: Éds. Karthala.
Peters, Carl Edward. 1941. Lumière sur le houmfort. Port-au-Prince: Cheraquit.
———. 1956. Le service des “loas.” Port-au-Prince: Impr. T elhomme.
Planson, Claude. 1974. Vaudou: Un initié parle. Paris: Jean Dullis.
———. 1987. Le Vaudou. Paris: MA Editions.
Pressoir, Ch.-Fernand. 1974. Débats sur le créole et le folklore. Port-au-Prince: Impr. de l’État.
Price-Mars, Jean. 1998. Ainsi parla l’oncle. Nouv. éd. Montréal: Leméac. Repr. Port-au-Prince:
L ’Imprimeur II.
———. So Spoke the Uncle. Ainsi Parla l’Oncle. T rans. and intro. Magdaline W . Shannon. New
York: Passeggiata Press, 1997.
Rigaud, Milo. 1953. La tradition vaudou et le Vaudou haïtien. Son temple, ses mystères, sa magie.
Paris: Niclaus.
———. 1953. Secrets of Voodoo. T rans. Robert B. Cross. San Francisco, CA: City Lights Books.
Vodou in Haitian Literature 197
1403971625ts12.qxd  29-9-06  12:42 PM  Page 197


--- PAGE 213 ---
Rigaud, Milo. 1974. Vè-Vè. Diagrammes rituels du Voudou. T rilingual edition French-English-
Spanish. New York: French and European Publications.
Roumain, Jacques. 1942. A propos de la campagne “anti-superstitieuse.” Port-au-Prince: Impr. de
l’État.
———. 1943. Le sacrifice du tambour-assotor. Pub. du Bureau d’Ethnologie de la République
d’Haïti, No. 1. Port-au-Prince: Impr. de l’État.
Saint-Gérard, Dr. Yves. 1992. Le phénomène Zombi: La présence en Haïti de sujets en état de
non-être. T oulouse: Éds. Érès.
Salgado, J. M. 1962. Le culte africain du Vaudou et les baptisés en Haïti: Essai de Pastorale. Rome.
Seabrook, William. 1929. The Magic Island. New York: Lancer Books.
Sterlin, Philippe. 1954. Vèvès vodou. Série I, II. Port-au-Prince: Philippe Sterlin.
T rouillot, D. 1885. Esquisse ethnographique. Le Vodoun. Aperçu historique et évolution. Port-au-
Prince: Impr. R. Éthéart.
Verger, Pierre. 1957. Notes sur le culte des Orisa et Vodun. Dakar: Ifan.
Verschueren, J. La République d’Haïti. T . III: Le culte du Vaudou. Paris.
Wexler, Anna. Clotaire Bazile. 1997. Oungan and Haitian Vodou Flagmaker. (The Flags of
Clotaire Bazile. A Description; An Interview with Clotaire Bazile). Callaloo 20 (2) (Spring):
371–398.
Williams, Joseph J. 1989. Voodoos and Obeahs: Phases of West Indian Witchcraft . New York:
AMS Press.
Wirkus, F ., and T . Dudley. 1932. Le roi blanc de la Gonave: Le culte du Vaudou en Haïti,
1915–1929. Paris: Payot.
Carrol F . Coates198
1403971625ts12.qxd  29-9-06  12:42 PM  Page 198


--- PAGE 214 ---
Chapter 12
It’s All for You, Sen Jak!
Donald J. Cosentino
Plaine-du-Nord is an old colonial town at the crossroads of a fertile plain due south
of Cap Haitien. The first slave uprisings of the Revolution began on that plain in
August, 1791. Henri Christophe had the Citadel built nearby, incongruously out-
sized, overbearing and magnificent, like the genius who envisioned it as Haiti’s final
redoubt against revanchist France. Plaine-du-Nord boasts no such architectural won-
der, except perhaps for the church of St. James, whose plain Jesuit face is painted a
pretty lemon yellow. A remnant of slavery days, the church still commands the town
center. T o the right of the church is the rectory where Fr. Keweillant, the Breton pas-
tor, lives.
1 T o the left, the town cemetery is dominated by a tall iron cross erected on
a concrete plinth.
Running past the church and cemetery is Centenary Road, a dirt track edged by
several large silk-cotton mapou trees. A few hundred yards beyond the church the
track swerves around a series of potholes which are usually little more than large ruts.2
Sometimes during the early summer rains these ruts fill in to become a kind of small
pond called trou or basin. Should the rains fail, townspeople will come with pails of
water to insure plenty of mud. For them, these are not potholes but St. James’s own
pond, known as the T rou Sen Jak. Its celestial sludge, along with the church, the
cemetery and the surrounding countryside, mark the terrestrial emergence point for
a saint who is generalissimo of a military family of spirits named Ogou. Plaine-du-
Nord is certainly his most important shrine in Haiti; perhaps his most important in
the whole wide Afro-Atlantic world where Ogou’s avatars prevail.
Ogou ceremonies are held at (and in) the T rou most Thursdays of the year,
3 except
during the month of November and throughout the season of Lent. For three days
prior to the canonical feast of St. James (July 25), pilgrims from all over Haiti and its
diaspora descend on the town by truck, car and foot. T rou-side ceremonies continue
day and night, non-stop, for 72 hours until the town’s tiny elite gathers at the Church
for the official point of the festivities, the Mass for St. James, celebrated by the dioce-
san priests and visiting hierarchs. But by this time most of the pilgrims have departed.
1403971625ts13.qxd  29-9-06  7:13 PM  Page 199


--- PAGE 215 ---
They have already hopped onto tap-taps for the short ride to nearby Limonade where
festivities for St. Anne—mother of Mary, grandmother of Jesus and great aunt of
John the Baptist and St. James—are already underway.
Pilgrims arrive at Plaine-du-Nord wearing blue suits and red scarves, or the multi-
striped rad penitans.
4 More secular visitors wear T-shirts celebrating the lascivious
possibilities of Getting Naked at Panama Beach. All have come with the usual devout
intentions: to fulfill vows, to seek healings, to have a good time. Pregnant women and
tubercular children line up before zinc basins for a bath and a blessing from itinerant
herbalists. An ecstatic woman, declaiming in a deep male voice, rides a bony bull. Set
like an altar with a red ribbon around his neck, and burning candles fixed to his
horns, the bull becomes a lumbering sacrifice for Ogou. After the muddy tauricide,
eager pilgrims line up to be anointed by his blood.
At this festival all is synchronic. The bull falls to his knees. Nearby, pilgrims,
overcome by emotion and spirit, fling themselves into the mud and lie face down, not
visibly breathing. They arise, looking like primal creatures. Bystanders are moved to
offer alms to beggars in the mud. Three groups of drummers playing Petwo rhythms
are situated at crosspoints around the T rou. Day into night, their music never
stops. Fr. Keweillant, wearing a panama hat, strolls around the T rou, joking with
parishioners and explaining to inquiring visitors, “What can we do? I have always
allowed this.”
A penitent son of the Iron God wanders by with razor blades and safety pins stuck
up and down his bare back. A woman with no legs sits near the T rou jiggling a cou-
ple of fornicating puppets. Chickens are whirled over supplicants by an oungan with
one arm and no teeth. T rucks arrive with more pilgrims. Visitors gather near the
mapou: off-beat tourists, edgy journalists, enthusiastic folklorists, would-be anthro-
pologists; everyone taking photos, gazing, stupefied by this god’s plenty. Pickpockets
circle everyone, striking like sharks.
This pilgrim’s progress is not limited to the T rou. Groups steadily enter the ceme-
tery where familiar smells of burning candles and rum arise from the cross on the
plinth. An oungan is pulling along a black goat, a propitiation for Bawon Samdi.
Next to the cemetery an enormous crowd has gathered on the steps of the church.
But they cannot enter. Iron gratings bar the doors and windows. So the pilgrims
shout prayers and hurl objects: candles, pennies, cigars, rum bottles, through the
gratings. They aim their missiles at an empty niche that used to contain an image of
St. James. Fr. Keweillant gives specific reasons for keeping the fervent pilgrims away
from their sacred target. “The Catholic Church has nothing to do with this yearly pil-
grimage. These rites are for another religion. They go in front of the Church because
Vodou is a very synthetic religion. It searches to reconcile divinity. These Vodouists
think that an aspect of divinity is found inside the church. They call him Sen Jak, but
they mean Ogou. For them, Ogou is not a saint. He is a divinity.”
5
Keweillant further explains why he has kept the doors of the parish church closed
against this festival since 1978. “There were constant incidents. Perpetual sacrifices.
People had immodest habits. I saw a woman lift up her skirt in front of the saint’s
statue and say, ‘Sen Jak, here I am. It’s all for you!’ Another woman offered Sen Jak a
piece of soap to wash her crotch, forgive me! I heard a woman in the dark part of the
church say, ‘Sen Jak, you are a big, powerful man. The man I live with is too old. His
Donald J. Cosentino200
1403971625ts13.qxd  29-9-06  7:13 PM  Page 200


--- PAGE 216 ---
zozo (prick) doesn’t work. Help me to find a younger one.... ’  I  heard these sorts of
things, and decided to shut the church during the pilgrimage.”
How Deep is the Mud...?
Keweillant was merely pointing out what every Vodouist knows. Sen Jak is Ogou,
senior brother of a military lineage broad enough to include the founding heroes of
Haitian history: Dessalines, Louverture, Christophe. And their paradigmatic strug-
gles now encompass Aristide’s Lavalas movement assembled under the standard of
Ogou’s fighting red cock. Through fantastic processes of appropriation, major
events in Haitian history have thus been refigured through the lineaments of a
Spanish warrior saint. There is no doubt that the saint’s popularity rests on a per-
ceived iconic correspondence between him and the Fon/Yoruba deity, Gu/Ogun.
6
Nor that this correspondence has inspired a creolized theology which remains
profoundly affected by a continuous reinterpretation of imposed iconography. The
Ogou metaphor long ago found its correlate in Catholic popular art, but where and
how was the correspondence perceived? How deep, we ask, is the mud at Plaine-du-
Nord?
Measured in time, the mud is deep indeed, sinking into the Gospel narratives
and the Golden Legends which followed. Jesus nicknamed his impetuous cousin
James (in French, Jacques) the “Son of Thunder.” Along with Simon Peter and his
brother John (the Beloved), James was closest to Jesus, being present at the
T ransfiguration on Mt. Tabor, and the Agony in the Garden of Gethsemane. From
the Acts of the Apostles, we learn that James was martyred during Herod’s first per-
secution. Thereafter legend takes over. According to hagiography, this same
“Thunderer” traveled to Spain before his martyrdom, whence his bones were mirac-
ulously translated and discovered at Compostela in the ninth century. Out of that
legend emerged the famous apparitions of Santiago (St. James) on his white horse,
brandishing a flaming sword and inspiring the war against the Moors during the
Iberian reconquista.
7
The apparition has inspired this key image: Sword and eyes raised heavenward,
Santiago rides with sublime indifference over the maimed body parts of the Moors
lying trampled beneath the hooves of his equally oblivious white stallion. He is
dressed all in blue, with gold scallops decorating his collar and a red medallion
embossed on his wide cap. A knight mounted on a brown steed rides by his side. He
is in full armor, with the casque of his helmet closed. In a mailed fist, the knight
carries a white flag with a red cross.
Vodouists salute this polychrome image as a representation of the senior brother
of a lineage of military spirits, all of whom share the name Ogou. “Representation”
is, of course, a very pale word for an image whose properties directly reflect divinity.
Mechanically reproduced by the millions, these lithographs are none the less sacred,
in the same way that millions of St. Christopher medals, or knickknacks stamped
with the image of the Virgin of Guadalupe, are sacred in popular Catholicism. Their
commonness does not render them common, nor their ubiquity vulgar. Rather their
It’s All for You, Sen Jak! 201
1403971625ts13.qxd  29-9-06  7:13 PM  Page 201


--- PAGE 217 ---
availability is a sort of miracle, a proof of the divine presence encoded in the mysteries
of lithography. And like miracles everywhere, this image has been subject to an
intense scrutiny, a folk hermeneutic whose exegeses have significantly reshaped an old
West African god.
Image replication is a multi-media affair: lithographs, flags, plaster, concrete and
wooden statues, friezes, murals, medals, key fobs, costumes. In these various forms
the Saint adorns taxis, ounfòs, and home altars in Plaine-du-Nord, Bizonton,
Brooklyn, and all the other towns and places Haitians have made their own.
Wherever they are, so too are lithographs of Santiago/St. Jacques/Sen Jak plastered
above bedsteads and within Rogatoires (home altars). Magnified copies of the same
image are painted onto ounfò walls, cast into huge concrete representations domi-
nating the shrine rooms in Carrefour and Croix-des-Missions, shaped out of papier
maché for collectors of Haitian art, and painted into tableaux by Vodou artists.
Befitting his role as general of the armies, Sen Jak’s image is appliquéd or sequined
onto more Vodou drapo than any other lwa, except perhaps for that of his consort
Ezili, with whom he is said to march in battle.
As with so many other imported objects, Vodouists have further subjected the
lithograph to metonymic elaborations. Because Ogou is the lwa of iron, he is also
patron of roads. Thus Haitian taxi drivers tie red ribbons around the base of their rear
view mirrors;
8 or in more flamboyant obeisance, paint the image of Sylvester Stallone
as Rambo on the back of tap-taps. Or sometimes Ogou is realized in the aggrandiz-
ing of his horse, as in the carousel sculpture created by Pierrot Barra. Indeed, for
Barra the Ogou metaphor has few referential boundaries. T o update iconography for
the annual pilgrimage to Plaine-du-Nord, he created a sculpture of an Ogou airplane,
painted blue and red, with images of Sen Jak and kouzen Jezi (Jesus) peeking out the
windows.
9
There is a powerful resonance between these Haitian manifestations of Ogou and
the use of borrowed imagery in contemporary Western art. In both cases artists are
appropriating commercially distributed images to forge new cultural symbols. But it
took Andy Warhol to teach New York artists what the masters of the Port-au-Prince
iron market had already found out: “if you blow a plain image up to absurd propor-
tions, or reproduce it often enough, you are not sneering at its ordinariness but some-
how gilding it with a glamour and pathos of its own.”
10 Vicki Goldberg further
explicates the process:
For centuries, artists provided forms for society’s heroes....P hotography, film, news-
reels and television changed that, and artists are now reduced to playing with images
already established in public fantasies, stoked by forces beyond the limits of
a r t ....This is evidence of global envy ....Who is there to look up to?
11
When the referent is invoked—“Who is there to look up to?”—Vodou and secular
artists part company. For behind each divine irruption, no matter how materially fan-
tastic, there is a reality more specific than the celluloid or plastic of its fabrication.
Ogou’s reality is palpable, encountered in the T rou Sen Jak, installed at the Palais
National, or manifested just around the corner—at the neighborhood peristyle,
where Sen Jak is riding his horse tonight.
Donald J. Cosentino202
1403971625ts13.qxd  29-9-06  7:13 PM  Page 202


--- PAGE 218 ---
Of Gubasas and Sangamentos
It is crucial to note that for all its outsized celebration by Haitians, the image of
St. Jacques was encountered by Africans well before the first slave ever departed for
the Americas. In 1480, the Portuguese built a chapel to Santiago in Elmina on the
Fante coast. Thus the image of the Saint was established at the point of forced
embarkation for future generations of Africans more than a decade before the crew of
the Santa María ever set foot on Hispaniola.
12 The effects of this imposition on the
West African imagination may be conjectured, inter alia, from iconic puns on the
Christian Portuguese in Benin bronze sculpture, or in the curious parallels between
the lithograph of St. James and Fon martial display as both blend into the Vodou
aesthetic. As Robert Farris Thompson observes:
The vision of killing by iron observed within the lithograph distinctly fits the martial
paradigm of Dahomean Gu. And just as the gubasa is the central sign of war and
smithing in Dahomey, so the saber became the chief icon of Ogun Ferraille in Haiti, in
a new and wondrous context, often flanked by honorific banners, symmetrically
displayed and inclined, as if nodding in honor of Lord Gu....The shape of the shafts
of the important flags that traditionally flank the sword of the saint in ground-paintings
(and the sword of the master-of-ceremonies in vodun dancing) extend a little-noted
accent of militaristic assertion. The flags’ shafts reverse the S-curved saber’s handguard;
they are cryptic swords of cloth, following and flanking the lord of the cutting edge, even
as a white cross on a field of red in a chromolithograph accompanied the warrior saint.
13
As suggestive as these West African references are, Santiago made a far more
portentous footfall further down the coast. In 1491, Portuguese missionaries
presented a flag embroidered with the Cross of St. James to Nzinga Nkuvu, King of
the Kongo.
14 For three centuries thereafter, Santiago played a decisive role in the
transformation of Kongo culture, a role whose dimensions are only now being prop-
erly described by historians.
15 A letter dated from 1512 describes the Saint’s part in
the victory won by Dom Afonso in one of the myriad civil wars He and his propaga-
tors inspired:
We called upon the blessed apostle Saint James, and as a result, miraculously, we saw all
our enemies turn their backs and flee as fast as they could . . . after the victory we learned
that those who escaped declared as one man that when we invoked the apostle Saint
James they all beheld a white cross amid a great number of armed and mounted men
which caused them such great dismay that they could not refrain from fleeing at once.
16
After his victory, Afonso I combined the annual military ceremony commemorat-
ing his seizure of power with the canonical feast of St. James on 25 July. 17 De
Lucques, a Portuguese observer, described one such celebration which lasted for eight
days (two Kongo weeks) in the province of Soyo:
On the feast of the saint, before coming to church to hear Mass the count goes to see
the countess, from whom he receives the bow and arrows. In the presence of his wife,
who sits on the ground, and together with two of his principal chief s...h e  immedi-
ately begins to perform a private sangamento, this is, to leap about and flourish the bow.
It’s All for You, Sen Jak! 203
1403971625ts13.qxd  29-9-06  7:13 PM  Page 203


--- PAGE 219 ---
After this military drill, he returns to his palace and attends Mass, giving satisfaction
first to the devil and then to God....O n  another day there is a public sangamento
outside the church; to see so many Blacks shouting and screaming, you would think you
were witnessing a scene from Hell.
18
De Lucques’s denunciation of St. James’s feast at Soyo is, curiously, not very dif-
ferent from the complaints of Fr. Keweillant, three centuries and one ocean removed.
Both perceived bifurcated celebrations for a bifurcated saint, divine attaché for at
least two heavens. Both feasts took place outside the Church, “satisfying the [African]
devil,” before a tiny elite went inside to satisfy the Christian God. And both engaged
the resigned wrath of Catholic clergy for a religious ritual they couldn’t control. The
feast at Soyo, documented three hundred years ago, is in fact a process model for
what Africans would reinvent in Haiti, a harbinger of the immense influence Kongo
would have in Hispaniola.
19
Processes of survival or of reinvention which have settled the image of St. James at
the core of Vodou sacred art can only be conjectured from a haphazard historical
record. But religious developments in St. Domingue were certainly synchronous with
those in the Africa. While the cult of St. James was being propagated in Kongo, the
Pope declared him patron of Hispaniola. Church records indicate the slaves
embraced his cult with great enthusiasm. Several of the earliest churches built in
St. Domingue bore his name,
20 though none has so consistently reflected such
furious devotion to the saint as his church at Plaine-du-Nord.
Plaster representations of the saint have filled a niche in that church from the
eighteenth century until his deposition and the installation of iron grates a generation
ago. During all that long time the presiding clergy have continued to take a dim view
of the popular devotions inspired by the shrine they reluctantly maintained. Writing for
a church bulletin in 1950, Msgr. Jan noted, “The blacks of Plaine-du-Nord enjoy the
satisfaction of combining in the same place the two sanctuaries of their religious beliefs,
the church and the ounfò. Diocesan priests offered even sharper comments, ‘I don’t like
to assist at the feast of St. James. I am not pleased to find myself mixed up with the idol-
ators of Papa Ogou, and to find, en route, peristyles of dancers from whom escape the
hysterical cries of those possessed by “angels.” In jostling the numerous crowd, I ask
myself, “Where are the Catholics? Where are the Vodouists?”
21
The cause for all this untoward enthusiasm was not one, but two statues of
St. Jacques. Marc Pean has outlined their history, which links the 1986 celebrations
already described to a parish scandal in 1899. One might well ponder the history of
that affair, for it foreshadows all the later attempts to “root out superstition” at Plaine-
du-Nord. These fin-de-siècle events were to play out again in the dechoukaj which
followed the overthrow of Duvalier fils. In Spring of 1986, an army of fundamental-
ist Christians, incited by the anti-Vodou broadcasts of the Protestant Radio Lumière,
marched to the T rou Sen Jak. They planned to seal Ogou away forever by pouring
concrete into his muddy hole. Their intentions were foiled by the drawn machetes
and cocomacaques (weapon-sticks) of furious Vodouists who protected Ogou’s
point of emergence with the same resolve their ancestors showed against the
iconoclast assault of Cincinnatus Leconte and his Anti-Vodou League a century
before.
22
Donald J. Cosentino204
1403971625ts13.qxd  29-9-06  7:13 PM  Page 204


--- PAGE 220 ---
Vodou in the Age of Mechanical Reproductions
A passion for the images of St. James has hardly been confined to Plaine-du-Nord.
A larger than life-size beige and brown statue of the saint also stood in the old Port-
au-Prince cathedral, before it was replaced with a smaller model in blue and red by
that devoted scholar of applied Folkloristics, Dr. François Duvalier.
23 These and sim-
ilar imported representations had affected, at least sartorially, even the heroes of the
Revolution.
24 Rigaud claims Louverture covered his head with a red handkerchief, a
sign that he “marched on the military points of Le Mystère, Nago Ogou Fer.” 25
Dessalines, too, acknowledged Ogou as his mèt tèt, and publicly appropriated his
attributes (red clothes, avid rum consumption, sword constantly at hand). In this
guise Dessalines merged with Ogou in popular imagination, and so manifested
himself at a ceremony described by Papa Doc:
I quivered with stupefaction when the personality of the oungan was capsized in a
hypnotic state, and surging forward from the depths of his consciousness came
Dessalines the Emperor. It was truly him. The wild face, the fanatic physiognomy...h e
mounted two men in order to better arch his back in the pose of a chevalier.26
This manifestation seems entirely consistent with the representation of Papa Ogou as
St. Jacques, seated on the back of his ounsis as he would mount his white horse, bran-
dishing his sword to the right and to the left.
27
But even more intense conflations of image, ritual, and history occur. Maya
Deren observed and commented on an ounsi, possessed by Ogou, who was singing
“I am wounded, oh I am wounded”: “In this moment, with the side-stretched arms,
the drooping head, the profoundly noble expression of the face, the attenuated,
fallen posture of the body, and the tenderness of his two supporters, whose bodies
are slightly bowed beneath his weight—he becomes the uncannily precise image of
Christ being taken from the cross.”
28 Aware of the extraordinarily complex borrow-
ings suggested by this manifestation of Ogou as Jesus, Deren notes, “It is improba-
ble that these people have anywhere seen that Christian image. Yet even if they had,
and if this were an unconscious recreation of it, it would be the ultimate testimonial
to their profound perception of the meaning of Christ. And if the image is not
derived, but original to [Vodou], that also testifies, in another way, to an equal
profundity.”
But is there need for such Jungian hedging? What Vodouist does not also identify
her religion as Catholic? And what Catholic Church is not adorned with the Stations
of the Cross, including this very image of the Deposition—as either a frieze, or a lith-
ograph? Such representations inspire a kind of mimetic frenzy in diverse post-
Counter-Reformation cultures. In Haiti, they are objectified in the dramatis personae
on the peristyle floor. In the Western World their influence persists in the campy half-
worlds of Warhol or Mapplethorpe, whose art consists of recomposing the same lith-
ographs that give a universal validity to the lwa in the street theology of Haiti.
It is impossible to analyze the transformations wrought upon the figure of Ogou
in the last century without appreciating the profound influence of chromolithographs
It’s All for You, Sen Jak! 205
1403971625ts13.qxd  29-9-06  7:13 PM  Page 205


--- PAGE 221 ---
upon the religious imagination of Vodou.29 All the major lwa are represented by these
mass-produced, glossy images signifying (in the African American sense) correspon-
dence between saint and lwa. Noting Vodou’s ritual appropriation of chromos,
scholars commonly dismiss the imported images as ruses used only to shield the true
identity of a proscribed African god.
30 But ruses would hardly have become treasured
commodities, sold in abundance, and at a relatively stiff price, to eager Haitian cus-
tomers. Nor would ruses be so widely and intimately employed to adorn home and
ounfò.
The chromo trade began in the mid-nineteenth century, after a concordant was
signed with the Vatican ending a schism that began in 1804. The first imports from
Europe were an immediate hit. Their continuing mass popularity confirms not just
the imposition but the co-option of Catholicism. Replete with cabalistic imagery,
chromolithographs have become rich food for an African religious sensibility cut
off from its native sources. Far from being peripheral, chromolithographs consti-
tute the single most important contemporary source for the elaboration of Ogou
theology.
The bewildering array of folk exegesis inspired by the lithograph of St. James
indicates some dimensions of the hermeneutic treasure house offered up to the imag-
ination of the Vodouists. Leiris wrote the first and still most important essay on the
subject:
One sees St. James on horseback, with a sword and shield, fighting the infidels and
escorted by a knight in armor...for all my informants, the main character is the god
of the forge and war, Ogou Feray or Ogou Fer (who has a sword as his essential attrib-
ute, and as with the other Ogous, red as his color). But for some, the second character
is Ogou Badagri, brother of Ogou Feray, even though for others, he is more likely a
Gede, spirit of the cemeteries; that because of the lowered visor of the helmet of the
character in question recalls the chin piece and other cadaverish aspects (such as cotton
in the nostrils) with which the adepts who incarnate the Gedes frequently make them-
selves grotesque, all things which, besides, explicate why these latter are reputed to
always speak through their noses.
31
Note that the chromo inspires more than interpretation. It also inspires narratives
about the deity and his relationships which constitute a living Vodou mythology. The
chromo becomes a revelatory source, open to counter-analyses like rival Jewish,
Christian, or Muslim hermeutics of the same Old T estament text. Thus Leiris’s
informants suggest alternative folk exegeses of the masked knight behind St. Jacques
which identifies him not as Gede, but as Ogou Badagri. His visor has been lowered
by his brother to prevent him from courting Ezili, whose favors both are seeking. So
story becomes plot, and plot thickens.
Milo Marcelin identifies the masked figure as St. Philip, the twin brother of
St. James, and so recognized as Ogou Badagri blinded by a brother’s jealousy: “There is
a battle between these Ogou warriors, proud, jealous, especially in those things which
concern affairs of the heart. T o whom does this apply but to the wanton Ezili? A ques-
tion which can never be resolved, because no one could possess Ezili, but which gives
place to a number of myths associated with Ogou and Ezili.”
32 In Haiti, myths
become reified. Note that the dramatis personae of this variant, Sts. Philip and James,
Donald J. Cosentino206
1403971625ts13.qxd  29-9-06  7:13 PM  Page 206


--- PAGE 222 ---
are now emblazoned on a Port-au-Prince tap-tap, their celestial rivalry transformed
into urban decor.
Leiris offers this cogent analysis of the chromo-hermeneutic process:
Plurality of attributes and of names for the same divinity or the same saint (between
which a very extended and very complex play of corresponding elements of identifica-
tion could be operative), extreme elasticity of possibilities of rapport ...v ariability of
representations attached to the same divinity, and variability in the interpretation of
forms, forces one to...pay attention to everything—for historic conjunctions, and
social conditions are of a kind that favor a syncretic process.
33
By this very interpretative process, General Ogou acquires his attending officers:
St. Michael and St. George. Some of Leiris’s informants recognized Ogou Badagri in
the chromolithograph of St. Michael the Archangel wearing a red cloak. In his left
hand he holds a balance, in his right a sword with which he gets ready to rip apart a
demon. Ogou Balendjo is detected in St. George, an equestrian figure also dressed in
a red mantle, armed with a lance and spearing a dragon. Leiris notes that both saints
appear to be warriors and blacksmiths, the Ogou family trades. The presence of fire
in both images (St. Michel encounters flames from hell, St. George braves the
dragon’s tongue) enforce this double identification with Ogou. Like Ogou’s horses on
the peristyle floor, Sts. Michael and George don’t fear fire while walking on burning
coals or handling bars of red hot iron.
34
Given the breadth and fuzzy margins of the Catholic cult of the saints, and the
iconic resourcefulness of printing houses in Mexico and Italy, Vodouists do not lack
for material upon which to work their hermeneutics. Each new iconic interpretation
is contingent on the attributes of the last, no official tradition powerful enough to
check theological innovation. The process is centripetal, pushing out into new forms
like a jazz riff. So during the long nightmare of the Cédras regime (1991–94),
chromos of St. Elias became a seller in the Iron Market. Saber in hand, this saint was
poised to slice off the head of an underfoot victim, while all around him flames arose,
and other victims were being executed beneath the image of the Golden Calf. “Ogou
Kriminèl,” one informant confirmed. And so indeed St. Elie must have appeared to
the masses absorbing the blows of the Cédras-FRAPH thugs: sons of General Ogou
transformed into criminals.
One need not look far beyond the agility of this folk hermeneutic to understand
the amazing intellectual and aesthetic creativity which generates the sacred arts of
Vodou. Nor, by the same token, should one be surprised at how easily many spokes-
people for contemporary Vodou adopt New Age jargon. The Godfather of this sort
of Vodou is probably Milo Rigaud, whose Secrets of Voodoooffers the following gloss
on the origins of Ogou:
Ogou Bhathalah (Obatala) is a part of the army of Ogou loas considered in the African
tradition as the fathers of alchemy. In the universal tradition, Bhathalah corresponds
to the first blade of the Tarot (the Juggler), whose hat is the sign of the “universal life.”
This is the Magus (Wise One) or spirit par excellence. Bhathalah personifies the “dis-
cipline of chaos” because it is he who directs, with the magic wand, the cosmic traffic.
Bhatahlah “disentangles the roads” by placing himself, like a traffic officer, at the magic
It’s All for You, Sen Jak! 207
1403971625ts13.qxd  29-9-06  7:13 PM  Page 207


--- PAGE 223 ---
crossroads. The scriptural reference to his occult function is found in Ezekiel XXI,
19–21: “The Lord says, Appoint thee two ways, that the sword of the king of Babylon
may come....F o r  the king of Babylon stood at the parting of the way, at the head of
the two ways, to use divination.”
The “swordstroke of Ogou” means that the Ogou mystères (loas of fire) or “stellar
powers, creators of the intellect” are descended from heaven through a fissure shaped
like the female sex organ represented by the planet Venus (Erzulie, in Voodoo). These
are the mystères who are “forgers,” like the aelohim which descend from the Jewish
Aziluth, or the “Lords of the Flame” in Indian mythology. The Ogous in the Voodoo
tradition bear the “fire of heaven” or the “luminous fire of Venus” shaped in the forge to
represent a short serpent which traverses the planetary earth and sows fire. “Ogou’s
swordstroke” means also the act of kissing the top of the flagpoles during the course
of the ritual Voodoo salutations performed by the flagbearers. In Voodoo, Luci-Fer
whose name is also Ogou-Fer, is Venus, the morning star. It is called “Bayacou star”
because it accompanies the sun each morning to explain the “earthly necessities” or
“needs.”
35
It would be easy to dismiss this theosophic farrago for the bizarre conflation of
myths which it is. All the hallmarks of the New Age philosophy are present: the
assumption of a universal solar mythology, gnosis, alchemy, secret language. These
are all “keys” which unlock the “hidden meaning” of Vodou, including the mean-
ing of the lwa who are at some dark level manifestations of a universal pantheon.
Thus in one short paragraph Ogou is conflated with Obatala (as he is later with
Shango); the Juggler and Magus of the Tarot deck; Ezekiel’s prophetic sword; the
Jewish aelohim; the Hindu Lords of the Flame; the morning star; and through an
etymological trick, with Lucifer, the fallen angel; not to mention others in the
Vodou pantheon—Danbala the serpent divinity and Legba/Kalfou, magician of
the crossroads.
It would be a serious mistake, however, to disregard Rigaud’s metaphysics. He is
an extremely influential source for contemporary Vodou mythology, especially as the
population of Haiti urbanizes. There has been a long and complicated fascination
with Euro-Semitic mythologies in New World African cultures, which leaves its
enduring mark in the proliferation of Freemasonic and Rosicrucian temples. We have
already discussed elements of Masonic art and ritual which grace the Vodou
ceremony. A visit to Port-au-Prince T emple Sacre 5005 reveals the influence of these
cabalistic riffs in wall murals of cyber-mythology. Other trips to other temples in
the city affirm that Ogou mythology has been refracted through multiple lenses: the
imagery of Roman Catholicism especially, but also the detritus of popular culture and
the alchemy of spiritism. Haiti’s Ogou is now caught between St. Jacques, Alan
Kardec, and Sly Stallone.
36
With the folk hermeneutic explored, it becomes easier to understand why
the women in the church at Plaine-du-Nord confronted the image of St. Jacques like
hungry lovers. And why they still revere his empty niche. By the same token, the
motivations of the priests who emptied that niche, and locked the iron gratings
around the church, are also clearer. The actions of all the dramatis personae at Plaine-
du-Nord are motivated, to varying degrees, by a common appreciation that the image
of god may be more immediately sacred than god himself. Vodouists, Catholics, and
Donald J. Cosentino208
1403971625ts13.qxd  29-9-06  7:13 PM  Page 208


--- PAGE 224 ---
Protestants, at some level, all have intuited the truth of Baudrillard’s powerful
observation:
What becomes of divinity when it reveals itself in icons, when it is multiplied in
simulacra? Do these images mask the platonic idea of God, or suggest that God himself
has ever been his own simulacra—that the images concealed nothing at all. In fact they
are not images such as the original model would have made them, but actually perfect
simulacra forever radiant with their own fascination ....Then the whole system
becomes weightless, it is no longer exchanging for what is real, but exchanging in itself,
in an uninterrupted circuit without reference or circumference.”
37
Baudrillard describes the power of images to create their own self-referential
world. That is the world Sen Jak rides towards in Rameau’s painting, “The Vodou
gods ponder Haiti’s destiny.” As if emerging from a chromolithograph, he leads his
white steed towards the two Ezilis, Bawon, Zaka, and Danbala, seated on little peri-
style chairs around the vèvè Milokan, which calls down all the divinities. His arrival
will close the circle of an imagined heaven where the fate of Haiti will be played out
by all the painted saints.
Kòk Kalite
Vodou’s endless ability to recycle imagery affects secular as well as religious life,
though in Haiti the two have always been very difficult to disentangle. There is no
“was” in Haitian history. The heroes and events of the Revolution are still debated in
the newspapers, and by illiterate peasants. The 1806 assassination of Jean-Jacques
Dessalines is still hot news. Was he done in at Pont-Rouge by a plot of the mulatto
elite? This question carries weight in a nation where class and color lines usually coin-
cide. Papa Doc, the self-proclaimed champion of noirisme, elevated Dessalines to first
place in the national pantheon. The main boulevard in Port-au-Prince was renamed
after him, and the gray guinea fowl ( pentard), which had been Dessalines’s symbol,
became the emblem of Duvalier.
Veneration of the pentard as the national emblem must have influenced the selec-
tion of the fighting rooster (kòk kalite) as Titid’s political emblem. The rooster plays a
powerful role in the Haitian culture. This feisty bird is combatant in the cock fights
which are a masculine preoccupation in Haiti. A tough never-say-die “quality cock” can
carry a man’s pride, and his betting money, far in these bloody fights. And that com-
bative toughness is just the image Titid projected on the streets. He is the kòk kalite. His
place on the ballot was marked by that bird. All his campaign posters, and the T-shirts,
key chains, visors, caps, and wall art they inspired, carried a picture of Titid juxtaposed
to the red rooster. There were so many flocks of rooster masks during 1991 Carnival cel-
ebrations which immediately followed his inauguration, that the streets of Port-au-
Prince resembled a convention of Kentucky Fried Chicken restauranteurs.
Often these popular representations showed the rooster pecking at, attacking, or
mounting the pentard. A Carnival masquerader held a rooster wrapped in red and
It’s All for You, Sen Jak! 209
1403971625ts13.qxd  29-9-06  7:13 PM  Page 209


--- PAGE 225 ---
blue bunting in one hand, and dangled a wretched pentard by her tied feet from the
other. Even one of the topical Carnival songs scorned the last provisional president in
the language of the birds. The lyric accused her of supporting a pre-emptive coup
attempt against Aristide:
Erta Pascal T rouillot
Mama Kaka
Look how you let the pentard
Get into the national coop
The cock carries further Haitian connotations. It is a Masonic symbol of forti-
tude. It is a sexual symbol, a French military insignia, and perhaps most significantly,
a key player in a very popular chromo of the crucifixion. In that picture, found in
many ounfòs, the cross is surrounded by various symbols of the passion, including
the pillar where Christ was scourged. On top of the pillar is a red rooster. In Christian
symbology he represents the cock that crowed thrice to mark Peter’s betrayal. But in
Vodou? Several Haitians pointed out that the red rooster is sacred to Ogou, and its
position in the chromolithograph is evidence of Ogou’s presence at the supreme
drama of Calvary. One young Vodouist told me explicitly that Titid’s kòk kalite
proved he, too, was a worshiper of Ogou and a Vodouist. Didn’t everyone see him kiss
his mother on T .V . and wasn’t she wearing a red dress—the color sacred to Ogoun?
As if to prove his point, the young man then pointed to an Aristide campaign poster.
Under Titid’s slogan, and in place of his face, the poster simply carried the pillar and
rooster from the chromolithograph. No need for any further explanation. The
message was plain enough for Vodou.
T o many, Titid’s 1990 election victory on a slogan of “Justice, Participation, and
T ransparency” was a miracle. When Roger Lafontant, one of the Duvalier old-timers
referred to as “dinosaurs,” tried to pull off a postelection coup, the streets exploded.
Mobs rooted out and sometimes murdered suspected makouts and dinosaurs. The
coup failed. And in the days preceding Carnival 1991, Titid’s election was celebrated
by a T e Deum Mass. Inside the church the horrified elites looked on, while outside,
ecstatic crowds pressed at the windows and swung from limbs of a concrete crucifix
shouting “Yo sezi. Yo sezi”—“They are shocked. They are shocked”—the very same
taunt seen atop the tap-tap dedicated to Sts. James and Philip.
The fairytale ended in September 1991. After only seven months the elites and
their makouts could not tolerate justice, transparency, participation, paying taxes, and
especially interference with their lucrative drug trade. Titid became another in a long
line of Haitian presidents packed off into exile. But unlike those other exiles, more
legends grew in his absence. Some said that at the moment the soldiers came to kill
him, Titid was possessed by Ogou and his assassins backed away. Others said he was
protected by Christian powers, recalling wall posters of Titid with Jesus or plastic fobs
with his familiar face beaming from inside the Immaculate Heart of Mary.
Since most Haitians are Catholic and Vodou, all these legends rang true, includ-
ing the extraordinary vision of a prostrate Aristide sprawled before the putschists in
Duval-Carrié’s “La Voix des Sans Voix” [The Voice of Those Without Voices]. In this
painted tableau, Titid is separated from the generals by Death in the tragicomic form
Donald J. Cosentino210
1403971625ts13.qxd  29-9-06  7:13 PM  Page 210


--- PAGE 226 ---
of niambo, the Kongo personification of the moral authority of the dead. 38 Gazing
down from the wall are the heroes of the Revolution, none of them strangers to the
terrible machinations of power spread out below. Niambo acts as their surrogate, an
imposing reminder (like his Haitian counterpart Gede) that the ancestors are not
indifferent to acts of injustice.
Another measure of the longing inspired by Titid’s exile were the flags created by
Oldof. After the coup he began to make banners in honor of the once-and-future
president, transforming a genre hitherto dedicated exclusively to the lwa. The pro-
duction and sale of these flags was secret, and often by commission. Oldof’s designs
incorporated extravagant “quality cocks” alongside the more usual Catholic imagery,
an elevation in the aviary which fused Titid’s kòk kalite with the sacred cocks of the
Crucifixion and Ogou. In one such flag, a massive, surreal kòk is standing atop a
tomb containing the crucified Christ. The tomb is banked by skulls, and by crossed
Haitian flags. The juxtaposition evokes the correspondence of Titid, Christ, Ogou,
and of course Gede, whose skulls represent not only death, but the promise of
regeneration.
Oldof did not live to see the second coming. He died in August, 1994, three
months before President “Mirak” returned to Haiti. With Titid’s restoration, the pro-
duction of Lavalas flags openly flourished, especially in the Bel-Air atelier of Silva
Joseph. In Silva’s drapo, references to Gede, Bawon, or Christ Crucified disappear.
Kòk kalite now emerges multicolored, triumphant, even vainglorious, heralding the
face of Titid in sequins and pearls. In Silva’s flag, the president’s image usurps the
place otherwise reserved for chromolithographs of the saint/lwa.
As if to acknowledge this apotheosis, a portrait of President Aristide now rests on a
Petwo altar in an ounfò near Solomon Market, just a few minutes away from the
national palace. Oungan Sauveur St. Cyr nestled the picture there, near a ceramic
figure of Ezili Dantò, sometime after Titid’s triumphant return in October 1994.
Ogou at last was back home. And back in confederacy with Ezili Dantò and the other
Petwo spirits with whom he had marched in 1791. In Vodou, as they say, there is no Was.
Notes
1. These observations on the ceremonies at Plaine-du-Nord are derived from my first field
visit to Haiti in 1986. That visit was funded by a research fellowship from the National
Endowment for the Humanities, and by the University of California Research Expeditions
Program (UREP), which also sponsored the participation of ten research assistants. I wish
especially to acknowledge the collaboration of Project Co-Director, Henrietta Cosentino.
In turn, we wish to acknowledge Fr. Keweillant, the town pastor, for obliging us in many
ways during our festival research.
2. Dating the origins of the festival is problematic. A woman from Plaine-du-Nord reported
to T ele-Haiti, “During Hurricane Flora in 1960 a pit appeared in an open space within the
village. Later it filled up with rainwater and formed a mud pool. The pilgrims of St. Jacques
saw a direct manifestation of the power of Ogou in this event” (Chantal Regnault, personal
communication). Carole Devillers has established a time line for this festival by a much ear-
lier dating for the first appearance of the T rou, “Popular memory has it that these holes 
It’s All for You, Sen Jak! 211
1403971625ts13.qxd  29-9-06  7:13 PM  Page 211


--- PAGE 227 ---
started in 1909 when the Gallois River flooded the newly built Centenary Road. Later the
pond grew bigger when sand was dug from it for construction of the police station”
(Devillers [1985] 404). Keweillant further muddies the mud by asserting that the basin
and bull festival for Ogou didn’t begin until the 1930s.
3. Weekly ceremonies are suspended during the month of November and the season of Lent.
November is dedicated exclusively to services for Gede, whose very interesting relationship
to Ogou has been explored by Karen McCarthy Brown, “The Vèvè of Haitian Vodou: A
Structural Analysis of Visual Imagery,” PhD dissertation, T emple University, 1976.
During Lent all liturgical services for the lwa are suspended, and their altar objects are
shrouded in cloth. Santeria and other African derived religions practice a similar custom,
which was common in pre-Vatican II Catholicism. There is the further implication of
hierarchical ordering in this covering: the lwa paying homage to Bondye, in his aspect as
the mystère, Suffering Jesus.
4. For the ritual significance of rad penitans, see Thompson (1983), chapter 3. Just as at a
Vodou ceremony (or indeed, at a Catholic Mass), there were many more women than men
pilgrims. The ratio was approximately 3:1.
5. Keweillant’s observations come from an interview at his rectory on July 24, 1986. He later
allowed us into the church to video the barrage of sacred offerings through the closed grat-
ings. It seemed like a war zone. We noted that the guards posted inside were willing to
accept offerings for St. Jacques and place them in the church in return for a small gratuity.
6. Not that the West African antecedents of Ogou present themselves as models of unilineal
descent. The degree to which the Yoruba Ogun may be comprehended as a single deity
with a particular iconography is a subject of some scholarly debate. Thus Karen Barber
observes, “Like other orisa, Ogun is distinct and yet not distinct, participating in a spec-
trum of and capabilities shared by the whole array of spiritual beings ....H e  exists in a
complex shifting configuration of relationships, sometimes overlapping, sometimes sepa-
rated, in some towns occupying one role, in others another” (1990, 290).
7. The shrine built for the “Thunderer” over the site of his relics in Compostela became
Europe’s second most important pilgrimage site (after Rome, of course). The Wyf of Bathe
claims to have visited Compostela during the opening lines of her prologue in The
Canterbury T ales.
8. Ogun’s patronage of the road is also honored in Western Nigeria where some taxi drivers
seek to appease the orisa by the propitiatory hitting and killing of a dog, Ogun’s favorite
sacrifice. For a celebrated development of this theme, see Wole Soyinka’s play, The Road,
or his volume of poems, Idanre.
9. Barra was also spurred into creativity by a more secular paper airplane he observed in the col-
lection of Marilyn Houlberg (Houlberg is professor of art and anthropology at the School of
the Art Institute of Chicago). It is Barra’s peculiar talent to find inspiration in whatever
pitches up at the market, or in his dreams (private communication with Houlberg, 1994).
10. From a review of “Pulp Fiction,” by Anthony Lane, The New Yorker, October 10, 1994, 96.
11. Vicki Goldberg, from her review of the “Elvis and Marilyn” Show at the Boston Fine Arts
Museum: “A Pair of Saints Who Refuse to Stay Dead,” Arts and Leisure Section, New York
Times, December 18, 1994, 49.
12. LeGrace Benson, “Islamic Motifs and Haitian Art,” Journal of Caribbean Studies , 9, (1
and 2), 62.
13. Thompson, Flash of the Spirit, 172.
14. Balandier (1968[1969]), 46.
15. See ibid.; Thornton (1984) inter alia.
16. Balandier (1968 [1969]), 49. Students of oral tradition will note the parallels between this
testimony and that which marked the apparitions during the reconquista, or indeed the
Donald J. Cosentino212
1403971625ts13.qxd  29-9-06  7:13 PM  Page 212


--- PAGE 228 ---
apparition of Constantine, “In Hoc Signo Vinces,” the paradigm for all “Cross in the Sky”
legends.
17. Balandier (ibid.) goes on to make an important point about Afonso’s co-option of this
Christian festival, “It was merely a way of adding a new celebration to an older one, with-
out changing the meaning of the institution as such ....Christianity was conceived as a
supplementary method of reinforcement, not as a religion exclusive of the old beliefs.
From this period began the ‘heresies’ which were to multiply until the end of the modern
colonial period.”
18. Balandier (1968 [1969]), 119–120.
19. According to Thornton, devotions to the Saint became institutionalized in Kongo: “in
1622, King Pedro II made a charter for the funding of his royal chapel, the Chapel of
St. James, stipulating exact salaries to be paid to members of the chapel” (Thornton
[1984], 161).
20. Even the Cathedral in Port-au-Prince, dedicated in 1781 to Our Lady of the Assumption,
was widely understood to be under his protection and popularly known by his name
(Beauvoir-Dominique [1991], 47).
21. Quoted from The Bulletin of Our Lady of Perpetual Help , a periodical founded by Msgr.
Kersuzan, Bishop of Cap Haitien at the turn of the 19th century, cited in Pean (1977) (my
translation).
22. Amy Wilentz has also described the attempt to seal up the T rou, “At the end of February,
Keweillant told me, a group of militant Protestants came to see him, and asked whether
he would help them plug up the source of the mudhole. ‘It was a good idea, I told them.
But now I realize that they should have done it right after February 7, or they should
have waited much longer and done it when the people were more psychologically
prepared.’ . . . The battle is not a new one. Protestants and the Catholic Church have
always wanted to stop up the hole; in Duvalier’s day, Keweillant says, ‘the hole was
protected by the palace,’ meaning the dictatorship. Now, it is protected by the people.”
(Wilentz 1987, 120–121).
23. The cathedral statue was part of a side altar dedicated to St. Jacques, which in the 19th
century became popularly associated with statues of the revolutionary heroes erected in
the nearby Champs-de-Mars (Beauvoir-Dominique, L ’Ancienne Cathédrale de Port-au-
Prince, 47).
24. The dialectic works in two directions, as Beauvoir-Dominique observes ( L ’Ancienne
Cathédrale de Port-au-Prince, 62), “We must guard against a unilateral vision of the rela-
tionship between tradition and history as one of agent to product. While the collective
memory of Ogou-Sen Jak worked on the heroes, the actions of history worked on the
memory” my translation.
25. 1969 [1985], 66.
26. Beauvoir-Dominique, L ’Ancienne Cathédrale de Port-au-Prince, 59.
27. Ibid., 59–60.
28. In her own footnote, Deren remarks, “This manifestation occurred in precisely the same
way several times, over a five month period, and was accepted without surprise, as if those
present were familiar with it, although it does not seem to be a very common aspect”
(1953, 132).
29. The most significant parallel in contemporary religions is the dialectical relationship
between the Indian chromolithograph of the Snake Charmer and the development of
Mami Wata cults in West and Central Africa (Drewal 1988).
30. Included among the scoffers is Luc de Heusch, who dismisses the correspondence between
lwa and lithograph, “But at the outset, we must do away with the fake problem of
Christian syncretism in voodoo. Throughout Haiti, the temples are decorated with colour
It’s All for You, Sen Jak! 213
1403971625ts13.qxd  29-9-06  7:13 PM  Page 213


--- PAGE 229 ---
reproductions of Catholic saints that evoke the loa through what Michel Leiris has
referred to as a pun based on objects instead of words ( un calembour d’objets). For exam-
ple, Ogun the Yoruba war god, is likened to St. James portrayed as a victorious knight
wielding a sword. Ogun belongs to the Nago family of gods, the Fon term for their Yoruba
enemies. An especially well-qualified informant stated that the Nago spend their time
making war on horseback. Hence Ogun, whenever he enters the bodies of his followers, is
like a knight on horseback wielding a sword. Thus is explained the iconographic equiva-
lence between the African god and the Catholic saint” (“Kongo in Haiti”), (291–292). De
Heusch then makes the following definitive observation, “Any religion, including
Christianity, is ultimately a syncretic phenomenon” (298–299). What DeHeusch fails to
understand is that syncretism, once begun, takes on a life of its own.
31. Leiris 1952, 204 (my translation).
32. Marcelin quoted in ibid., 1952, 204, n. 2 (my translation). Comments on Marcelin are
also included from Beauvoir-Dominique, L ’Ancienne Cathédrale de Port-au-Prince .
Comparative mythologists will note that Ezili fills the mythic place held by Osun in
Yoruba/Lucumí theology. Both deities remain unattainable objects of Ogun/Ogou’s frus-
trated libido; a frustration which may have inspired the fervent sexual offerings to
St. Jacques reported by Fr. Keweillant at Plaine-du-Nord (see above).
33. Leiris, “Notes sur l’usage de chromolithographies catholiques par les vodouisants d’Haiti,”
204, n. 3.
35. Rigaud 1969 [1985], 76–77.
36. His modern predicament is elegantly captured by Hector Hyppolite in his painting,
“Ogou Ferraille.” Gone are the martial clothes of St. Jacques. Hyppolite’s Ogou is a
Magus, controlling elements of divination and magic suasion as diverse as the catalogue of
Milo Rigaud. See Drot, Art Naïf, Art Vodou(1988), 129. It is worth noting that in African
cosmologies the forge is widely associated with mysteries of divination and magic.
37. Baudrillard 1984, 255.
38. A niambo is “a massive ‘mummy’ meant to be displayed, wept over by descendants, and
then perambulated on in glory to its grave....These towering, massive, gigantic pres-
ences, larger than life, loom over the person escorting them to their final resting place”
(Thompson and Cornet 1981, 58). Of niambo’s moral authority, Fu-Kiau states, “When
you die you automatically become an ancestor. But not everyone is made into a niambo.
Being buried in a niambo figure means the community believes this person will become
our medium...saying to our ancestors, ‘I am their mediator. I move between worlds’
Thompson, 63. So in Duval-Carrié’s painting, niambo stands between Titid, Cedras and
les héros, mediating the unfolding disaster for Haiti.
References
Balandier, Georges. 1968 [1969]. Daily Life in the Kingdom of the Kongo . London: George
Allen and Unwin Ltd. [Cleveland: Meridian].
Barber, Karen. 1990. Review of “Africa’s Ogun.” Journal of Religion in Africa 20: 3.
Baudrillard, Jean. 1968. Le Système des Objets. Paris: Gallimard.
———. 1984. The precession of Simulacra. In Art After Modernism, edited by Brian Wallis.
New York: The New Museum of Contemporary Art.
Beauvoir-Dominique, Rachel. 1991 L ’Ancienne Cathédrale de Port-au-Prince. Port-au-Prince:
Editions Henri Deschamps.
Donald J. Cosentino214
1403971625ts13.qxd  29-9-06  7:13 PM  Page 214


--- PAGE 230 ---
Benson, LeGrace. 1992. Some observations on West African Islamic motifs and Haitian art.
Journal of Caribbean Studies 9 (Winter/Spring): 59–66.
Brown, Karen McCarthy. 1976. The Vèvè of Haitian Vodou: A structural analysis of visual
imagery. PhD dissertation, T emple University.
De Heusch, Luc. 1989. “Kongo in Haiti: A New Approach to Religious Syncretism.” Man
(Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute), 24 (June): 290–303.
Deren, Maya. 1953 [1970, 1983]. Divine Horsemen: The Living Gods of Haiti . New York:
Chelsea House; McPherson and Co. and Thames and Hudson.
Devillers, Carole. 1985. “Of Spirits and Saints,” National Geographic 167 (3).
Drewal, Henry John. 1988. “Interpretation, invention, and representation of Mami Wata,”
Performance in Contemporary African Arts . Bloomington: Indiana University Folklore
Institute.
Leiris, Michel. 1952. “Notes sur l’usage de chromolithographies catholiques par les
vodouisants d’Haiti,” Les Afro-Americans. Dakar: IFAN.
Pean, Marc. 1977. L ’Illusion Héroïque: T ome 1 1890–1902, 25 Years of Capoise Life. Port-au-
Prince: Prix Deschamps.
Rigaud, Milo. 1969 [1985]. Secrets of Voodoo. San Francisco: City Lights Books.
Soyinka, Wole. 1967. Idanre and Other Poems. New York: Hill and Wang.
Thompson, Robert Farris, and Joseph Cornet. 1981. The Four Moments of the Sun .
Washington, DC: National Gallery of Art.
Thompson, Robert Farris. 1983. Flash of the Spirit: African and Afro-American Art and
Philosophy. New York: Random House.
Thornton, John. 1984. The Development of an African Catholic Church in the Kingdom of
the Kongo, 1491–1750. Journal of African History 25: 147–167.
Wilentz, Amy. 1987. Voodoo in Haiti today. Grand Street (Winter).
It’s All for You, Sen Jak! 215
1403971625ts13.qxd  29-9-06  7:13 PM  Page 215


--- PAGE 231 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 232 ---
Notes on Contributors
Patrick Bellegarde-Smith is Professor of Africology at the University of Wisconsin-
Milwaukee. He holds a PhD in International Politics and has written extensively on
issues of Haitian cultural identity, social thought and religion. He is a houngan
asogwe, a priest of Vodou. He is the author of Haiti: The Breached Citadel (1990
2004), In the Shadow of Powers: Dantès Bellegarde in Haitian Social Thought (1985),
and editor of Fragments of Bone: Neo-African Religions in a New World (2005). He is
co-editor, with Claudine Michel, of the forthcoming anthologies God in Every
Woman: Gender, Power and Politics in Haitian Vodou (forthcoming) and Haitian
Vodou: Spirit, Myth, Reality(Indiana University Press, 2006).
LeGrace Benson holds a PhD from Cornell University and an M.F .A. from the
University of Georgia. Currently she is Director of the Arts of Haiti Research Project
and an Associate Editor of the Journal of Haitian Studies. Author of a number of arti-
cles in scholarly journals concerning Haitian art, she has also contributed chapters to
books concerning educational, environmental, and art issues in Haiti and the wider
Caribbean. She is now a visiting researcher at the UCSB Center for Black Studies.
Karen McCarthy Brown is Professor of Sociology and Anthropology at Drew
University. She holds an MA from Columbia University and a PhD from T emple
University. Her areas of expertise include religion and politics in Haiti and religion as
a form of social resistance. She is the author of the acclaimed Mama Lola: A Vodou
Priestess in Brooklyn, (1991/2004) and another important volume, Tracing the Spirit:
Ethnographic Essays on Haitian Art, as well as many articles and essays.
Carrol F . Coates is Professor of French & Comparative Literature at Binghamton
University (SUNY), where his teaching has focused on francophone literature of the
Caribbean and West Africa. He has published English translations of three Haitian
novels with the University of Virginia Press: René Depestre, The Festival of the Greasy
Pole; Jacques Stephen Alexis, General Sun My Brother, and In The Flicker of an Eyelid
(the latter in collaboration with Edwidge Danticat). He is Series Editor of Caraf
Books (Virginia), Caribbean and African Literature in T ranslation.
Leslie G. Desmangles is Professor of Religion and International Studies at T rinity
College in Hartford, Connecticut and served as the first president of the Haitian
Studies Association from 1994–1998. He holds a PhD in Anthropology of Religion
from T emple University. He has published many articles on Haitian Vodou and is
also the author of The Faces of the Gods: Vodou and Roman Catholicism in Haiti
1403971625ts14.qxd  28-9-06  1:12 PM  Page 217


--- PAGE 233 ---
(University of North Carolina Press, 1993). He edited a volume for the Haitian
Studies Association entitled Haiti in the Global Context(1995), and served as an asso-
ciate Editor for the Encyclopedia of African and African American Religions(Routledge
Press, 2001).
Gerdès Fleurant holds a PhD in music and is Professor Emeritus of Music Culture at
Wellesley College. He is the author of many articles published in scholarly books and
journals as well as Dancing Spirit: Rhythms and Rituals of Haitian Vodun, the Rada Rite
(1996). He is the founder and director of Léocardie and Alexandre Kenscoff Cultural
Center, a culture, research, and development center in Mirebalais, Haiti.
Laënnec Hurbon was born in Jacmel, Haiti and holds graduate degrees in theology
(Institut catholique de Paris) and sociology (Sorbonne). He is the Director of research
at the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique in Paris (CNRS) and a Professor
at Quisqueya University in Port-au-Prince, of which he is a founding member. He
specializes in Caribbean religion, culture and politics, and is the author of many
books and essays on Haitian Vodou, including Dieu dans le vaudou Haitien, Voodoo:
Search for the Spirit, Voodoo: Truth and Fantasyand Los Misterios del Vudu.
Elizabeth McAlister holds an MA in African American Studies, an MA in History,
and a PhD in American Studies. She is Associate Professor of Religion and Chair of
the Department of Religion at Wesleyan University. Her area of expertise is Afro-
Caribbean religious traditions, particularly Haitian Vodou. She is also interested in
issues of transnationalism, religion and the social construction of race and ethnicity,
as well as religion and gender and sexuality. She is the author of Rara: Vodou, Power,
and Performance in Haiti and its Diaspora (University of California Press, 2002) and
she has produced two CDs, Angels in the Mirror: Voodoo Music of Haiti, and Rhythms
of Rapture: Sacred Musics of Haitian Vodou , published by the Smithsonian in con-
junction with the vodou exhibit at the UCLA Fowler Museum of Cultural History
titled “Sacred Arts of Haitian Vodou.”
Claudine Michel is Professor of Black Studies at the University of California, Santa
Barbara and holds a PhD in International Education. She is the author of Offerings:
Continuity and Transformation in Haitian Vodou (forthcoming from Oxford
University Press), Aspects Educatifs et Moraux du Vodou Haïtien(1995), and co-author
of Théories du Développement de l’Enfant: Etudes Comparatives (1994). She is also co-
editor of Black Studies: Current Issues, Enduring Questions (2001) and The Black
Studies Reader (2004). She is co-editor, with Patrick Bellegarde-Smith, of the forth-
coming anthologies God in Every Woman: Gender, Power and Politics in Haitian
Vodou, and Haitian Vodou: Spirit, Myth, Reality(Indiana University Press, 2006). She
is currently the Editor of The Journal of Haitian Studies.
Pierre Minn received his BA from Yale University. He is presently completing PhD
studies in medical anthropology and related fields at McGill University in Canada.
He is the recipient of the Peter K. New Award (1998), and has received a Fulbright
Grant to South Korea. He has done field research on medical anthropology and
religion in various parts of Haiti and the Dominican Republic.
Notes on Contributors218
1403971625ts14.qxd  28-9-06  1:12 PM  Page 218


--- PAGE 234 ---
Richard Brent T urneris Associate Professor of African-American World Studies and
Religious Studies at the University of Iowa. He is the author of numerous articles,
including “Mardi Gras Indians and Second Lines, Sequin Artists and Rara Bands:
Street Festivals and Performances in New Orleans and Haiti,” and “The Haiti-New
Orleans Vodou Connection: Zora Neale Hurston As Initiate Observer,” both pub-
lished in the Journal of Haitian Studies. His most recent book is entitled Islam in the
African-American Experience and his current research is on Vodou in New Orleans.
Anna Wexler is an artist and scholar, with a PhD from Harvard University, whose
research/writings have focused on visual forms in Haitian Vodou and Cuban
Santeria. Her multimedia performance piece, “Gullah Jack’s Bag,” was produced in
collaboration with the artist/Vodou priest, Erol Josue, in 2002. She is currently
developing collaborative performance projects engaged with persona, duration, and
the production of ritual objects. A faculty member at the Springfield College School
of Human Services, Boston, she teaches courses on African Atlantic and other
culturally based healing systems.
Notes on Contributors 219
1403971625ts14.qxd  28-9-06  1:12 PM  Page 219


--- PAGE 235 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 236 ---
Abubakri, 158
affranchis (free people), 104–106
Afonso, Dom, 203, 213n17
Africa
ancestors, attention on, 161
cross, Vodou uses/interpretations of,
42–49
Dahomean/Catholic syncretism in
Vodou, 39–42
environment inspiritedness, 162
Haitian flag and, 70–71
humoral medicine from, 151n4
influences in Caribbean, 1
Islam in, 157–158
Islamic signs in Haiti, 162–167
knowledge of captives from, 155–157
Rara origins from, 90
Reconquista era, 159–160
religions of, xi
Santiago/St. James images in, 203
Vodou roots in, 103, 111
Vodou’s pervasiveness and, 30
African Religions and Philosophy (Mbiti), 31
“African Religions in the Americas: The
Islands in Between” (Barrett), 32
The African Religions of Brazile(Bastide), 158
African-Americans, 118. See also New
Orleans Vodou
African-diasporic culture
Haitian-New Orleans Vodou connection,
121–122
Zora Neale Hurston and, 117–118,
130–131
Africans
demonization of, xi
knowledge of slaves, 155–157
linked with devil, 86–87
africology, 114n15
Afro-Caribbean spirituality
cultural differences, 1–2
family, centrality of, 5–8
healing traditions, 2–3
knowledge, power, 23–25
person, Vodou view of, 8–11
rituals of Haitian Vodou, 11–13
serving spirits in Haiti, 4–5
Vodou spirits, 16–19
agricultural compounds (lakou), 60
agriculture, 137, 145
Agwe, 168
Agwe Tawoyo, 66
Aida Wedo, 36n9
AIDS, 94, 140
AIDS and Accusation (Farmer), 140
Ainsi parla l’oncle (Price-Mars), 70
Aizin, 171
al-Burak, 172
Alexander, Jim, 123
Alexander VI, Pope, 159
Alexis, Jacques Stephen
on President Vincent, 184
quote of, 101
Vodou in novel by, 187, 190–191, 192
Alocoque, St. Marguerite-Mary, 169
“Alourdes: A Case Study of Moral Leadership
in Haitian Vodou” (Brown), 31
altar, 67
American Civil War, 122
American Occupation of Haiti
bourgeois social revolution and, 54
campaign against Vodou, 126
classes and, 107–108
Haitian flag and, 70, 71
Indigenism as reaction to, 53
ancestors, 161–162
Anderson, Mother Leafy, 126
Index
1403971625ts15.qxd  28-9-06  1:57 PM  Page 221


--- PAGE 237 ---
Angel Heart (film), 35n1
Anne, Saint, 171, 200
anti-Semitism
burning of Jew/Judas in effigy, 83–87
demonization of Jews, 80–81
Jew in Haitian culture, 93–96
taught by Catholic clergy in Haiti, 97n29
anti-superstition campaign
efforts of Roman clergy, 184
in Haiti, 88
Haitian novel about, 190–191
Antwanèt (Bèlans resident), 147
apartheid, 109
apostles, 92
Arc-en-ciel pour un occident chrétien
(Depestre), 192
Archer, Joe, 56
Ardouin, Beaubrun, 106
Arhes mermaid, 168–169
Aristide, Jean-Bertrand
kòk kalite (fighting rooster) image,
209–211
Kreyòl, Vodou and, 110
Lavalas movement, 201
revolutionaries before, 114n18
U.S. role in election of, 108
art
images of Santiago/St. James, 201–206
kòk kalite(fighting rooster) image, 209–211
reproductions of images, 205–209
of Vodou, 183
Ashkenazi Jews, 95
Asofo banners, 164
Aspects Moraux et Educatifs du Vodou Haïtien
(Michel), 34, 182
assògwe (with the asson), 15
asson
assògwe (with the asson) ritual, 15
taking the asson ritual, 12, 26n6
attention, 161
Aubin, Eugène, 68, 69
Auguste, J. C., 171–172
Azaka, 17, 36n9
Azaka Médé, 165, 166
Baer, Roberta D., 148
Balandier, Georges, 212n16, 213n17
balanse (to balance), 24–25
“balm yards” (healing centers), 2
Bambara, 44–45, 48
bands, Rara, 82, 83
baptism
Africans and, 87
of flags, 71–72
as Vodou ritual, 12
Baron Simityè (Baron of the Cemetery)
call on, 22
in Rara, 79
role of, 36n9
Barra, Pierrot, 202, 212n9
Barrett, L., 32
Bastide, Roger, 158
bathing
for chalè, 140, 141–142
healing with, 24–25
lack of water for, 145–146
Baudrillard, Jean, 209
Baussan, Robert, 56
Bazile, Clotaire
Anna Wexler’s work on, 76
on baptized flags, 72
on flag designs, 167
on history of flags, 67
traditions, continuation of, 175n40
Beaubrun, Théodore, 56
Beauvoir, Max, 184
Beauvoir-Dominique, Rachel, 128, 131
begging, 5
behavior, 156–157
Bèlans, Haiti
chalè and environment, 150
chalè as folk illness and, 148
chalè as metaphor in, 149
chalè study in, 135–136
chalè symptoms, treatment, 139–142
description of/inhabitants of, 136–137
medicinal plant use in, 152n12
nurses’ view of chalè, 143–144
poverty and chalè, 147–148
refwadisman in, 151n5
research methodology for study, 137–138
water and chalè, 145–146
water conditions in, 143
Bellegarde, Dantès
Carbonarisme, 112n2
on Haiti as province of France, 107
on Vodou, 102
Bellegarde-Smith, Patrick
on Haitian social
development/democracy, 101–112
information about, 217
on Lwa, 30
Index222
1403971625ts15.qxd  28-9-06  1:57 PM  Page 222


--- PAGE 238 ---
overview of book, xi–xiv
on unity in Vodou, 182
Vodou definition of, 29
on Vodou’s synthetic quality, 120
“Bénédiction des Drapeaux par la Maitresse
de l’Eau” (Valcin), 69
beneficence, 32
Benson, LeGrace
on Catholic processional banners, 72–73
information about, 217
on Islamic/Breton influence on Vodou,
155–176
overview of chapter by, xiii
Bercy, Drouin de, 166
Bible, 92
Bi-Centennial Exhibition, 1949, 55
biomedicine
biomedical categorization of chalè
symptoms, 143
disease from, 136
folk illness and, 148
nurses’ view, 143–144
terms used by Haitians, 140
Bizango (secret society), 128
black English, 113n9
Black religion
Haitian-New Orleans Vodou connection,
121–122
Marie Laveau, 123–125
New Orleans Vodou, 118–121
Zora Neale Hurston and, 118
Blain, Pierre, 56
Blanchet, Linda Mathon, 55, 56
Bleier, Suzanne Preston, 72
Boas, Franz, 118
Bohning, Don, 181
bòkò
definition of, 112n1, 193
in Haitian literature, 185–186, 188, 
190, 191
Bolivar, Simón, 106, 107
Bon Dieu (Godhead), 46, 49
Bondyè (God), 19
books, 155, 156
Borno, Louis, 109
Boukan Ginen, 52, 60–61
Boukman Dutty, 101
Boukman Eksperyans
formation of, 60–61
named after Makandal, 112n1
songs of, 52, 61
bourgeois social revolution, 54–56
Bourguinon, Erika, 165
bowels, 139
Boyer, Jean-Pierre, 106
Bradley, D. J., 143
The Breached Citadel (Bellegarde-Smith), 29
Brierre, Jean F ., 56, 114n30
Brittany
light from, 168–170
sacred tree symbol in, 171–172
Brodwin, Paul, 144
Brown, David H., 88, 99n58
Brown, Karen McCarthy
Afro-Caribbean spirituality, 1–25
Carrol F . Coates and, 181
on François Duvalier, 184
on Gede/Ogou relationship, 212n3
on heating up, 151n3
on humanism, 31
information about, 217
on kanzo, 72
on kouche, 74
Mama Lola, 118
on military-political complex, 69
overview of chapter by, xii
vèvè research by, 163
on Vodou as healing, 183
Vodou definition of, 182
Vodou healing centrality, 82
on Vodou’s functions, 28
on words in action, 33
Bryan, William Jennings, 53
bull, 200
bumps, 140
burning, Jew in effigy, 83–87
bushpriest (prêt’ savanne), 41, 71
Bustillo, Marta, 148
Bwa Kayiman
Boukman Eksperyans and, 60, 61
Haitian Revolution in, 52
Vodou ceremony at, 184
byen eshofe (well heated up), 13
Cabon, Père Adolphe, 41
Caco rebellions, 108
calabash, 43–44
Callaloo (Wexler), 76
Canon, Katie G., 118
capitalism, 82
Carbonarisme, 102, 112n2
cardinal points of universe, 43–44
Index 223
1403971625ts15.qxd  28-9-06  1:57 PM  Page 223


--- PAGE 239 ---
card-reading, 20
Carew, Jan, 110
Casimir, Lumaine, 55–56
Casséus, Frantz, 56
Catholicism
anti-superstition campaign, 184, 190–191
Breton missions in Haiti, 169–170
church in Plaine-du-Nord, 199–201
cross, Vodou uses/interpretations, 42–49
Haitian national identity and, 110
images of saints, reproductions, 205–209
images of St. James/Santiago, 201–205
Jew burning ritual in Haiti, 83–87
John XIII’s stance, 57
processional banners, 72–73
Rara and, 81
religion of elites in Haiti, 104
syncretism with Dahomean religions, 39,
40–42
Vodou creation and, 82
Vodou drapo and, 71–72
Vodou practice and, 28
in Vodou rituals, 12
Vodouists in Catholic imagination, 87–93
Catholics
Catholic Creoles in New Orleans, 126
Haitian Catholics and Vodouists, 89
Marie Laveau, 123
Cédras, Raoul, 108
cemetery, 6, 22
ceremonies. See also rituals
cross, uses/interpretations, 42–49
in Haiti, 12–13
kanzo, 73–76
Cesaire (oungan), 13–14
Césaire, Aimé, 53
chalè, 148, 151n3
chalè (heat) illness
Bèlans/inhabitants of, 136–137
culture-bound syndrome, 149–150
as folk illness, 148
larger issues and, 145–148
as metaphor, 149
origins of, 138
overview of, 135–136
research methodology, 137–138
symptoms, biomedical perspective of,
143–144
symptoms, treatments, 139–142
change, principles of, 48
Chardin, T eilhard de, 162
chatrang (chess), 163, 164–165
Chauvet, Marie
flag and, 71
Vodou in novel by, 187, 192
checkety pattern
for bull sacrifice, 175n41
chess game, 164–165
on Djinka cloths, 167
on quilts, 165–166
in vèvè, 163–164
chess (chatrang), 163, 164–165
Cheung, Shueng-Tak, 149
children
chalè and, 150
divine twins as, 16, 17
fetus in perdition, 21
in Haiti, condition of, 4
Haiti as child-centered culture, 24
work of, 12
“Choeur Michel Déjean”, 55, 56
“Choeur Simidor”, 55
chofe (heat up), 82–83
Christianity
anti-Semitism, 80–81, 95
anti-superstition campaign, 190–191
burning of Jew/Judas in effigy, 83–87
Christian slaves, 159
communication with ancestors and, 161
environmental inspiritedness in, 162
Haitian Holy Week of Easter, 79–80
Haitian national identity and, 110
Haitian presidents and, 184
images of saints, reproductions, 
205–209
images of St. James/Santiago, 201–206
racism towards Haitians, 105
Sen Jak as St. James/Santiago, 199–202
symbols from Brittany, 168–170
Vodou and, 28
Vodou not absorbed by, 120–121
Vodouists in Catholic imagination, 87–93
Christophe, Henri, 110, 199
chromolithographs, 205–209
Cimber, Alphonse, 56
Cirlot, J. E., 165
Civil Rights Movement
Conscientization movement and, 51
Freedom Culture and, 57
race as nationalism, 109
Rasin Movement and, 61
Civil War, American, 122
Index224
1403971625ts15.qxd  28-9-06  1:57 PM  Page 224


--- PAGE 240 ---
class
American occupation and, 107–108
Catholic vs. Vodou, 89–93
of Haiti, 81–82
Haitian independence and, 104–107
in New Orleans, 122
political culture of Haiti, 108–112
Clérismé, Rénald, 167, 173n22
Coates, Carrol F .
information about, 217
overview of chapter by, xii
Vodou in Haitian literature, 181–193
cock (kòk kalite), 209–211
Code Noir
Jews and, 86
underground Vodou from, 41
Vodou in New Orleans and, 122
Cohen, William B., 159
Colin, Moniqe and Pollone, 72
Colon, Christobal (Christopher Columbus),
79–80
colonialism, 104–106
The Colonizer’s Model of the World(Palcy),
114n17
commitments, to spirits, 11
community
initiates and, 131
spirit possession and, 13, 14
Compère Général Soleil (Alexis), 187, 192
Compostela, Spain, 201, 212n7
Comtese, Marie, 123
Congo, 57
Congo Square, New Orleans, 121–122
Conjuring Culture (Smith), 118
Conscientization movement
bourgeois social revolution, 54–56
Freedom Culture, 57–59
Haitian revolution, 52
Haitian song of freedom and, 51
Indigenism, Negritude, 53–54
Rasin Movement, 60–62
summary of, 62–63
contract, 83
Cook, Mercer, 54
cooling or chilling (refwadisman), 151n5
Cornet, Joseph, 214n38
Cosentino, Donald J.
overview of chapter by, xiii
Sacred Arts of Haitian Vodou, 68
on Sen Jak worship/images, 199–214
Cosentino, Henrietta, 211n1
cosmology, 182
Courlander, Harold
on checkety pattern, 175n41
on root of Vodou, 30
on Vodou as true religion, 29
Creole language. See Kreyòl
Creole Wild West, 128
Creoles, 87
creolization, 82, 88–89
cross
Catholic/Vodou correspondence, 41
Dahomean origins of, 39
Vodou uses, interpretations of, 42–49
Cuban religion, 1
culture
bourgeois social revolution, 54–56
Catholic vs. Vodou, 88–93
democracy in popular culture, 108–112
Freedom Culture of 1970s, 57–59
Haitian societal development, 101–104
Indigenism, Negritude, 53–54
Jew in Haitian culture, 93–96
Rasin/Root Music Movement, 60–62
songs of freedom, 62–63
Culture, Natality and Family Planning
(Marshall and Polgar), 26n7
culture-bound syndrome, 149–150
Dahomean religions
cross, Vodou uses/interpretations, 
42–49
Gu, images of, 203
syncretism with Catholicism in Haiti,
39–42
Vodou roots in, 103
Damas, Léon-Gontran, 114n30
Damballah, 36n9, 41
Danbala Wedo, 120, 127
dance
in Congo Square, New Orleans, 122
in Vodou rituals, 33, 34
Dancing Spirits. Rhythms and Rituals of
Haitian Vodun, the Rada Rite
(Fleurant), 27, 33, 34
Daniel, Arnold, 56
Dartiguenave, Philippe-Sudre, 109
Dash, Michel, 59
Davis, Wade
controversial work of, 36n12
Vodou definition of, 29–30
on zombies, 183, 184
Index 225
1403971625ts15.qxd  28-9-06  1:57 PM  Page 225


--- PAGE 241 ---
Dayan, Joan, 70
De Heusch, Luc, 213n30
De Pradines, Emerante, 56
dead. See also zonbi (recently dead)
calling from water, 9
continuation of existence, 25n2
death, 8, 9
dechoukaj, 193
Dédé, Sanité, 123
deeds, 33
deforestation, 145
deities. See lwa (spirits)
Delbeau, Bertrand, 189
Demesmin, Carole Maroulé, 56
Demme, Jonathan, 61
democracy
Haitian national identity and, 110–112
lack of in Haiti, 108–109
Denby, Edwin, 111
Denis, Lorimer, 56
Depestre, René
Festival of the Greasy Pole, 185, 192
poem by, 186–187, 192
Deren, Maya
Divine Horsemen: The Voodoo Gods in
Haiti, 49n4
on Haitian religion, 33
on houngan, 45
on Ogou as Christ, 213n28
on possession by Ogou, 205
on vèvè, 47
Derenoncourt, Aboudja, 132
DeSantis, L., 138
Desmangles, Leslie
on baptism, 71
Christian cross, Vodou interpretations of,
39–49
on flags, 69
information about, 217–218
overview of chapter by, xiii
quote of Maya Deren, 33
on Vodou’s satisfaction of needs, 34
on zombi phenomenon, 184
Desquiron, Lilas, 189–190, 192
Dessalines, Jean-Jacques
assassination of, 209
Haitian flag and, 69–70, 167
Haitian property and, 106
Ogou and, 205
Destiné, Jean-Léon, 56
devil
Jews, Jesus and, 85–86
Jews as slaves of Satan, 87–93
Jews/Africans associated with, 80
The Devil and the Jews (T rachtenberg), 85
Devillers, Carole, 211n2
Dezafi (Franketienne), 185–186
diagnosis, 2–3, 20
Dieterlen, Germaine, 44–45
Dieu dans le vaudou Haïtien (Hurbon), 171
disease
definition of, 136
in Haiti, 4
divination
checkety pattern and, 165
treatment with, 19–20
vèvè, patterns of, 163
Divine Horsemen: The Voodoo Gods in Haiti
(Deren), 49n4
divine twins (màwasa), 16–17
doctors, 123, 127–128
dolls, 22
Dominique, Max, 187, 188
double entendre technique, 61
Dra-Po, Etude Esotérique de Égrégore
Africain, Traditionnel, Social, et
National d’Haiti (Holly), 70–71
drapo Vodou, 65–76
borders of, 166
checkety pattern of, 163–164, 165
designs of, 167
European flags and, 68–69
Haitian national flag, 69–71
in kanzo ceremony, 73–76
kòk kalite image on, 211
Kongo flag contributions, 66–68
myth of origin, 65–66
sacralizing of flag, 71–73
Sen Jak on, 202
ship on, 168
traditions, continuation of, 175n40
dreams, 8, 23
drought, 145–146
Druids, 171
The Drum and the Hoe: Life and Lore of the
Haitian People (Courlander), 29, 30,
175n41
drumming, 122
DuBois, W . E. B., 53
Duffaut, Préfète, 170
Index226
1403971625ts15.qxd  28-9-06  1:57 PM  Page 226


--- PAGE 242 ---
Dunham, Kathenne, 56
Duroseau, Lincee and Fabre, 55
Duval-Carrié, Edouard, 210–211
Duvalier, François
in bourgeois social revolution, 54
death of, 58
kòk kalite (fighting rooster) image 
and, 209
selection of, 108
Vodou and, 184
Vodou as tool of, 185–186
Duvalier, Jean-Claude
ban on burning of Jew effigy, 83
Freedom Culture and, 58
governments after, 108
Duvalier family
Freedom Culture and, 57
Vodou as tool of, 185–186
Vodou in Haitian literature and, 192
Earl, Arester, 165
Easter
burning Jew in effigy, 83–87
Catholic/Vodou rituals during, 
89–90
Rara celebration on, 79–80
echofe (to heat), 151n3
education, Vodou as vehicle for, 183
elders, respect of, 31
Elias, Saint, 207
elites
of Haiti, 81–82
Haitian independence and, 105, 
106–107
identity issues of, 112
political culture of Haiti, 109
U.S. occupation and, 108
emotional states, 3
En Haïti (Aubin), 68
English language, 113n10
environment
awareness of, 157
inspiritedness, 162
environmental problems
cause of chalè, 149–150
chalè and, 135, 136
drought and chalè, 145–146
erosion, 145
Erzili, 36n9
Erzulie, 169, 208
Estimé, Dumarsais
bourgeois social revolution, 56
support of, 54
U.S. opposition to, 109
ethics, 21–22
Étienne, Gérard, 185, 192
Europe
anti-Semitism in, 80–81
demonization of Jews, 85–86
European flags, 68–69
“eyes”, 21
Ezili, 206, 214n32
Ezili Freda, 66
Face of the Gods (Thompson), 67
The Faces of the Gods (Desmangles), 71
family
ancestors, attention on, 161
centrality of, 5–8
communal expectations, 31
Rada lwa as, 18
spirits, obligations to, 21–22
Fandrich, Ina
on Haitian-New Orleans Vodou
connection, 125
on Marie Laveau, 123, 124
Fanon, Frantz, 51
Farmer, Paul, 140
farming, 137, 145
Faro (Bambara Godhead), 44–45
fate, 9
feeding the poor (manje pov), 16, 17
fees, healer, 26n9
Ferdinand, King of Spain, 159
Festival of the Greasy Pole (Depestre), 
185, 192
fever (fyèv), 137
“Fictional Oungan: In the Long Shadow of
the Fetish” (Wexler), 76
Fignolé, Daniel, 54
films
misperceptions about Vodou from, 35n1
The Serpent and the Rainbow, 36n12
zombis in, 183–184
Flagg Collection of Haitian Art, Milwaukee
Art Museum, 162–163
flags. See also drapo Vodou
checkety pattern on, 164
Haitian flag, 69–71, 114n20, 167
kòk kalite image on, 211
Index 227
1403971625ts15.qxd  28-9-06  1:57 PM  Page 227


--- PAGE 243 ---
Flash of the Spirit, African & Afro-American
Art & Philosophy (Thompson), 30, 67
Fleurant, Gerdès
Dancing Spirits, 27
on heating up, 34
information about, 218
on Vodou as danced religion, 33
Vodou conscientization, 51–63
Flon, Catherine, 167
folk hermeneutic, 206–209
folklore, 55–56
Fon, 10, 17
Fonds-des-Nègres (Chauvet), 71, 187, 192
food, 16, 139
forbearance, 32
forgiveness, 32
Foster, George M., 138
Fouchard, Jean
Marrons du Syllabaire, 158, 172n6
on Muslim slaves, 173n10
Fouché, Franck, 185, 192
Foulah, 52, 60–61
The Four Moments of the Sun (Thompson
and Cornet), 66–67
France
anti-Semitism in Haiti and, 86–87
Code Noir, 122
colonialism in Haiti, 104–106
Haitian Revolution, 52
influence on Haitian flags, 68–69
missionary efforts of, 159–160
Francis of Assisi, Saint, 162
Franketienne, 185–186, 192
free people (affranchis), 104–106
freedom, 52. See also Haitian Revolution;
song of freedom
Freedom Culture (“Kilti libète”)
description of movement, 57–59
Haitian music and, 51
prediction of, 62
Rasin Movement and, 61
Freemasonry, 167
Freire, Paulo, 51, 54
French
Catholic missionaries in Haiti, 40–41
Catholicism of, 82
Haitian national identity and, 110, 111
spirituality in Haiti and, 9
French language
Kreyòl and, 103
Kreyòl’s vocabulary from, 113n10
phrase of, 115n40
spread of in Haiti, 110
French Revolution, 104–105, 110
Fuertes, Serge, 158
Fu-Kiau, 214n38
fyèv (fever), 137
Gabriel, Mesmin, 54
Garibaldi, Guiseppe, 112n2
Gede
kòk kalite and, 211
lithograph of St. James and, 206
Papa Gede, 86
role of, 36n9
services for, 212n3
gemmatria, 165
Général Baron-la-Croix (Fouché), 185, 192
genitals, 140, 149
George, Saint, 207
Germain, André, 56
gift-giving, 2
Gilbert, Guy, 61
Gilman, Sander, 85
Ginen, spirits of, 92
glã (emptiness), 44–45
Glapion, Marie, 123
glè, 139, 143
glossary of Vodou/other terms, 193
God, 19, 208–209
Goldberg, Vicki, 202
gonfleman (swelling), 151n8
Good Friday
Easter Rara festivals, 89, 90
Kongo and, 99n58
Gough, Henry, 165
gouvenman lannuit, 110, 115n38
Gouverneurs de la Rosée (Masters of the Dew)
(Roumain), 53, 59, 187, 192
Gran Brigit, 36n9
Grandjean, René, 126
gray guinea fowl (pentard), 209–210
Greek humoral medicine, 138
Green, Linda, 150
gris-gris (Vodou charms), 122
Gu (giver of civilization and art)
flag and, 67
images of, 203
in Mawu’s steps, 44
guardian angel, 8–9, 11–12
Index228
1403971625ts15.qxd  28-9-06  1:57 PM  Page 228


--- PAGE 244 ---
gubasa, 203
Guignard, Felix, 55
Guilloux, Alexis-Jean-Marie, 170
gwo bananj (big guardian angel)
head spirit and, 11
in possession, sleep, death, 8–9
Vodou rituals and, 11–12
habits, 156–157
Hahn, Robert, 149
Haiti. See also chalè (heat) illness
African influence in, 1–2
Afro-Caribbean healing tradition, 2–3
anti-literacy in, 160
Breton, Muslim Long Conversations,
171–172
Brittany, symbols from, 168–170
chalè, larger issues and, 145–148
children as center of culture, 24
classes in, 81–82
Dahomean/Catholic syncretism in, 39–42
democracy in popular culture, 108–112
endurance of beliefs, practices in,
160–161
environmental inspiritedness in, 162
family, centrality of, 5–8
flags of, 65–76
Haitian independence, class and,
104–108
Haitian Revolution, 52
identity of, 109–112
knowledge from Africa, 155–157
Muslims from Africa in, 157–159
names of, 96n2
oral/social performance tradition in,
32–33
Plaine-du-Nord, 199–201
presidencies of, 108, 114n32
Rara celebration in, 79–80
rituals of Haitian Vodou, 11–13
serving spirits in, 4–5
societal development in, 101–104
Vodou as key element of, 28
Vodou spirits, 16–19
Vodou view of person, 8–11
Haiti, History, and the Gods (Dayan), 70
Haiti Culturelle (Cultural Haiti), 58–59
Haïti et ses Peintres (Lerebours), 69
Haiti: The Breached Citadel (Bellegarde-
Smith), 182
Haitian Art (Stebich), 69
Haitian culture
bourgeois social revolution, 1946, 54–56
democracy in popular culture, 108–112
Freedom Culture of 1970s, 57–59
Haitian Revolution, 52
Indigenism, Negritude, 53–54
Rasin/Root Music Movement, 60–62
song of freedom, 51
summary of, 62–63
“Haitian Fight Song” (Mingus), 51
Haitian literature. See literature, Haitian
Haitian national flag
blue and red flag, 114n20
creation of, 69–70, 167
occult readings of, 70–71
Haitian Revolution
Haitian independence, class and,
104–108
Islam’s influence on, 158
movements in, 101–102
Vodou ceremony at Bwa Kayman, 184
Haitian Roots Music, 56, 57, 59–62
Haitians. See also society
of Bèlans, 136–137
class conflicts after independence,
104–108
demonization of Jews and, 80–81
Jew burning ritual of, 83–87
learning of languages, 115n39
Haiti-New Orleans Vodou connection
early connections, 121–122
knowledge, Haitian concept of, 118–121
Marie Laveau, 123–125
strength of, 131–132
Zora Neale Hurston and, 117
Zora Neale Hurstons’ initiation into
Vodou, 125–131
Hall, Gwendolyn Midlo, 121
handshake, 48
Harlem Renaissance, 53, 54
Harlequin pattern, 165
head, 139–140
head-washing (lave tet), 14
healing
Afro-Caribbean cultures, 1–2
fees for, 26n9
knowledge, power for, 23–25
six factors of, 2–3
treatment in Vodou system, 19–21
Index 229
1403971625ts15.qxd  28-9-06  1:57 PM  Page 229


--- PAGE 245 ---
healing—continued
treatment of chalè, 139–140
Vodou as religion of, 183
Vodou treatment, 82
health
in Bèlans, Haiti, 137
illness/disease definitions, 136
heart symbol, 169–170
heat. See also chalè (heat) illness
cause of chalè, 139, 140–141
chalè, larger issues and, 145–148
chalè as metaphor and, 149
nurses’ view of chalè, 144
heat up, 82–83
heaven, 4
Helms, Jesse, 181, 182
Herskovits, Melville
photographs of, 171, 175n43
Vodou as syncretism, 39
Hidalgo, Miguel, 114n18
Hispaniola
Christian plays in, 86
creolization, 82
Haiti’s part of, 4
Jews in, 94
Mende sent to, 158
naming of, 96n2
Passion Plays in, 86
St. James as patron of, 204
Hoffmann, Léon-François, 192
Hogu, Lionel, 71–72
Holly, Arthur (a.k.a. Her-Ra-Ma-El), 70–71
homosexual priests, 26n3
Honorat, Lamartinière, 56
Honoring the Ancestors (Matthews), 118
hoodoo, 127. See also Vodou
“Hoodoo in America” (Hurston)
on becoming Hoodoo doctor, 125
Haitian-New Orleans Vodou connection,
117, 121
instructors of Zora Neale Hurston,
127–128
on Marie Laveau, 123
Vodou knowledge in, 119
horse
possessed person as, 46, 49n6
spirit possession, 13–14
hot-cold concepts
cooling chalè treatment, 139–140
Haitian humoral classification, 151n4
in Latin American humoral medicine, 138
refwadisman condition, 151n5
Houlberg, Marilyn, 212n9
hounfo objects, 168
hounfort (temple), 40, 41. See also ounfò
(temple)
houngan (priest). See also oungan (priest)
cross structure of pérystile and, 46–47
Dahomean origins of word, 40
drapo and, 163–164
as drapo artists, 167, 175n40
Legba invocation by, 42–43
loas as mirrored images and, 45
Long Conversation/Theater and, 157
as revolutionary leaders, 101
hounsi (initiate), 40
Hughes, Langston, 54
humanism, 30–32
Humanocentrism, 61–62
humoral medicine
chalè origins, 138
chalè treatment, 139–140
Haitian, African roots of, 151n4
refwadisman condition, 151n5
Hunt, Alfred N., 53
Hurbon, Laënnec
on Christianity, 92
information about, 218
on power of Vodou, 93
on tree symbol, 171
Hurston, Zora Neale
Haitian-New Orleans Vodou, early
connections, 121–122
initiation into Vodou, 125–130
initiation into Vodou, significance of,
130–131
journey as initiative-observer of 
Vodou, 117
knowledge, Haitian concept of, 118–121
Marie Laveau and, 123, 124–125
T ell My Horse, 68
work of, 118
hygiene
cause of chalè, 141–142
lack of water for, 145–146
Hyppolite, Hector, 214n36
“I Am Going to See Where My Oungan Is”
(Wexler), 76
Ibo people, 168
Index230
1403971625ts15.qxd  28-9-06  1:57 PM  Page 230


--- PAGE 246 ---
identity
Caribbean issues with, 115n36
Haitian national identity, 109–112
illness. See also chalè (heat) illness
cross-cultural study of, 136
definition of, 136
folk illness, 148
images
kòk kalite (fighting rooster), 209–211
reproductions of, 205–209
of Sen Jak/Santiago/St. James, 201–204
imams, 157, 158
Immaculate Heart of Mary, 169
immortality, 25n2
income, of Haitian people, 4–5
indentured servants, 159
independence, 104–112
Indigenism
Ainsi parla l’oncle (Price-Mars), 70
bourgeois social revolution and, 56
Freedom Culture and, 57
Haitian documentation and, 156
peasantry and, 107
roots of song of freedom, 53–54
infection, 143, 151n9
initiate (hounsi), 40
initiation
of flag, 72
kanzo (initiation) cycle, 73–75
konesans and, 23
levels of, 14–16
of Zora Neal Hurston in New Orleans
Vodou, 124–131
Inquisition, 80
International Planned Parenthood
Federation, 181
intuitive powers, 23
inversion, 45–46
iron, 207
Islam
in Africa, 157–158
ancestors and, 161–162
anti-literacy in America, 160
endurance of beliefs, practices, 160–161
environmental inspiritedness and, 162
knowledge of voyagers from Africa,
155–157
Muslims’ arrival in New World, 158–159
in Reconquista era, 159–160
sacred tree symbol in, 171–172
slaves, recitations of surahs, 173n19
survival in Haiti, 162–167
Iturbide, Augustín, 105
“J. J. Dessalines” (Obin), 69
Jacques, Saint
images of, 201–206
offerings for, 212n5
as Sen Jak/Ogou, 199–201
shrine in Compostela, 212n7
Jahn, Jaheinz, 39–40
Jamaica, 1, 2
James, C. L. R., 56
James, Saint
images of, 201–206
offerings for, 212n5
as Sen Jak/Ogou, 199–201
shrine in Compostela, 212n7
Jan, Jean-Marie, 111
Jan, Msgr., 204
Janvier, Louis-Joseph, 106
jazz, 186
Jazz de Jeunes, 55
jealousy, 20–21
Jean-Louis, Edgar, 72
Jelliffe, Derrick B., 143
Jelliffe, E. F . Patrice, 143
Jesus Christ
burning of Jew/Judas in effigy, 83–84
in Easter Rara festivals, 79, 90, 91
Jews and, 85–86
Ogou manifestation as, 205
St. James and, 201
time of death, 97n14
Vodouists and, 92
Jews
anti-Semitism in Haiti, 97n29
burning Jew in effigy, 83–87
demonization of, 80–81
Haitian Catholics and, 89
in Haitian culture, 93–96
Judas as symbol for, 97n21
Rara link to, 90–91
Rara name and, 98n50
Vodouists as Satan’s slaves and, 89
Jinyoz, Mis, 144
jobs, 6–7
John XXIII, Pope, 51, 57
Johnson, Bernice Reagon, 61
Jones, Ava Kay, 131
Index 231
1403971625ts15.qxd  28-9-06  1:57 PM  Page 231


--- PAGE 247 ---
Joseph, Silva, 211
The Journal of American Folklore (Hurston),
117, 120
Judas
burning “Judas” in effigy, 83–86
in Haitian culture, 94
in Passion Plays, 91
in Rara celebration, 79, 80, 90
as symbol for Jews, 97n21
Judas Iscariot and the Myth of Jewish Exile
(Maccoby), 97n21
Julien, J. B. Emmanuel Francius, 158
justice, 32
kanzo (initiation)
description of, 14
flags in ceremony, 73–76
sacralizing of flag, 72
kase in yanvalou dance, 34, 37n33
Kenny, Michael G., 149
Keweillant, Fr.
on attempt to seal T rou, 213n22
offerings for St. Jacques and, 212n5
Plaine-du-Nord ceremonies and, 199, 200
thanks to, 211n1
khawatim, 166, 167
“Kilti libète”. See Freedom Culture (“Kilti
libète”)
Kleinman, Arthur, 136
Klodèt (Bèlans resident), 147–148
knowledge. See konesans (knowledge)
kò drapo, 74, 75
kòn kabrit, 193
konesans (knowledge)
from Africa to Saint-Domingue, 
155–157
for healing, 25
of New Orleans Vodou, 118–121
use of term, 23
Zora Neale Hurston and, 117
Kongo
devotions to saints in, 213n19
flag contributions, 66–68
Good Friday festival, 99n58
Santiago’s role in, 203
Vodou roots in, 103
“Kongo Influences on Haitian Sacred Art”
(Thompson), 67
koro (culture-bound syndrome), 149
kouche (lie down), 15, 74
Kouzen, 66
Kreyòl
black English and, 113n9
contributions to, 113n10
development of, 113nn6–7
glossary of terms in, 193
Haitian national identity and, 110
as response to oppression, 102–103
“La Bénédiction des Drapeaux” (Rigaud), 69
La case de Damballah(Savain), 187–188, 192
La Reine Soleil levée (Étienne), 185, 192
“La Voix des Sans Voix” (Duval-Carrié),
210–211
Lafontant, Roger, 210
Laguerre, Ferrère, 55
Laguerre, Michel, 140
lakou (agricultural compounds), 60
Laleau, Léon, 114n30
land
degradation in Haiti, 145
family and, 5, 6
language
Haitian national identity and, 109–110
Haitians learning of, 115n39
Kreyòl, 113nn6–10
Kreyòl as language of Haiti, 107
power of, 113n5
as response to oppression, 102–103
laplas, 66
Laraque, Guy, 190
Lasirenn, 168
latah (culture-bound syndrome), 149
Latrobe, Benjamin Henry, 122
Lavaud, Wilfred (a.k.a. Ti Do), 60
lave tet (head-washing), 14
Laveau, Marie
ascendancy of, 122
Hoodoo doctors and, 125
Luke T urner on, 127
spelling of name, 133n26
spiritual work of, 123–125
Le Mystere de la Passion (French play), 85
Le phénomène zombi(Saint-Gérard), 183–184
Le roman haïtien (Hoffman), 192
Le Vodou Haitien(Maximilien), 71
Leconte, Cincinnatus, 204
left hand, 48
Legba
as loa of crossroads, 42–43
role of, 36n9
as St. Peter, 41
Index232
1403971625ts15.qxd  28-9-06  1:57 PM  Page 232


--- PAGE 248 ---
Leiris, Michel
on chromo-hermeneutic process, 207
on image of St. James, 206
on images of saints, 213n30
LeNobletz, Michel, 169, 170
Lent, 88, 212n3
Leon, Eli, 165
Lerebours, Michel Philippe, 69
Les affres d’un défi (Franketienne), 
185–186, 192
Les Arbres Musiciens (Alexis), 101, 
190–191, 192
Les Chemins de la Croix (Passion Play), 89
Les chemins de Loco-Miroir (Desquiron),
189–190, 192
Lescot, Élie
anti-superstition campaign of, 55, 190–191
Vodou and, 184
Lespinasse, Beauvais, 106
Lévi-Strauss, Claude, 3
Levy, Nikol, 61
Leyburn, James G., 52
Leyoni, Mis, 143–144, 148
lie down (kouche), 15, 74
life, 28
Ligondé, François-Wolf, 185
Lincoln, Bruce, 95
literacy, 160
literary movement, 53–54
literature, Haitian
glossary of Vodou/other terms, 193
misperceptions about Vodou, 181–182
poem by René Depestre, 186–187
on Vodou, categories of, 191–192
Vodou as cosmology, 182–183
Vodou as tool of Duvaliers, 185–186
Vodou in novels, 187–191
zombies and, 183–184
lithographs, 202, 205–209
little guardian angel (ti bonanj), 9
loas, see lwa (spirits)
Long, Carolyn Morrow, 126
Long Conversation/Theater
in creation of new religion, 156–157
Islamic, 157–159
Islamic signs, survival in Haiti, 162–167
light from Brittany, 168–170
sacred tree symbol in, 171–172
Lonmer-Denis, 54
Louis XIV , king of France, 86, 122
Louisiana, 126. See also New Orleans Vodou
Louisnis, Louinès, 56
Lowenthal, David, 159
lower class. See peasants
Lucifer, 93
luck, 4, 25
Lucques, Père Laurent de, 203–204
lwa (spirits)
apostles as, 92
checkety pattern and, 166
cross symbol and, 43, 45–49
definition of, 193
dependence on living, 12
flag, sacralizing of, 71–74
flag contributions of Kongo, 66–68
flags, colonial flags’ influence on, 68–69
flags, Haitian flag and, 70–71
flags, military-political, 69–70
functions of, 128
in Haitian literature, 186–187
images of saints, 205–209
importance of/rituals for, 16
in initiation ritual, 131
initiation rituals and, 14–16
knowledge, power from, 23–24
Marie Laveau and, 124, 127
marriage to, 26n5
most common, 36n9
myth of origin, 65–66
Ogou worship in Plaine-du-Nord, 199–201
origins of Vodou words, 40
possession by, 13–14
Rara bands and, 83
Rara celebration of, 79, 80
residence of, 42–43
rituals for, 34
rituals of Haitian Vodou for, 11–13
sacred tree symbol for, 171
saint images for, 183
Sen Jak, images of, 201–202
service of, 30, 212n3
serving, 4–5
in sèvis, xi
sorcery and, 21–23
treatment of problems and, 19, 20–21
types of, 16–19
types of/rituals for, 17–19
in Vodou definition, 29
Vodou magic and, 119–120
Vodou view of person, 8–11
Zora Neale Hurston’s initiation and,
129–130
Index 233
1403971625ts15.qxd  28-9-06  1:57 PM  Page 233


--- PAGE 249 ---
Maccoby, Hyam, 97n21
Mack, Phyllis, 96n1
Madiou, Thomas, 158
magic
in initiation ritual, 131
in New Orleans Vodou, 127, 128–129
in Vodou esoteric knowledge, 119–120
The Magic Island (Seabrook), 35n1, 84–85
Magloire, Paul E., 54–55
mail fraud laws, 126
“Major Issues in the Study of African
T raditional Religion” (Olupona), 35
Makandal
Boukman Eksperyans named after, 112n1
leader in Haitian revolution, 87, 101–102
as Muslim, 158–159
male healers, 24
Mama Lola (Brown)
Carrol F . Coates and, 181
on heating up terms, 151n3
on Vodou, 28
Zora Neale Hurston’s work and, 118
manbo (priestess)
definition of, 193
drapo and, 163–164
as healer, 183
instructors of Zora Neale Hurston,
127–128
in kanzo ceremony, 74–75
knowledge, power and healing, 23–25
Long Conversation/Theater and, 157
Marie Laveau, 123–125
role of, 7
sorcery by, 21–23
treatment by, 19–21
Manbo Ayizen, 65–66
mandala, 163
manje lwa, 193
manje màwasa (meal for divine twins), 16
manje pov (feeding the poor), 16, 17
marabouts
authority of, 158
endurance of beliefs, practices, 161
influence of, 157
marasa (twins)
definition of, 193
divine twins (màwasa), 16–17
in Haitian novel, 186, 189–190
Marcelin, Milo, 70, 206
Mardi Gras Indian tribes, 128
market, 6–7
Maroneau, Jean-Claude, 56
marriage, to spirit, 11, 26n5
marronage, 101
Marrons du Syllabaire (Fouchard), 
158, 172n6
Marshall, John F ., 26n7
Martin T oma(Papillon), 188–189, 192
Martineau, Jean-Claude, 61
Martineau, Koralen Jean-Claude, 58, 59
Marxists, 58
Masonic art, 208, 210
master of the head (mèt tet), 10
Masters of the Dew (Gouverneurs de la Rosée)
(Roumain), 53, 59, 187, 192
Matthews, Donald H., 118
màwasa (divine twins), 16–17
Mawu (Dahomean Godhead), 43, 44
Maximilien, Louis, 71
Mbiti, John, 31
McAlister, Elizabeth A.
“A Sorcerer’s Bottle: The Art of Magic in
Haiti”, 97n13
information about, 218
on “Jew” in Haitian imagination, 79–96
overview of chapter by, xii
McCormick, Medill, 111
meal for divine twins (manje màwasa), 16
men, 6, 7
Mende, 157, 158
Mennesson-Rigaud, Odette, 69–70
Mercier, P ., 43, 44
mermaid, 168–169
Merriam Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary, 182
mèt tet (master of the head), 10
metaphors, 138, 149
Métraux, Alfred, 68–69
Mexico, 105
Miami Herald, 181
Michael, Saint, 207
Michel, Claudine
information about, 218
overview of book, xi–xiv
Vodou definition of, 182
on Vodou in Haiti, 27–35
on Vodou worldview, 34
Michelet, Jules, 107
middle class
American Occupation of Haiti and,
107–108
Index234
1403971625ts15.qxd  28-9-06  1:57 PM  Page 234


--- PAGE 250 ---
Haitian independence and, 104–107
political control of, 109
military power, 69–70
Mingus, Charlie, 51
Minn, Pierre, 135–152, 218
mirror
cross and, 46
loas as mirrored images, 45
Loco-mirroi, Agassou-Dos-mirroi, 49n5
mistè (mysteries), 16. See also lwa (spirits)
mò (one of the dead), 9, 16
mòn, 193
money, 26n9, 146–148
Mongin, R. P ., 161
Montane, John, 123
morality
humanism in Vodou, 31–32
sorcery and, 22
in Vodou, 10
Morelos, José-Maria, 114n18
Morisseau-Leroy, Félix, 56
Morse, Richard A., 56, 61
Moses, 94, 119–120
mother, 21
mulattos, 106
Mules and Men (Hurston)
instructors of Zora Neale Hurston, 127
on New Orleans Vodou, 117, 118–120
Murat, Antalcidas, 56
Murray, Gerald F ., 26n7
music. See also song of freedom
bourgeois social revolution and, 55–56
at Bwa Kayiman, 52
in Congo Square, New Orleans, 122
Freedom Culture and, 58
Haitian song of freedom, 51, 62–63
New Orleans Jazz and Heritage 
Festival, 132
Rara bands, 82, 83
Rasin/Root Music Movement, 60–62
Muslims
in Africa, 157–158
ancestors and, 161–162
anti-literacy in America, 160
endurance of beliefs, practices, 160–161
in Haiti, 158–159
Islamic signs, survival in Haiti, 162–167
knowledge of voyagers from Africa,
155–157
in Reconquista era, 159–160
sacred tree symbol in, 171–172
slaves, recitations of surahs, 173n19
mysteries (mistè), 16. See also lwa (spirits)
Mythlogie Vodou(Marcelin), 70
nam (animating force of body), 8
names, 155
Namgyal Monastery, 163
nanchò (nations), 17–18
Napoleonic Wars, 110
Narcisse, André, 56
National Endowment for the 
Humanities, 211n1
nationalism
Caribbean identity issues, 115n36
Haitian, 109–112
nations (nanchò), 17–18
Native Americans, 114n19, 121–122
Neeley, Bobby Joe, 122
Negritude
Haitian classes and, 107–108
of poets, 114n30
roots of song of freedom, 53–54
New Illustrated Webster’s Dictionary of the
English Language, 1993, 35n1
New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival, 132
New Orleans Vodou
early Haitian connections, 121–122
initiation of Zora Neale Hurston, 125–131
knowledge of, 118–121
Marie Laveau, 123–125
today, 131–132
New T estament, 85
niambo, 211, 214n38
Nicholas V , Pope, 159
Nkrumah, Kwame, 51
Noirisme, 54–55, 57
novels, 187–191
nurses, 143–144, 151n11
Nzinga Nkuvu, King of the Kongo, 203
Obin, Senèque, 69
objects, Catholic
cross, Vodou uses/interpretations, 42–49
Vodou use of, 41–42
Ogou (spirit of war and anger)
Ezili and, 214n32
flag of, 69–70
images of Sen Jak/saints, 201–209
kòk kalite (fighting rooster) and, 210, 211
Index 235
1403971625ts15.qxd  28-9-06  1:57 PM  Page 235


--- PAGE 251 ---
Ogou—continued
as master of the head, 10
modern image of, 214n36
patronage of road, 212n8
possession by, 13–14
rituals for in Plaine-du-Nord, 199–201
types of, 18
Ogou Badagri, 207
Ogou Balendjo, 207
Ogou Bedagri, 206
Ogou Bhathalah, 207–208
“Ogou Feraille” (Hyppolite), 214n36
Ogou Feray
flags presented to, 70
Haitian flag and, 71
St. James image as, 206
Ogu, 36n9
Ogun (the Fon Gu), 17
Old Ship of Zion (Pitts), 118
Olupona, Jacob, 35
oppression, 112
orality, 160
oral/social performance, 32–35
ounfò (temple). See also hounfort (temple)
definition of, 193
as extended family, 7–8
as family affair, 183
in Haitian literature, 191
Rara bands associated with, 82, 83
oungan (priest), see also houngan (priest)
definition of, 193
father role of, 7
in Haitian literature, 191
Haitian presidents and, 184
as healer, 183
homosexual, 26n3
instructors of Zora Neale Hurston,
127–128
in kanzo ceremony, 74–75
knowledge, power and, 23–25
patriarch as, 6
on Rara festival, 91
sorcery by, 21–23
spirit possession, 13–14
treatment by, 19–21
Vodou priests in New Orleans, 123
ounsi, 69
Palcy, Euzhan, 114n17
palm, 171
Papa Gede, 86
Papa Jwif, 94
Papa Loko, 66
Papa Sobo, 66
Papa T elemarque, 98n50
Papillon, Margaret, 188–189, 192
Pardon ceremony, 73
Pardons festival, 170
Paris, Jacques, 123
Paris, Peter, 32
Parker, James, 165
Passage of Darkness. The Ethnobiology of a
Haitian Zombie (Davis), 36n12
Passion Plays
Jews in, 85–86, 91
in Rara celebration, 89–90
patriarch, 6
Patrick, Saint, 41
Patriotic Action Movement, 58
patterns
checkety pattern, 163, 164–166, 175n41
Islamic signs in Haiti, 162–167
Paul, Emmanuel C., 56
payment, healer, 26n9
Pean, Marc, 204
Péan, Stanley, 186, 192
peasants
class in Haiti, 81–82
identification with Jews, 91
language, religion of, 102–104
uprisings of, 106, 108
U.S. occupation and, 107
pèdisyon, 143–144
Pedro II, King of Spain, 213n19
pentard (gray guinea fowl), 209–210
perdition, 21, 26n7
personhood
in Afro-Caribbean healing traditions, 2
collective, 31
Vodou view of, 8–11
pérystile
cross structure of, 46–47
description of, 49n4
inversion and, 45
as symbol of universe, 48–49
Peter, Saint, 41
Petro lwa, 17, 18
Philadelphia (film), 61
Philip, Saint, 206
physical activity
chalè from, 141, 146, 148
race and, 152n13
Index236
1403971625ts15.qxd  28-9-06  1:57 PM  Page 236


--- PAGE 252 ---
Pierre, André, 119
pilgrims, 199–201
Pinn, Anthony B., 118
Piquets, 106, 108
Piquion, René, 54
Pitts, Walter F ., 118
Plaine-du-Nord, Haiti
attempt to seal T rou, 213n22
ceremonies in, 212n3
church for St. James in, 204
Donald Cosentino’s visit to, 211n1
image of god in, 208
offerings for St. Jacques, 212n5
pilgrims, ceremonies in, 199–201
T rou Sen Jak origins, 211n2
plants, medicinal, 137, 140, 152n12
“Plenty Confidence in Myself: The
Initiation of a White Woman Scholar
into Haitian Vodou” (Brown), 33
Pluchon, Pierre, 161
pò tet (head pot), 15–16
Polgar, Steven, 26n7
political culture, 108–112
political power, 69–70
Polk, Patrick
on European military sources for flag, 71
on flags, 68, 69, 164
on Vodou flag, 69
Pompée de Vastey, Valentin, 106
Pontius Pilate, 79, 85
poor, feeding, 16, 17
Port-au-Prince, Haiti
Bi-Centennial Exhibition in, 55
burning of Jew/Judas in effigy, 83, 
84–85
St. James statue in, 205
use of folklore in, 56
Portuguese missionaries, 203
possession
big guardian angel in, 8
Dahomean influence on Vodou, 40
description of process, 13–14
by Ogou, 205
possessed person as horse, 49n6
by Rada/Petro lwa, 18
suspension of time in, 46
symbolism of, 47–48
wisdom, power from spirits via, 23
possession performance, 13
Postel, Henry, 185
pòt drapo, 73–74, 75
poteau mitan
definition of, 49n7
symbolism of, 46, 49
pouse, 139, 151n6
poverty, 4–5, 146–148
power, 112
pregnancy, 21, 26n7
prenda (sacred cauldron), 67
presidencies
of Haiti, ephemeral, 108, 114n32
Haitian presidents and Vodou, 184
prêt’ savanne (bushpriest), 41, 71
Price-Mars, Jean
Ainsi parla l’oncle, 70
bourgeois social revolution and, 56
Freedom Culture and, 57
Haitian literature and, 192
Negritude and, 107–108
Vodou as syncretism, 39
priest, 6. See also houngan (priest); 
oungan (priest)
priestess. See manbo (priestess)
problem, treatment of, 19–21
promise, 16, 20
Prosser, Gabriel, 53
Protestantism, 111
Prussin, LaBelle, 157
pwe (points), 25
pwe achte ( “points that have been
purchased”), 21–22
pwen, 15
Quick, Abdullah Hakim, 159
quilts, 165–166
Qur’an, 155, 156
Raboteau, Albert J., 96n1
race
Haitian independence and, 105
Haitian national identity and, 109,
110–111
physical activity and, 152n13
Racine, Marie-Marcelle Buteau, 113n6
racism
affranchis and, 105
American occupation and, 107
Haitian independence and, 105
Rada
Dahomean origins of word, 40
description of, 18
grouping of spirits, 17
Index 237
1403971625ts15.qxd  28-9-06  1:57 PM  Page 237


--- PAGE 253 ---
RAM (Roots Music Group), 52, 61
Rara
bands, 82, 83
burning Jew in effigy, 83–87
Catholicism and, 88
Catholic/Vodou rituals during, 89–93
celebration of, 79–80
Jewish noisemaker and, 98n50
peasants in, 81–82
rash, 140
Rasin Movement, 57, 59–62
rattle. See asson
Reagan, Ronald, 114n19
Reconquista, 159–160, 201
refwadisman (cooling or chilling), 151n5
Regnault, Chantal, 211n2
relationships
Afro-Caribbean healing and, 2–3
heating, 82–83
between spirits, devotees, 12
rele mò nan dlo (calling the dead from the
water), 9
religion. See also Afro-Caribbean spirituality
definitions of Vodou, 27, 35n1
of Haiti after independence, 107
Haitian national identity and, 109–110
sources of Vodou, 155–157
Vodou, misconceptions about, 27–28
Vodou as religious/philosophical
persuasion, 29–30
Vodou vs. other religions, 28
Zora Neale Hurston’s work on, 117–118
reposois (repositories), 42, 49n1
Republique d’Haïti, Departement du Nord,
136–137
Research in African Literatures (Wexler), 76
“Research Project on Society, Culture, and
Sacred T exts” (Wimbush), 118
resistance, passive, 109–112
restavèk, 193
Ribeiro, Darcy, 106
Rigaud, Louis, 69
Rigaud, Milo
on Arthur Holly, 70
on Élie Lescot, 184
on images of saints, 205
on origins of Ogou, 207–208
on vèvè pattern, 166
on Vodou knowledge, 119
The Rites of Passage (Van Gennep), 131
ritual anti-structure theory, 131
rituals
for communion with lwa, 34
dancing/drumming events, 6
of Haitian Vodou, 11–13
initiation, 14–16
kanzo, 73–76
spirit/person division and, 10–11
for spirits, 16–19
Zora Neale Hurston’s initiation, 129–130
road, 202, 212n8
Romain, Jean-Baptiste, 54
Roman Catholicism. See Catholicism
Romans, 79, 85
Root Music Movement, 57, 59–62
Roots Music Group (RAM), 52, 61
Roumain, Jacques
bourgeois social revolution and, 56
Masters of the Dew, 53, 59
Vodou in novel by, 187, 192
Roumer, Thérèse, 84, 113n6
royal palm, 171
rural Vodou, 16
Sacred Arts of Haitian Vodou(Cosentino), 68
“Sacred Banners and the Divine Cavalry
Charge” (Polk), 68, 164
Sacred Heart of Jesus, 169
Sacred Possessions: Vodou, Santería and Obeah
in the Caribbean (Wexler), 76
sacred tree, 171
Saint-Domingue
anti-literacy in, 160
anti-Semitism in, 85–86
environmental inspiritedness in, 162
Haitian independence, 104, 105
Haitian Revolution in, 52
knowledge of voyagers from Africa,
155–157
Muslims in, 159–160
St. James and, 204
Saint-Gérard, Yves, 183–184
Saintil (bòkò), 185–186
Saint-Méry, Moreau de, 39, 172
saints
ancestors and, 161
Catholic, addition into Vodou, 41
images for lwa, 183, 213n30
images of, reproductions, 205–209
images of Santiago/St. James, 201–205
Index238
1403971625ts15.qxd  28-9-06  1:57 PM  Page 238


--- PAGE 254 ---
St. James as Sen Jak/Ogou, 199–201
as visual representations of lwa, 120
St. Aude, Renee, 56
St. Louis Cathedral, New Orleans, 123
Sakpata, 166
Salgado, Antoine, 56
Saloppé, Marie, 123
Sanctified Church (Hurston), 117
sangamento, 203–204
Sanneh, Lamin, 72
Santiago. See James, Saint
Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 201, 
212n7
Sartre, Jean-Paul, 108
Satan, 87–93
Sauvy, Anne, 169
Savain, Pétion, 187–188, 192
Savain, Roger E., 56
science of the concrete, 3
scientific medicine, 3
Seabrook, William, 35n1, 84–85
séances, 126
seasons, 141
secret societies, 128
Secrets of Voodoo(Rigaud), 166, 
207–208
seeing, 23
Sen Jak (chief of Haitian Ogou)
images of, 201–209
kòk kalite (fighting rooster) image and,
209–211
offerings for, 212n5
Plaine-du-Nord shrine for, 199–201
Vodou flagstaff and, 67
Sephardim Jews, 94
The Serpent and the Rainbow (Davis),
29–30, 36n12, 184
The Serpent and the Rainbow (film), 
35n1, 36n12
serviteur (devotee), 46, 47–48
sèvi lwa yo (serving the spirits), 30
sèvis, xi
sevitè, xi
sexuality
of priest, 7, 26n3
Vodou view of person and, 10
Seyler, Daniel I., 145
Shannon, Magdaline, 70
ship, 168
Shopona (Yoruba spirit), 17
Simone (temple song leader), 13–14
skin, 140, 143
slave revolts, U.S., 53
slavery
Afro-Caribbean cultures and, 1–2
class in Haiti and, 81
enslavement of Muslims, 159
Haitian Revolution, 52
Rara and, 80
sorcery and, 92
slaves
anti-literacy in America, 160
anti-Semitism in Haiti and, 86–87
Catholicism and, 40–41
Dahomean religions from, 39–40
endurance of beliefs, practices, 160–161
Haitian independence and, 104, 
105, 106
Haitian Revolution and, 101, 102
Haitian-New Orleans Vodou connection,
121–122
Islamic knowledge of African captives,
155–157
loss of family, 5
Muslims, recitations of, 173n19
Muslims sent to Saint-Domingue, 158
Vodouists as Satan’s slaves, 87–93
sleep, 8
Smith, Theophus H., 118, 119–120
snake, 127
Sò Ann, 61
social hierarchy, 6
society
Catholic vs. Vodou, 89–93
class in Haiti, 81–82, 91
communal expectations in Vodou, 31
democracy in popular culture, 
108–112
development of in Haiti, 101–104
Haitian independence and, 104–108
in New Orleans, 122
Soley leve (The Sun Rises), 58–59
song of freedom
bourgeois social revolution, 54–56
at Bwa Kayiman, 52
Freedom Culture of 1970s, 57–59
in Haiti, 51
Indigenism, Negritude, 53–54
Rasin/Root Music Movement, 60–62
summary of, 62–63
Index 239
1403971625ts15.qxd  28-9-06  1:57 PM  Page 239


--- PAGE 255 ---
songs, 15, 33
“A Sorcerer’s Bottle: The Art of Magic in
Haiti” (McAlister), 97n13
sorcery
Africans suspected of, 87
ethics of, 21–23
by oungan/manbo, 183
slavery and, 92
Vodou equated with, 181, 182
sou pwen (on the point), 15
soul, 8–11
Soulouque, Faustin, 108
Souls of Black Folk (DuBois), 53
Soyinka, Wole, 212n8
Spain
anti-Judaism in, 80
Christianity in Africa and, 159
Haitian Jew burning ritual and, 86
Spanish Inquisition, 86
Spanish-American-Cuban War, 105
spirit possession. See possession
spirits, see lwa (spirits)
spiritual churches, in New Orleans, 126
spiritualism, 126
spirituality. See Afro-Caribbean 
spirituality
The Spirituality of African Peoples. The 
Search for a Common Moral Discourse
(Paris), 32
S-shaped cross-guards, 66–67, 68
star (zetwal), 9
Stebich, Ute, 69
stomach, 139
student strike, 57
suffering
minimization of, 25
poverty in Haiti, 5
serving spirits and, 4
Vodou as way to deal with, 28
sumangolo, 45
sun, 140
supernatural problem, 19–21
Sylvain, Marcel, 56
symbols
from Brittany, 168–170
checkety pattern, 175n41
Islamic signs in Haiti, 162–167
sacred tree, 171–172
symptoms, 139–140, 143
syncretism, 39–42, 213n30
Tainos, 79–80
Tambuctou, West Africa, 158
Tarot, 207
teaching, 32–35
T ell My Horse(Hurston), 68, 120, 131
temple. See hounfort (temple); ounfò (temple)
Thomas, J. T ., 138
Thompson, Robert Farris
on image of Gu, 203
on Kongo flag contributions, 66–68
on niambo, 214n38
on Vodou, 30
Thompson, Samuel
ancestors of, 127–128
initiation of Zora Neale Hurston,
124–125, 127, 129–130
Thornton, John
on baptism, 72
on devotions to saints, 213n19
on European/West African alliances, 159
ti bonanj (little guardian angel), 9
TiBe, 34
Tibet, 163
time, 45–46
T oledano, Betsey, 123
tombs, 67
tonton makout, 193
T orres, Camilo, 114n18
T oumson, Roger, 115n36
T oussaint L ’Overture, Pierre Dominique
as bòkò, 101
Ogou and, 205
Vodou and, 102, 111
T rachtenberg, Joshua, 85
transnationalism, 82
treatment
of chalè, 139–140
medicinal plants for fever/chalè, 137
payment for, 26n9
relationships and, 82
sorcery, ethics of, 21–23
in Vodou system, 19–21
T rou Sen Jak
attempt to seal, 213n22
origins of, 211n2
pilgrims/rituals for Ogou, 199–201
Vodouists protection of, 204
T rouillot, Michel-Rolph, 69
Tselos, Susan, 166
T urner, Luke, 127–128
Index240
1403971625ts15.qxd  28-9-06  1:57 PM  Page 240


--- PAGE 256 ---
T urner, Nat, 53
T urner, Richard Brent
on Haiti-New Orleans Vodou connection,
117–132
information about, 219
overview of chapter by, xii
T urner, Victor, 131
twins. See marasa (twins)
Un arc-en-ciel pour l’occident chrétien
(Depestre), 186–187
United States. See also New Orleans 
Vodou
campaign against Vodou, 126
Freedom Culture in, 58–59
Haitian politics and, 109
Haitian religion and, 111
Indigenism, Negritude in, 53–54
occupation of Haiti, xi, 107–108
in Spanish-American-Cuban War, 105
unity, 182
universe
African creation myths, 43–45
cross structure of pérystile, 46–47
Vodouist concept of, 48–49
University of California Research
Expeditions Program (UREP), 
211n1
upper class. See elites
urban life, 6–8
urban Vodou, 16, 17
USAID, 181
Vaccine, 58–59, 61
Valcin, Gérard, 69, 162–163
Van Gennep, Arnold, 131
Varieties of African-American Religious
Experience (Pinn), 118
Venus, 208
Vessey, Denmark, 53
vèvè
checkety pattern on, 166
cosmic forces encoded in, 163
cross as Legba’s symbol, 43
definition of, 49n3, 193
drawing of, 46–47, 48, 50n8
pentacle sign in, 167
ship on, 168
Vietnam War, 57
Villamil, Felipe Garcia, 67
Ville-aux-Camps
cross symbol and, 48, 49
residence of loas, 42–43
Vincent, President, 184
vire, 37n33
“virtue theory”, 32
vocabulary, 40
Vodou. See also drapo Vodou
bourgeois social revolution and, 55–56
as cosmology, 182–183
cross, uses/interpretations, 42–49
Dahomean/Catholic syncretism in, 39–42
definition of, 4, 27, 35n1
drapo, significance of, 163–164
Freedom Culture and, 58
French anti-Vodou sentiments, 86–87
glossary of terms, 193
Haitian independence and, 107
in Haitian literature, 181–193
Haitian majority view and, 102–104
Haitian national identity and, 110,
111–112
Haitian Revolution, song of freedom, 52
Haitians against, 113n12
healing, 82
healing traditions of Afro-Caribbean, 2–3
humanism in, 30–32
images, reproductions of saints, 205–209
Indigenism, Negritude and, 53–54
initiation, 14–16
Jew, burning in effigy, 83–87
Jew in, 94
knowledge, power, 23–25
kòk kalite (fighting rooster) image,
209–211
Mass integration into, 162
meaning of word, 40
misconceptions about, 27
misperceptions about, 181–182
music, 51
name of, 113n13
non-Africanized forms, 113n6
oral/social performance, teaching
through, 32–35
overview of book, xii–xiii
person, view of, 8–11
prejudice against, xi
Rara bands, 82, 83
Rara celebration, 79, 80, 81
Rasin/Root Music Movement, 60–62
Index 241
1403971625ts15.qxd  28-9-06  1:57 PM  Page 241


--- PAGE 257 ---
Vodou—continued
as religious/philosophical persuasion,
29–30
rituals of, 11–13
Sen Jak/St. James, 199–202
serving spirits in Haiti, 4–5
social revolution and, 101–102
songs of freedom, 62–63
sorcery, ethics, 21–23
spelling of, 35n7
spirit possession, 13–14
spirits, 16–19
terms used in, 151n3
treatment, 19–21
unity through, 36n26
values, principles of, 27–28
witchcraft, Vodou seen as, 181–182
zombies and, 183–184
Vodou, Haitian-New Orleans connection
early connections, 121–122
knowledge, Haitian concept of, 118–121
Marie Laveau, 123–125
strength of, 131–132
Zora Neale Hurston and, 117
Zora Neale Hurstons’ initiation into
Vodou, 125–131
Vodou charms (gris-gris), 122
Vodouists, in Catholic imagination, 87–93
Vodun, 29, 35n7. See also Vodou
Voodoo, xi, 29, 35n8
votive, 168, 175n50
Wahlman, Maude, 165, 175n43
Warhol, Andy, 202
water
in Bèlans, Haiti, 136
chalè and, 150, 151n7
condition from drinking, 151n8
drought and chalè, 145–146
water-related infections, 143
Watson, E. O., 111
Webster’s New World Dictionary, 1964, 35n1
wedding, 12
Western world, 3, 27–28
Wexler, Anna
on drapo Vodou, 65–76
on houngan and drapo, 163
information about, 219
overview of chapter by, xiii
white plantocracy, 105
Wiese, H., 138
Wiese, Jean, 139
Wilentz, Amy, 145, 213n22
Wimbush, Vincent, 118
witchcraft, 181, 182
women
Freedom Culture and, 59
healers, 23–24
in rural/urban Haiti, 6–7
“Women in Perdition: Ritual Fertility
Control in Haiti” (Murray), 26n7
words, 33
work
of children in Haiti, 12
of men/women, 6–7
work of the left hand, 21–23. See also sorcery
Ya Seizi band, 98n48
yanvalou, 43, 49n2
Yarborough, Lavina Williams, 55, 56
Yellow Pocahontas, 128
Yolande, Marie, 75
Yonker, Dellores, 68, 164
Yoruba
belief about fate, 10
spirits of, 17
Vodou roots in, 103
Zaka, 66
zetwal (star), 9
Zombi Blues (Péan), 186, 192
zonbi (recently dead)
definition of, 193
in Haitian literature, 185–186, 190
Jesus as, 92
misperceptions about, 183–184
in Rara, 79, 83
zonbi astral, 97n13
Index242
1403971625ts15.qxd  28-9-06  1:57 PM  Page 242

