=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: walter_rodney - how europe underdeveloped africa.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 454
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:35:55.594555
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Walter Rodney 1973
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa
Published by: Bogle-L'Ouverture Publications, London and 
Tanzanian Publishing House, Dar-Es-Salaam 1973, Transcript from 
6th reprint, 1983;
Transcribed: by Joaquin Arriola.
To
Pat, Muthoni, Mashaka and
the extended family
Contents
Preface
Chapter One. Some Questions on Development 
1.1 What is Development
1.2 What is Underdevelopment?
Chapter Two. How Africa Developed Before the Coming 
of the Europeans up to the 15th Century
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/index.htm (1 of 3) [8/22/05 11:01:42 AM]


--- PAGE 3 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
2.1 General Over-View
2.2 Concrete Examples
Chapter Three. Africa’s Contribution to European 
Capitalist Development — the Pre-Colonial Period
3.1 How Europe Became the Dominant Section of a World-
Wide Trade System
3.2 Africa’s contribution to the economy and beliefs of early 
capitalist Europe
Chapter Four. Europe and the Roots of African 
Underdevelopment — to 1885
4.1 The European Slave Trade as a Basic Factor in African 
Underdevelopment 
4.2 Technological Stagnation and Distortion of the African 
Economy in the Pre-Colonial Epoch 
4.3 Continuing Politico-Military Developments in Africa — 
1500 to 1885
Chapter Five. Africa’s Contribution to the Capitalist 
Development of Europe — the Colonial Period
5.1 Expatriation of African Surplus Under Colonialism
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/index.htm (2 of 3) [8/22/05 11:01:42 AM]


--- PAGE 4 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
5.2 The Strengthening of Technological and Military Aspects 
of Capitalism
Chapter Six. Colonialism as a System for 
Underdeveloping Africa
6.1 The Supposed Benefits of Colonialism to Africa 
6.2 Negative Character of the Social, Political and Economic 
Consequences
6.3 Education for Underdevelopment
6.4 Development by Contradiction
 
Walter Rodney Archive | Marxism & Anti-Imperialism in Africa 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/index.htm (3 of 3) [8/22/05 11:01:42 AM]


--- PAGE 5 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Preface
This book derives from a concern with the contemporary African 
situation. It delves into the past only because otherwise it would be 
impossible to understand how the present came into being and what the 
trends are for the near future. In the search for an understanding of what 
is now called “underdevelopment” in Africa, the limits of enquiry have 
had to be fixed as far apart as the fifteenth century, on the one hand and 
the end of the colonial period, on the other hand. 
Ideally. an analysis of underdevelopment should come even closer to 
the present than the end of the colonial period in the 1960s. The 
phenomenon of neo-colonialism cries out for extensive investigation in 
order to formulate the strategy and tactics of African emancipation and 
development. This study does not go that far, but at least certain 
solutions are implicit in a correct historical evaluation, just as given 
medical remedies are indicated or contra-indicated by a correct 
diagnosis of a patient’s condition and an accurate case-history. 
Hopefully, the facts and interpretation that follow will make a small 
contribution towards reinforcing the conclusion that African 
development is possible only on the basis of a radical break with the 
international capitalist system, which has been the principal agency of 
underdevelopment of Africa over the last five centuries.
As the reader will observe, the question of development strategy is 
tackled briefly in the final section by A.M. Babu, former Minister of 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/preface.htm (1 of 2) [8/22/05 11:02:45 AM]


--- PAGE 6 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Economic Affairs and Development Planning, who has been actively 
involved in fashioning policy along those lines in the Tanzanian context 
[n.b.: not included in this reprint]. It is no accident that the text as a 
whole has been written within Tanzania, where expressions of concern 
for development have been accompanied by considerably more positive 
action than in several other parts of the continent.
Many colleagues and comrades shared in the preparation of this work. 
Special thanks must go to comrades Karim Hirji and Henry Mapolu of 
the University of Dar es Salaam, who read the manuscript in a spirit of 
constructive criticism. But, contrary to the fashion in most prefaces, I 
will not add that “all mistakes and shortcomings are entirely my 
responsibility.” That is sheer bourgeois subjectivism. Responsibility in 
matters of these sorts is always collective, especially with regard to the 
remedying of shortcomings. My thanks also go to the Tanzania 
Publishing House and Bogle L'Ouverture Publications for co-operating 
in producing this volume as simply and cheaply as possible. The 
purpose has been to try and reach Africans who wish to explore further 
the nature of their exploitation, rather than to satisfy the ‘standard, set 
by our oppressors and their spokesmen in the academic world.
Walter Rodney. 
Dar es Salaam.
 
Table of Contents 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/preface.htm (2 of 2) [8/22/05 11:02:45 AM]


--- PAGE 7 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Chapter One
Some Questions on Development
‘In contrast with the surging growth of the countries in our socialist camp 
and the development taking place, albeit much more slowly, in the 
majority of the capitalist countries, is the unquestionable fact that a large 
proportion of the so-called underdeveloped countries are in total 
stagnation, and that in some of them the rate of economic growth is lower 
than that of population increase.
‘These characteristics are not fortuitous; they correspond strictly to the 
nature of the capitalist system in full expansion, which transfers to the 
dependent countries the most abusive and barefaced forms of exploitation. 
It must be clearly understood that the only way to solve the questions now 
besetting mankind is to eliminate completely the exploitation of dependent 
countries by developed capitalist countries, with all the consequences that 
this implies.’
Che Guevara, 1964.
1. 1 What is Development?
Development in human society is a many-sided process. At the level of 
the individual, it implies increased skill and capacity, greater freedom, 
creativity, self-discipline, responsibility and material well-being. Some 
of these are virtually moral categories and are difficult to evaluate – 
depending as they do on the age in which one lives, one’s class origins, 
and one’s personal code of what is right and what is wrong. However, 
what is indisputable is that the achievement of any of those aspects of 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (1 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:06 AM]


--- PAGE 8 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
personal development is very much tied in with the state of the society 
as a whole. From earliest times, man found it convenient and necessary 
to come together in groups to hunt and for the sake of survival. The 
relations which develop within any given social group are crucial to an 
understanding of the society as a whole: Freedom, responsibility, skill, 
etc. have real meaning only in terms of the relations of men in society.
Of course, each social group comes into contact with others. The 
relations between individuals in any two societies are regulated by the 
form of the two societies. Their respective political structures are 
important because the ruling elements within each group are the ones 
that begin to dialogue, trade or fight, as the case may be. At the level of 
social groups, therefore, development implies an increasing capacity to 
regulate both internal and external relationships. Much of human 
history has been a fight for survival against natural hazards and against 
real and imagined human enemies. Development in the past has always 
meant the increase in the ability to guard the independence of the social 
group and indeed to infringe upon the freedom of others - something 
that often came about irrespective of the will of the persons within the 
societies involved.
Men are not the only beings which operate in groups, but the human 
species embarked upon a unique line of development because man had 
the capacity to make and use tools. The very act of making tools was a 
stimulus to increasing rationality rather than the consequence of a fully 
matured intellect. In historical terms, man the worker was every bit as 
important as man the thinker, because the work with tools liberated men 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (2 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:06 AM]


--- PAGE 9 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
from sheer physical necessity, so that he could impose himself upon 
other more powerful species and upon nature itself. The tools with 
which men work and the manner in which they organise their labour are 
both important indices of social development.
More often than not, the term ‘development’ is used in an exclusive 
economic sense – the justification being that the type of economy is 
itself an index of other social features. What then is economic 
development? A society develops economically as its members increase 
jointly their capacity for dealing with the environment. This capacity 
for dealing with the environment is dependent on the extent to which 
they understand the laws of nature (science), on the extent to which 
they put that understanding into practice by devising tools (technology), 
and on the manner in which work is organised. Taking a long-term 
view, it can be said that there has been constant economic development 
within human society since the origins of man, because man has 
multiplied enormously his capacity to win a living from nature. The 
magnitude of man’s achievement is best understood by reflecting on the 
early history of human society and noting firstly, the progress from 
crude stone tools to the use of metals; secondly, the changeover from 
hunting and gathering wild fruit to the domestication of animals and the 
growing of food crops; and thirdly, the improvement in the character of 
work from being an individualistic activity towards an activity which 
assumes a social character through the participation of many.
Every people have shown a capacity for independently increasing their 
ability to live a more satisfactory life through exploiting the resources 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (3 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:06 AM]


--- PAGE 10 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
of nature. Every continent independently participated in the early 
epochs of the extension of man’s control over his environment – which 
means in effect that every continent can point to a period of economic 
development. Africa, being the original home of man, was a major 
participant in the processes in which human groups displayed an ever 
increasing capacity to extract a living from the natural environment. 
Indeed, in the early period, Africa was the focus of the physical 
development of man as such, as distinct from other living beings.
Development was universal because the conditions leading each 
economic expansion were universal. Everywhere, man was faced with 
the task of survival by meeting fundamental material needs; and better 
tools were a consequence of the interplay between human beings and 
nature as part of the struggle for survival. Of course, human history is 
not a record of advances and nothing else. There were periods in every 
part of the world when there were temporary setbacks and actual 
reduction of the capacity to produce basic necessities and other services 
for the population. But the overall tendency was towards increased 
production, and at given points of time the increase in the quantity of 
goods was associated with a change in the quality or character of 
society. This will be shown later with reference to Africa, but to 
indicate the universal application of the principle of 
quantitative/qualitative change an example will be drawn from China.
Early man in China lived at the mercy of nature, and slowly discovered 
such basic things as the fact that fire can be man-made and that seeds of 
some grasses could be planted in the soil to meet food requirements. 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (4 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:06 AM]


--- PAGE 11 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Those discoveries helped inhabitants of China to have simple farming 
communities using stone tools and producing enough for bare 
subsistence. That was achieved several thousand years before the birth 
of Christ or the flight of the Prophet Muhammad. The goods produced 
at that stage were divided more equally among the members of society, 
who lived and worked in families. By the time of the T'ang dynasty of 
the 7th century A.D., China had expanded its economic capacity not 
only to grow more food but also to manufacture a wide variety of items 
such as silks, porcelain, ships and scientific devices. This of course 
represented a quantitative increase in the goods produced, and it was 
inter-related with qualitative changes in Chinese society. By the later 
date, there was a political state, where before there were only self-
government units. Instead of every family and every. individual 
performing the tasks of agriculturalists, house-builders, tailors, etc., 
there had arisen specialization of function. Most of the population still 
tilled the land, but there were skilled artisans who made silk and 
porcelain, bureaucrats who administered the state and Buddhist and 
Confucian religious philosophers who specialized in trying to explain 
those things that lay outside of immediate understanding.
Specialization and division of labour led to more production as well as 
inequality in distribution. A small section of Chinese society came to 
take a large disproportionate share of the proceeds of human labour, and 
that was the section which did least to actually generate wealth by 
working in agriculture or industry. They could afford to do so because 
grave inequalties had emerged in the ownership of the basic means of 
production, which was the land. Family land became smaller as far as 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (5 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:06 AM]


--- PAGE 12 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
most peasants were concerned, and a minority took over the greater 
portion of the land. Those changes in land tenure were part and parcel 
of development in its broadest sense. That is why development cannot 
be seen purely as an economic affair, but rather as an overall social 
process which is dependent upon the outcome of man’s efforts to deal 
with his natural environment.
Through careful study, it is possible to comprehend some of the very 
complicated links between the changes in the economic base and 
changes in the rest of the superstructure of the society – including the 
sphere of ideology and social beliefs. The changeover from 
communalism in Asia and Europe led for instance to codes of behaviour 
peculiar to feudalism. The conduct of the European knights in armour 
had much in common with that of the Japanese Samurai or warriors. 
They developed notions of so-called ‘chivalry’ – conduct becoming a 
gentleman knight on horseback; while in contrast had to learn extreme 
humility, deference and obsequiousness – symbolised by doffing his 
cap and standing bare-headed before his superiors. In Africa, too, it was 
to be found that the rise of the state and superior classes led to the 
practice whereby common subjects prostrated themselves in the 
presence of the monarchs and aristocrats. When the point had been 
reached, it became clear that the rough equality of the family had given 
way to a new state of society.
In the natural sciences, it is well known that in many instances 
quantitative change becomes qualitative after a certain period. The 
common example is the way that water can absorb heat (a quantitative 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (6 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:06 AM]


--- PAGE 13 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
process) until at 100° C it changes to steam (a qualitative change of 
form). Similarly, in human society it has always been the case that the 
expansion of the economy leads eventually to a change in the form of 
social relations. Karl Marx, writing in the 19th century, was the first 
writer to appreciate this, and he distinguished within European history 
several stages of development. The first major stage following after 
simple bands of hunters was Communalism where property was 
collectively owned, work was done in common, and goods were shared 
out equally. The second was Slavery, caused by the extension of 
domineering elements within the family and by some groups being 
overwhelmed by others. Slaves did a variety of tasks, but their main job 
was to produce food. The next was Feudalism where agriculture 
remained the principal means of making a livelihood, but the land 
which was necessary for that purpose was in the hands of the few, and 
they took the lion’s share of the wealth. The workers on the land (now 
called Serfs) were no longer the personal property of the masters, but 
they were tied to the land of a particular manor or estate. When the 
manor changed hands, the serfs had to remain there and provide goods 
for the landlord – just keeping enough to feed themselves. Just as the 
child of a slave was a slave, so the children of serfs were also serfs. 
Then came Capitalism, under which the greatest wealth in the society 
was produced not in agriculture but by machines – in factories and in 
mines. Like the preceding phase of feudalism, capitalism was 
characterised by the concentration in a few hands of ownership of the 
means of producing wealth and by unequal distribution of the products 
of human labour. The few who dominated were the bourgeoisie who 
had originated in the merchants and craftsmen of the feudal epoch, and 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (7 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:06 AM]


--- PAGE 14 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
who rose to be industrialists and financiers. Meanwhile, the serfs were 
declared legally free to leave the land and to go in search of 
employment in capitalist enterprises. Their labour thereby became a 
commodity – something to be bought and sold.
It was predicted that there would be a further stage – that of Socialism – 
in which the principle of economic would be restored, as in 
communalism. In the present century, the phase of Socialism has indeed 
emerged in some countries. Economically, each succeeding stage 
represented development in the strict sense that there was increased 
capacity to control the material environment and thereby to create more 
goods and services for the community. The greater quantity of goods 
and services were based on greatest skills and human inventiveness. 
Man was liberated in the sense of having more opportunities to display 
and develop his talents. Whether man uplifted himself in a moral sense 
is open to dispute. The advance in production increased the range of 
powers which sections of society had over other sections, and it 
multiplied the violence which was part of the competition for survival 
and growth among social groups. It is not at all clear that a soldier 
serving capitalism in the last World War was less ‘primitive’ in the 
elemental sense of the word than a soldier serving in one of Japan’s 
feudal armies in the 16th century, or for that matter a hunter living in 
the first phase of human organisation in the forests of Brazil. 
Nevertheless, we do know that in those three respective epochs hunting 
band, feudalism, capitalism-the quality of life improved. It became less 
hazardous and less uncertain, and members of society potentially had 
greater choice over their destinies. All of that is involved when the 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (8 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:06 AM]


--- PAGE 15 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
word ‘development’ is used.
In the history of those societies which have passed through several 
modes of production, the opportunity is presented of seeing how 
quantitative changes give rise ultimately to an entirety different society. 
The key feature is that at given junctures the social relations in the 
society were no longer effective in promoting advance. Indeed, they 
began to act as brakes on the productive forces and therefore had to be 
discarded. Take for instance the epoch of slavery in Europe. However 
morally indefensible slavery may have been, it did serve for a while to 
open up the mines and agricultural plantations in large parts of Europe 
and notably within the Roman Empire. But then those peasants who 
remained free had their labour depressed and under-utilised because of 
the presence of slaves. The slaves were not disposed to work at any 
tasks requiring skills, so the technological evolution of society 
threatened to come to a halt. Furthermore, the slaves were restless, and 
slave revolts were expensive to put down. The landowners, seeing their 
estates going to ruin, decided that it would be best to grant the legal 
freedom for which slaves were clamouring. and to keep exploiting the 
labour of these free serfs by ensuring that they had no lands to plough 
other than those of the landlords. Thereby, a new set of social relations 
– that of landlord and serf – replaced the old relations of slave master 
and slave.
In some instances. the changeover to a new mode was accompanied by 
violence at a critical point. This occurred when the ruling classes 
involved were being threatened with removal by the process of change. 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (9 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:06 AM]


--- PAGE 16 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
The feudal landlords remained in power for centuries during which the 
merchant and manufacturing interest grew wealthy and sought to 
achieve power and social pre-eminence. When classes are so well-
defined, their consciousness is at a high level. Both the landlord class 
and the capitalists recognised what was at stake. The former fought to 
hold on to the social relations which no longer corresponded to the new 
technology of machine production and the organisation of work by 
means of purchasing labour power. The capitalists flung themselves 
into Revolutions in Europe in the 18th and 19th centuries to break the 
old relations of production.
The notions of revolution and class consciousness must be borne in 
mind when it comes to examining the situation of the modern worker 
and peasant classes in Africa. However, for the greater part of Africa’s 
history, the existing classes have been incompletely crystallized and the 
changes have been gradual rather than revolutionary. What is probably 
of more relevance for early African development is the principle that 
development over the world’s territories has always been uneven.
While all societies have experienced development, it is equally true that 
the rate of development differed from continent to continent, and within 
each continent different parts increased their command over nature at 
different rates. Inside Africa, Egypt was capable of producing wealth in 
abundance twenty-five centuries ago, because of mastery of many 
scientific natural laws and their invention of technology to irrigate, 
grow food, and extract minerals from the subsoil. At that time, hunting 
with bows and even wooden clubs was what people depended on for 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (10 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:06 AM]


--- PAGE 17 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
survival in most parts of the African continent-and in various other 
places such as the British Isles.
One of the most difficult questions to answer is exactly why different 
peoples developed at different rates when left on their own. Part of the 
answer lies in the environment in which human groups evolved and part 
of it lies in the ‘superstructure’ of human society. That is to say, as 
human beings battled with the material environment, they created forms 
of social relations, forms of government, patterns of behaviour and 
systems of belief which together constituted the superstructure-which 
was never exactly the same in any two societies. Each element in the 
superstructure interacted with other elements in the superstructure as 
well as with the material base. For instance, the political and religious 
patterns affected each other and were often intertwined. The religious 
belief that a certain forest was sacred was the kind of element in the 
superstructure that affected economic activity, since that forest would 
not be cleared for cultivation. While in the final analysis the 
breakthrough to a new stage of human development is dependent upon 
man’s technical capacity to deal with the environment, it is also to be 
borne in mind that peculiarities in the superstructure of any giv en 
society have a marked impact on the rate of development.
Many observers have been puzzled by the fact that China never became 
capitalist. It entered the feudal phase of development virtually 1,000 
years before the birth of Christ; it had developed many aspects of 
technology; and it had many craftsmen and artisans. Yet the mode of 
production was never transformed to one where machines were the 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (11 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:06 AM]


--- PAGE 18 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
main means of producing wealth and where the owners of capital would 
be the dominant class. The explanation is very complex, but in general 
terms the main differences between feudal Europe and feudal China lay 
in the superstructure – i.e. in the body of beliefs, motivations and socio-
political institutions which derived from the material base but in turn 
affected it. In China, religious, educational and bureaucratic 
qualifications were of utmost importance, and government was in the 
hands of state officials rather than being run by the landlords on their 
own feudal estates. Besides, there were greater egalitarian tendencies in 
Chinese land distribution than in European land distribution, and the 
Chinese state owned a great deal of land. The consequence was that the 
landowners had greater powers as bureaucrats than as men of property, 
and they used that to keep social relations in the same mould. It would 
have been impossible for them to have done that indefinitely, but they 
slowed down the movement of history. In Europe, the elements of 
change were not stifled by the weight of a state bureaucracy.
As soon as the first capitalists appeared in European society, an 
incentive was created for further development through the attitude of 
this class. Never before in any human society had a group of people 
seen themselves consciously functioning in order to make the maximum 
profit out of production. To fulfill their objective of acquiring more and 
more capital, capitalists took a greater interest in the laws of science 
which could be harnessed in the form of machinery to work and make 
profit on their behalf. At the political level, capitalism was also 
responsible for most of the features which today are referred to as 
‘Western Democracy’. In abolishing feudalism, the capitalists insisted 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (12 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:06 AM]


--- PAGE 19 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
on parliaments, constitutions, freedom of the press, etc. These too can 
be considered as development. However the peasants and workers of 
Europe (and eventually the inhabitants of the whole world) paid a huge 
price so that the capitalists could make their profits from the human 
labour that always lies behind the machines. That contradicts other 
facets of development, especially viewed from the standpoint of those 
who suffered and still suffer to make capitalist achievements possible. 
This latter group are the majority of mankind. To advance, they must 
overthrow capitalism; and that is why at the moment capitalism stands 
in the path of further human social development. To put it another way, 
the social (class) relations of capitalism are now outmoded, just as slave 
and feudal relations became outmoded in their time.
There was a period when the capitalist system increased the well-being 
of significant numbers of people as a by-product of seeking out profits 
for a few, but today the quest for profits comes into sharp conflict with 
people’s demands that their material and social needs should be 
fulfilled. The capitalist or bourgeois class is no longer capable of 
guiding the uninhibited development of science and technology again 
because these objectives now clash with the profit motive. Capitalism 
has proved incapable of transcending fundamental weaknesses such as 
underutilization of productive capacity, the persistence of a permanent 
sector of unemployed, and periodic economic crises related to the 
concept of ‘market’ – which is concerned with people’s ability to pay 
rather than their need for commodities. Capitalism has created its own 
irrationalities such as a vicious white racism, the tremendous waste 
associated with advertising, and the irrationality of incredible poverty in 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (13 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:06 AM]


--- PAGE 20 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
the midst of wealth and wastage even inside the biggest capitalist 
economies, such as that of the U.S.A. Above all, capitalism has 
intensified its own political contradictions in trying to subjugate nations 
and continents outside of Europe, so that workers and peasants in every 
part of the globe have become self-conscious and are determined to take 
their destiny into their own hands. Such a determination is also an 
integral part of the process of development.
It can be offered as a generalization that all phases of development are 
temporary or transient and are destined sooner or later to give way to 
something else. It is particularly important to stress this with reference 
to capitalism because the capitalist epoch is not quite over and those 
who live at a particular point in time often fail to see that their way of 
life is in the process of transformation and elimination. Indeed, it is one 
of the functions of those who justify capitalism (bourgeois writers) to 
try and pretend that capitalism is here to stay. A glance at the 
remarkable advance of Socialism over the last fifty-odd years will show 
that the apologists for capitalism are spokesmen of a social system that 
is rapidly expiring.
The fact that capitalism today is still around alongside of socialism 
should warn us that the modes of production cannot simply be viewed 
as a question of successive stages. Uneven development has always 
ensured that societies have come into contact when they were at 
different levels – for example, one that was communal and one that was 
capitalist.
When two societies of different sorts come into prolonged and effective 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (14 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:06 AM]


--- PAGE 21 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
contact, the rate and character of change taking place in both is 
seriously affected to the extent that entirely new patterns are created. 
Two general rules can be observed to apply in such cases. Firstly, the 
weaker of the two societies (i.e., the one with less economic capacity) is 
bound to be adversely affected-and the bigger the gap between the two 
societies concerned the more detrimental are the consequences. For 
example, when European capitalism came into contact with the 
indigenous hunting societies of America and the Caribbean, the latter 
were virtually exterminated. Secondly, assuming that the weaker 
society does survive, then ultimately it can resume its own independent 
development only if it proceeds to a level higher than that of the 
economy which had previously dominated it. The concrete instances of 
the operation of this second rule are found in the experience of the 
Soviet Union, China and Korea.
China and Korea were both at a stage approximating to feudalism when 
they were colonised by the capitalist powers of Europe and Japan. 
Russia was never legally colonised, but while in the feudal stage and 
before its own indigenous capitalism could get very far, the Russian 
economy was subjugated by the more mature capitalism of Western 
Europe. In all three cases, it took a socialist revolution to break the 
domination of capitalism, and only the rapid tempo of socialist 
development could make amends for the period of subjugation when 
growth was misdirected and retarded. Indeed, as far as the two biggest 
socialist states are concerned (the Soviet Union and China), socialist 
development has already catapulted them beyond states such as Britain 
and France, which have been following the capitalist path for centuries.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (15 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:07 AM]


--- PAGE 22 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Up to the end of the 1950s (the point at which this study terminates), 
Russia, China, Korea and certain nations in Eastern Europe were the 
only countries which had decisively broken with capitalism and 
imperialism. Imperialism is itself a phase of capitalist development in 
which Western European capitalist countries, the U.S.A., and Japan 
established political, economic, military and cultural hegemony over 
other parts of the world which were initially at a lower level and 
therefore could not resist domination. Imperialism was in effect the 
extended capitalist system, which for many years embraced the whole 
world – one part being the exploiters and the other the exploited, one 
part being dominated and the other acting as overlords, one part making 
policy and the other being dependent.
Socialism has advanced on imperialism’s weakest flanks – in the sector 
that is exploited, oppressed and reduced to dependency. In Asia and 
eastern Europe, socialism released the nationalist energies of colonised 
peoples; it turned the goal of production away from the money market 
and towards the satisfaction of human needs; it has eradicated 
bottlenecks such as permanent unemployment and periodic crises; and 
it has realised some of the promise implicit in Western or bourgeois 
democracy by providing the equality of economic condition which is 
necessary before one can make use of political equality and equality 
before the law.
Socialism has re-instated the economic equality of communalism, but 
communalism fell apart because of low economic productivity and 
scarcity. Socialism aims at and has significantly achieved the creation 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (16 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:07 AM]


--- PAGE 23 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
of plenty, so that the principle of egalitarian distribution becomes 
consistent with the satisfaction of the wants of all members of society.
One of the most crucial factors leading to more rapid and consistent 
expansion of economic capacity under Socialism has been the 
implementation of planned development. Most of the historical 
processes so far described relate to involuntary and unplanned 
development. No one planned that at a given stage human beings should 
cease using stone axes and use iron implements instead; and (to come to 
more recent times) while individual capitalist firms plan their own 
expansion, their system is not geared to over-all planning of the 
economy and the society. The capitalist state intervened only fitfully 
and partially to supervise capitalist development. The Socialist state has 
as its prime function the control of the economy on behalf of the 
working classes. The latter -i.e., workers and peasants – have now 
become the most dynamic force in world history and human 
development.
To conclude this brief introduction to the extremely complex problem 
of social development, it is useful to recognise how inadequate are the 
explanations of that phenomenon which are provided by bourgeois 
scholars. They very seldom try to grapple with the issue in its totality, 
but rather concentrate attention narrowly on ‘economic development’. 
As defined by the average bourgeois economist, development becomes 
simply a matter of the combination of given ‘factors of production’ : 
namely land, population, capital, technology, specialisation and large-
scale production. Those factors are indeed relevant, as is implied in the 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (17 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:07 AM]


--- PAGE 24 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
analysis so far; but omissions from the list of what bourgeois scholars 
think relevant are really overwhelming. No mention is made of the 
exploitation of the majority which underlay all development prior to 
Socialism. No mention is made of the social relations of production or 
of classes. No mention is made of the way that the factors and relations 
of production combine to form a distinctive system or mode of 
production, varying from one historical epoch to another. No mention is 
made of imperialism as a logical phase of capitalism.
In contrast, any approach which tries to base itself on Socialist and 
revolutionary principles must certainly introduce into the discussion at 
the earliest possible point the concepts of class, imperialism, and 
Socialism, as well as the concepts of the workers and oppressed 
peoples. Each new concept bristles with its own complications, and it is 
not to be imagined that the mere resort to certain terminology is the 
answer to anything. However, one has at least to recognise the full 
human, historical and social dimensions of development, before it is 
feasible to consider ‘underdevelopment’ or the strategies for escaping 
from underdevelopment.
1.2 What is Underdevelopment?
Having discussed ‘development’, it makes it easier to comprehend the 
concept of underdevelopment. Obviously, underdevelopment is not 
absence of development, because every people have developed in one 
way or another and to a greater or lesser extent. Underdevelopment 
makes sense only as a means of comparing levels of development. It is 
very much tied to the fact that human social development has been 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (18 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:07 AM]


--- PAGE 25 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
uneven and from a strictly economic view-point some human groups 
have advanced further by producing more and becoming more wealthy.
The moment that one group appears to be wealthier than others, some 
enquiry is bound to take place as to the reason for the difference. After 
Britain had begun to move ahead of the rest of Europe in the 18th 
century, the famous British economist Adam Smith felt it necessary to 
look into the causes behind the ‘Wealth of Nations’. At the same time, 
many Russians were very concerned about the fact that their country 
was ‘backward’ in comparison with England, France and Germany in 
the 18th century and subsequently in the 19th century. Today, our main 
pre-occupation is with the differences in wealth between on the one 
hand Europe and North America and on the other hand Africa, Asia and 
Latin America. In comparison with the first, the second group can be 
said to be backward or underdeveloped. At all times, therefore, one of 
the ideas behind underdevelopment is a comparative one. It is possible 
to compare the economic conditions at two different periods for the 
same country and determine whether or not it had developed; and (more 
importantly) it is possible to compare the economies of any two 
countries or sets of countries at any given period in time.
A second and even more indispensable component of modern 
underdevelopment is that it expresses a particular relationship of 
exploitation: namely, the exploitation of one country by another. All of 
the countries named as ‘underdeveloped’ in the world are exploited by 
others; and the underdevelopment with which the world is now pre-
occupied is a product of capitalist, imperialist and colonialist 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (19 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:07 AM]


--- PAGE 26 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
exploitation. African and Asian societies were developing 
independently until they were taken over directly or indirectly by the 
capitalist powers. When that happened, exploitation increased and the 
export of surplus ensued, depriving the societies of the benefit of their 
natural resources and labour. That is an integral part of 
underdevelopment in the contemporary sense.
In some quarters, it has often been thought wise to substitute the term 
‘developing’ for ‘underdeveloped’. One of the reasons for so doing is to 
avoid any unpleasantness which may be attached to the second term, 
which might be interpreted as meaning underdeveloped mentally, 
physically, morally or in any other respect. Actually, if 
‘underdevelopment’ were related to anything other than comparing 
economies, then the most underdeveloped country in the world would 
be the U.S.A, which practices external oppression on a massive scale, 
while internally there is a blend of exploitation, brutality, and 
psychiatric disorder. However, on the economic level, it is best to 
remain with the word ‘underdeveloped’ rather than ‘developing’, 
because the latter creates the impression that all the countries of Africa, 
Asia and Latin America are escaping from a state of economic 
backwardness relative to the industrial nations of the world, and that 
they are emancipating themselves from the relationship of exploitation. 
That is certainly not true, and many underdeveloped countries in Africa 
and elsewhere are becoming more underdeveloped in comparison with 
the world’s great powers, because their exploitation by the metropoles 
is being intensified in new ways.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (20 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:07 AM]


--- PAGE 27 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Economic comparisons can be made by looking at statistical tables or 
indices of what goods and services are produced and used in the 
societies under discussion. Professional economists speak of the 
National Income of countries and the National Income per capita. These 
phrases have already become part of the layman’s language, by way of 
the newspapers and no detailed explanation will be offered here. It is 
enough to note that the National Income is a measurement of the total 
wealth of the country, while the per capita income is a figure obtained 
by dividing the National Income by the number of inhabitants in order 
to get an idea of the ‘average’ wealth of each inhabitant. This ‘average’ 
can be misleading where there are great extremes of wealth. A young 
Ugandan put it in a very personal form when he said that the per capita 
income of his country camouflaged the fantastic difference between 
what was earned by his poor peasant father and what was earned by the 
biggest local capitalist, Madhvani. In considering the question of 
development away from the state of underdevelopment, it is of supreme 
importance to realise that such a process demands the removal of the 
gross inequalities of land distribution, property holding and income, 
which are camouflaged behind national income figures. At one stage in 
history, advance was made at the cost of entrenching privileged groups, 
In our times, development has to mean advance which liquidates 
present privileged groups with their corresponding unprivileged groups. 
Nevertheless, the per capita income is a useful statistic for comparing 
one country with another; and the developed countries all have per 
capita incomes several times higher than any one of the recently 
independent African nations.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (21 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:07 AM]


--- PAGE 28 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
The following table gives a clear picture of the gap between Africa and 
certain nations measured in per capita incomes. It is the gap that allows 
one group to be called ‘developed’ and another ‘underdeveloped’. (The 
information is obtained from United Nations statistical publications, 
and applies to the year 1968 unless otherwise stated.)
Countries Per Capita income in U.S. 
dollars.
Canada 2,247
U.S.A. 3,578
France (1967) 1,738
United Kingdom (1967) 1,560
AFRICA as a whole (1965) 1,400
Congo 52
Ghana 198
Kenya 107
Malawi 52
Morocco 185
South Africa 543
Tanzania 62
U.A.R. 156
Zambia 225
The gap that can be seen from the above evidence is not only great, but 
it is also increasing. Many people have come to realise that the 
developed countries are growing richer quite rapidly, while 
underdeveloped countries for the most part show stagnancy or slow 
rates of growth. In each country, a figure can be calculated to represent 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (22 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:07 AM]


--- PAGE 29 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
the rate at which the economy grows. The growth rate is highest in 
Socialist countries, followed by the big capitalist countries, and with the 
colonies and ex-colonies trailing far behind. The proportion of 
international trade which is in the hands of the underdeveloped 
countries is declining. That proportion was roughly 30% in 1938 and 
went down to less than 20% in the 1960’s. This is an important 
indicator because trade is both a reflection of the quantity of goods 
produced and a way of obtaining goods not locally produced.
Developed economies have certain characteristics which contrast with 
underdeveloped ones. The developed countries are all industrialized. 
That is to say, the greater part of their working population is engaged in 
industry rather than agriculture, and most of their wealth comes out of 
mines, factories, etc. They have a high output of labour per man in 
industry because of their advanced technology and skills. This is well 
known, but it is also striking that the developed countries have a much 
more advanced agriculture than the rest of the world. Their agriculture 
has already become an industry, and the agricultural part of the 
economy produces more although it is small. The countries of Africa, 
Asia and Latin America are called agricultural countries because they 
rely on agriculture and have little or no industry: but their agriculture 
is unscientific and the yields are far less than those of the developed 
countries. In several of the largest underdeveloped nations, there was 
stagnation and fall in agricultural output in and after 1966. In Africa, 
the output of food per person has been falling in recent years. Because 
the developed countries have a stronger industrial and agricultural 
economy than the rest of the world, they produce far more goods than 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (23 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:07 AM]


--- PAGE 30 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
the poor nations-in the category of necessities as well as luxuries. It is 
possible to draw up statistical tables showing the production of grain, 
milk, steel, electric power, paper, and a wide range of other goods; and 
showing at the same time how much of each commodity is made 
available to each citizen (on the average). Once again, the figures are 
highly favourable to a few privileged countries in the world. 
The amount of steel used in a country is an excellent indicator of the 
level of industrialization. At one extreme, one finds that the U.S.A. 
consumes 685 kg. of steel per person, Sweden 623 kg. and East 
Germany 437 kg. At the other extreme, one finds that Zambia consumes 
10 kg., East Africa 8 kg. and Ethiopia 2 kg. When the same kind of 
calculation is made for sugar, a sample of the results shows Australia 
with 57 kg, and North America and the Soviet Union with 45 to 50 kg. 
on the average. Africa, however, consumes only 10 kg. of sugar per 
person per year, and this is better than Asia with 7 kg..
An even more gloomy set of statistics relate to basic food requirements. 
Each individual needs a certain quantity of food per day, measured in 
calories. The desirable amount is 3,000 calories per day; but no African 
country comes anywhere near to that figure. Algerians consume on 
average only 1,370 calories per day, while Ivory Coast can consider 
itself very well off within an African context with 2,290 calories as the 
national average. Furthermore, one also has to judge the protein content 
of the food; and many parts of Africa suffer from ‘protein famine’ – 
which means that even when calories are available from starchy foods, 
little protein is to he found. Persons in developed capitalist and Socialist 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (24 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:07 AM]


--- PAGE 31 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
countries consume twice as much protein food as those in 
underdeveloped countries. Such differences help to make it clear which 
countries are ‘developed’ and which are ‘underdeveloped’.
The social services provided by a country are of importance equal to 
that of its material production in bringing about human well-being and 
happiness. It is universally accepted that the state has the responsibility 
to establish schools and hospitals, but whether these are provided by the 
government or by private agencies, their numbers can be established in 
relation to the size of the population. The extent to which basic goods 
and social services are available in a country can also be measured 
indirectly by looking at the life expectancy, the frequency of deaths 
among children, the amount of malnutrition, the occurrence of diseases 
which would be prevented by inoculation and public health services, 
and the proportion of illiterates. In all these respects, the comparison 
between the developed and underdeveloped countries shows huge and 
even frightening differences. For every 1,000 children who are born 
alive in Cameroon, 100 never live to see their first birthday, and out of 
every 1,000 African children born alive in rural Sierra Leone, 160 die 
before reaching one year. Yet the comparable figures for the U.K. and 
Holland are only 12 and 18, respectively. Besides many more African 
children die before they reach the age of five. Lack of doctors is a major 
drawback. In Italy, there is one doctor for every 580 Italians and in 
Czechoslovakia there is one doctor for every 510 citizens. In Niger, one 
doctor must do for 56,140 people; in Tunisia, one doctor for every 
8,320 Tunisians; and in Chad one doctor for 73,460 persons.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (25 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:07 AM]


--- PAGE 32 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
It takes a large number of skilled people to make an industrial economy 
function; while the countries of Africa have a woefully insufficient 
number of highly qualified personnel. The figures on doctors just given 
confirm this, and the same problem exists with engineers, technicians, 
agriculturalists and even administrators and lawyers in some places. 
Middle level skills in fields such as welding are also lacking. To make 
matters worse, there is at present a ‘brain drain’ from Africa, Asia and 
Latin America towards North America and Western Europe. This is to 
say, professionals, technicians, high-level administrators and skilled 
workers emigrate from their homes, and the small number of skilled 
people available to the underdeveloped world are further depleted by 
the lure of better pay and opportunities in the developed world.
The lopsided nature of the present international economy is strikingly 
brought home by the fact that the underdeveloped countries have in turn 
to recruit foreign experts at fantastic cost.
Most of the data presented so far can be described as ‘quantitative’. It 
gives us measurements of the quantity of goods and services produced 
in various economies. In addition, certain qualitative assessments have 
to be made concerning the way that a given economy is put together. 
For economic development it is not enough to produce more goods and 
services. The country has to produce more of those goods and services 
which in turn will give rise spontaneously to future growth in the 
economy. For example, the food-producing sector must be flourishing 
so that workers would be healthy, and agriculture on the whole must be 
efficient so that the profits (or savings) from agriculture would 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (26 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:07 AM]


--- PAGE 33 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
stimulate industry. Heavy industry, such as the steel industry and the 
production of electrical power, must be present so that one is capable of 
making machinery for other types of industry and for agriculture. Lack 
of heavy industry, inadequate production of food, unscientific 
agriculture – those, are all characteristics of the underdeveloped 
economies.
It is typical of underdeveloped economies that they do not (or are not 
allowed to) concentrate on those sectors of the economy which in turn 
will generate growth and raise production to a new level altogether, and 
there are very few ties between one sector and another so that (say) 
agriculture and industry could react beneficially on each other.
Furthermore, whatever savings are made within the economy are 
mainly sent abroad or are frittered away in consumption rather than 
being redirected to productive purposes. Much of the national income 
which remains within the country goes to pay individuals who are not 
directly involved in producing wealth but only in rendering auxiliary 
services-civil servants, merchants, soldiers, entertainers, etc. What 
aggravates the situation is that more people are employed in those jobs 
than are really necessary to give efficient service; and to crown it all 
these people do not reinvest in agriculture or industry. They squander 
the wealth created by the peasants and workers by purchasing cars, 
whisky and perfume.
It has been noted with irony that the principal ‘industry’ of many 
underdeveloped countries is administration. Not long ago, 60%, of the 
internal revenue of Dahomey went into paying salaries of civil servants 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (27 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:07 AM]


--- PAGE 34 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
and government leaders. The salaries given to the elected politicians is 
higher than that given to a British Member of Parliament, and the 
number of parliamentarians in the underdeveloped African countries is 
also relatively high. In Gabon, there is one parliamentary representative 
for every 6,000 inhabitants, compared to one French parliamentary 
representative for every 100,000 Frenchmen. Many more figures of that 
sort indicate that in describing a typical underdeveloped economy it is 
essential to point out the high disproportion of the locally distributed 
wealth that goes into the pockets of a privileged few.
Members of the privileged groups inside Africa always defend 
themselves by saying that they pay the taxes which keeps the 
Government going. At face value this statement sounds reasonable, but 
on close examination it is really the most absurd argument and shows 
total ignorance of how the economy functions. Taxes do not produce 
national wealth and development. Wealth has to be produced out of 
nature – from tilling the land or mining metals or felling trees or 
turning raw materials into finished products for human consumption. 
These things are done by the vast majority of the population who are 
peasants and workers.
There would be no incomes to tax if the labouring population did not 
work.
The incomes given to civil servants, professionals, merchants, etc. come 
from the store of wealth produced by the community. Quite apart from 
the injustices in the distribution of wealth, one has to dismiss the 
argument that ‘the tax payers’ money’ is what develops a country. In 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (28 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:07 AM]


--- PAGE 35 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
pursuing the goal of development, one must start with the producers and 
move on from there to see whether the products of their labour are 
being rationally utilised to bring greater independence and well-being to 
the nation.
By paying attention to the wealth created by human labour out of 
nature, one can immediately appreciate that very few underdeveloped 
countries are lacking in the natural resources which could go in to 
making a better life; and in those cases it is usually possible for two or 
three territories to combine together for their mutual benefit. In fact, it 
can be shown that the underdeveloped countries are the ones with the 
greatest wealth of natural resources and yet the poorest in terms of 
goods and services presently provided by and for their citizens.
The United Nations Survey of Economic Conditions in Africa up to 
1964 had this to say about the continent’s natural resources:
Actually, African potential is shown to be greater every day 
with new discoveries of mineral wealth. On the agricultural 
side, African soil is not as rich as the picture of tropical 
forests might lead one to believe; but there are other climatic 
advantages so that with proper irrigation crops can be grown 
all the year round in most parts of the continent.
The situation is that Africa has not yet come anywhere close to making 
the most of its natural wealth, and most of the wealth now being 
produced is not being retained within Africa for the benefit of Africans. 
Zambia and Congo produce vast quantities of copper, but that is for the 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (29 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:07 AM]


--- PAGE 36 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
benefit of Europe, North America and Japan. Even the goods and 
services which are produced inside of Africa and which remain in 
Africa nevertheless fall into the hands of non-Africans. Thus, South 
Africa boasts of having the highest per capita income in Africa; but as 
an indication of how this is shared out, one should note that while the 
Apartheid regime assures that only 24 white babies die out of every 
1,000 live births, they are quite happy to allow 128 African babies to 
die out of every 1,000 live births. In order to understand present 
economic conditions in Africa, one needs to know why it is that Africa 
has realised so little of its natural potential, and one also needs to know 
why so much of its present wealth goes to non-Africans who reside for 
the most part outside of the continent.
In a way, underdevelopment is a paradox. Many parts of the world that 
are naturally rich are actually poor and parts that are not so well off in 
wealth of soil and sub-soil are enjoying the highest standards of living. 
When the capitalists from the developed parts of the world try to 
explain this paradox, they often make it sound as though there is 
something ‘God-given’ about the situation. One bourgeois economist, 
in a book on development, accepted that the comparative statistics of 
the world today show a gap that is much larger than it was before. By 
his own admission, the gap between the developed and the 
underdeveloped countries has increased by at least 15 to 20 times over 
the last 150 years. However, the bourgeois economist in question does 
not give a historical explanation, nor does he consider that there is a 
relationship of exploitation which allowed capitalist parasites to grow 
fat and impoverished the dependencies. Instead, he puts forward a 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (30 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:07 AM]


--- PAGE 37 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
biblical explanation! He says that:
‘It is all told in the Bible:
For unto every one that hath shall be given, and he shall have abundance; 
but from him that hath not shall be taken away even that which he hath. 
(St Matthew, xxv, 29.)
The story of the “hath nots” is the story of the modern underdeveloped 
countries.’
Presumably, the only comment which one can make on that is ‘Amen’.
The interpretation that underdevelopment is somehow ordained by God 
is emphasised because of the racist trend in European scholarship. It is 
in line with racist prejudice to say openly or to imply that their 
countries are more developed because their people are innately superior, 
and that the responsibility for the economic backwardness of Africa lies 
in the generic backwardness of the race of black Africans. An even 
bigger problem is that the people of Africa and other parts of the 
colonised world have gone through a cultural and psychological crisis 
and have accepted at least partially the European version of things. That 
means that the African himself has doubts about his capacity to 
transform and develop his natural environment. With such doubts, he 
even challenges those of his brothers who say that Africa can and will 
develop through the efforts of its own people. If we can determine when 
underdevelopment came about, it would dismiss the lingering suspicion 
that it is racially or otherwise predetermined and that we can do little 
about it.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (31 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:07 AM]


--- PAGE 38 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
When the ‘experts’ from capitalist countries do not give a racist 
explanation, they nevertheless confuse the issue by giving as causes of 
underdevelopment the things which really are consequences. For 
example, they would argue that Africa is in a state of backwardness as a 
result of lacking skilled personnel to develop. It is true that because of 
lack of engineers Africa cannot on its own build more roads, bridges 
and hydroelectric stations. But that is not a cause of underdevelopment, 
except in the sense that causes and effects come together and reinforce 
each other. The fact of the matter is that the most profound reasons for 
the economic backwardness of a given African nation are not to be 
found outside that nation. All that we can find inside are the symptoms 
of underdevelopment and the secondary factors that make for poverty.
Mistaken interpretations of the causes of underdevelopment usually 
stem either from prejudiced thinking or from the error of believing that 
one can learn the answers by looking inside the underdeveloped 
economy. The true explanation lies in seeking out the relationship 
between Africa and certain developed countries and in recognising that 
it is a relationship of exploitation.
Man has always exploited his natural environment in order to make a 
living. At a certain point in time, there also arose the exploitation of 
man by man, in that a few people grew rich and lived well through the 
labour of others. Then a stage was reached by which people in one 
community called a nation exploited the natural resources and the 
labour of another nation and its people. Since underdevelopment deals 
with the comparative economics of nations, it is the last kind of 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (32 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:07 AM]


--- PAGE 39 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
exploitation that is of greatest interest here – i.e. the exploitation of 
nation by nation. One of the common means by which one nation 
exploits another and one that is relevant to Africa’s external relations is 
exploitation through trade. When the terms of trade are set by one 
country in a manner entirely advantageous to itself, then the trade is 
usually detrimental to the trading partner. To be specific, one can take 
the export of agricultural produce from Africa and the import of 
manufactured goods into Africa from Europe, North America and 
Japan. The big nations establish the price of the agricultural products 
and subject these prices to frequent reductions. At the same time the 
price of manufactured goods is also set by them, along with the freight 
rates necessary for trade in the ships of those nations. The minerals of 
Africa also fall into the same category as agricultural produce as far as 
pricing is concerned. The whole import/export relationship between 
Africa and its trading partners is one of unequal exchange and of 
exploitation.
More far-reaching than just trade is the actual ownership of the means 
of production in one country by the citizens of another. When citizens 
of Europe own the land and the mines of Africa, this is the most direct 
way of sucking the African continent. Under colonialism the ownership 
was complete and backed by military domination. Today, in many 
African countries the foreign ownership is still present, although the 
armies and flags of foreign powers have been removed. So long as 
foreigners own land, mines, factories, banks, insurance companies, 
means of transportation, newspapers, power stations, etc. then for so 
long will the wealth of Africa flow outwards into the hands of those 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (33 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:07 AM]


--- PAGE 40 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
elements. In other words, in the absence of direct political control; 
foreign investment ensures that the natural resources and the labour of 
Africa produce economic value which is lost to the continent.
Foreign investment often takes the form of loans to African 
governments. Naturally, these loans have to be re-paid; and in the 1960s 
the rate of repayment (amortization) on official loans in underdeveloped 
countries rose from $400 million per year to about $700 million per 
year, and it is constantly on the increase. Besides, there is interest to be 
paid on these loans as well as profits which come from the direct 
investment in the economy. These two sources accounted for the fact 
that over $500 million flowed outward from the underdeveloped 
countries in 1965. The information on these matters is seldom complete, 
for the obvious reason that those making the profit are trying to keep 
things quiet, so the figures given above are likely to be underestimates. 
They are meant to give some idea of the extent to which the wealth of 
Africa is being drained off by those who invest in, and thereby own, a 
large part of the means of production of wealth in Africa. Furthermore, 
in more recent times the forms of investment have become more subtle 
and more dangerous. They include so-called ‘absentee’ management of 
local African companies by international capitalist experts.
Africa trades mainly with the countries of Western Europe, North 
America and Japan. Africa is also diversifying its trade by dealing with 
socialist countries, and if that trade proves disadvantageous to the 
African economy, then the developed socialist countries will also have 
joined the ranks of the exploiters of Africa. However, it is very essential 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (34 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:07 AM]


--- PAGE 41 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
at this stage to draw a clear distinction between the capitalist countries 
and the socialist ones, because socialist countries have never at any time 
owned any part of the African continent nor do they invest in African 
economies in such a way as to expatriate profits from Africa. Therefore, 
socialist countries are not involved in the robbery of Africa.
Most of the people who write about underdevelopment and who are 
read in the continents of Africa, Asia and Latin America are spokesmen 
for the capitalist or bourgeois world. They seek to justify capitalist 
exploitation both inside and outside their own countries. One of the 
things which they do to confuse the issue is to place all 
‘underdeveloped’ countries, in one camp and all ‘developed’ countries 
in another camp irrespective of different social systems; so that the 
terms ‘capitalist’ and ‘socialist’ never enter the discussion. Instead, one 
is faced with a simple division between the industrialised nations and 
those that are not industrialised. It is true that both the U.S.A. and the 
Soviet Union are industrialised and it is true that when one looks at the 
statistics, countries such as France, Norway, Czechoslovakia and 
Rumania are much closer together than any one of them is to an African 
country. But it is absolutely necessary to determine whether the 
standard of living in a given industrialised country is a product of its 
own internal resources or whether it stems from exploiting other 
countries. The United States has a small proportion of the World’s 
population and exploitable natural wealth but it enjoys a huge 
percentage of the wealth which comes from exploiting the labour and 
natural resources of the whole world.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (35 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:07 AM]


--- PAGE 42 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
The erroneous views about underdevelopment and the oversimplified 
distinction between rich and poor nations are opposed by Socialist 
scholars both inside and outside the Socialist countries. Those 
erroneous views are also being exposed by economists in 
underdeveloped countries who are discovering that the explanations 
offered by bourgeois scholars are explanations which suit the interests 
of those countries which exploit the rest of the world through trade and 
investment. One French Socialist writer, Pierre Jalée, proposes that to 
obtain a proper perspective of relations between developed countries 
and underdeveloped ones, two categories should be set up namely, 
imperialist and Socialist. The Socialist camp include all countries big 
and small which have decided to break away from international 
capitalism. The imperialist camp contains not only the capitalist giants 
like the U.S.A., France, West Germany and Japan but also the weak 
nations in which those industrial nations have investments. Therefore 
the imperialist camp can be sub-divided into exploiting and exploited 
countries. For the most part, the nations of Africa fall into the group of 
exploited countries inside of the capitalist/imperialist system. Roughly 
one-third of the world’s peoples are already living under some form of 
Socialism. The other two-thirds constitute the capitalist/imperialist 
camp, with the majority being in the exploited section.
It is interesting to notice that in spite of their efforts to confuse the 
situation, the bourgeois writers often touch on the truth. For example, 
the United Nations (which is dominated by western capitalist powers) 
would never stress the exploitation by capitalist nations, but their 
economic reviews refer on the one hand to ‘the centrally planned 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (36 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:07 AM]


--- PAGE 43 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
economies’, which means the Socialist countries, and on the other hand 
they speak of ‘the market economies’ which means in effect the 
imperialist sector of the world. The latter is subdivided into ‘the 
developed market economies’ and ‘the developing market economies’, 
disguising the fact that the market means capitalist market. This study is 
concerned with analysing the relations between those countries which 
are together within the capitalist market system.
The things which bring Africa into the capitalist market system are 
trade, colonial domination and capitalist investment. Trade has existed 
for several centuries; colonial rule began in the late 19th century and 
has almost disappeared; and the investment in the African economy has 
been increasing steadily in the present century. Throughout the period 
that Africa has participated in the capitalist economy, two factors have 
brought about underdevelopment. In the first place, the wealth created 
by African labour and from African resources was grabbed by the 
capitalist countries of Europe; and in the second place restrictions were 
placed upon African capacity to make the maximum use of its 
economic potential – which is what development is all about. Those two 
processes represent the answer to the two questions raised above as to 
why Africa has realized so little of its potential and why so much of its 
present wealth goes outside of the continent.
African economies are integrated into the very structure of the 
developed capitalist economies; and they are integrated in a manner that 
is unfavourable to Africa and ensures that Africa is dependent on the 
big capitalist countries. Indeed, structural dependence is one of the 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (37 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:07 AM]


--- PAGE 44 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
characteristics of underdevelopment. Most progressive writers divide 
the capitalist/imperialist system into two parts. The first is the dominant 
or metropolitan section and the countries in the second group are often 
called satellites because they are in the orbit of the metropolitan 
economies. The same idea is conveyed by simply saying that the 
underdeveloped countries are dependencies of the metropolitan 
capitalist economies.
When a child or the young of any animal species ceases to be dependent 
upon its mother for food and protection, it can be said to have 
developed in the direction of maturity. Dependent nations can never be 
considered developed. It is true that modern conditions force all 
countries to be mutually interdependent in order to satisfy the needs of 
their citizens; but that is not incompatible with economic independence 
because economic independence does not mean isolation. It does, 
however, require a capacity to exercise choice in external relations, and 
above all it requires that a nation’s growth at some point must become 
self-reliant and self-sustaining. Such things are obviously in direct 
contradiction to the economic dependence of numerous countries on the 
metropoles of Western Europe, North America and Japan. 
It is also true that metropoles are dependent on the wealth of the 
exploited portions of the world. This is a source of their strength and a 
potential weakness within the capitalist/imperialist system, since the 
peasants and workers of the dependencies are awakening to a realisation 
that it is possible to cut the tentacles which imperialism has extended 
into their countries. However, there is a substantial difference between 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (38 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:07 AM]


--- PAGE 45 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
the dependence of the metropoles on the colonies and the subjugation of 
the colonies under a foreign capitalist yoke. The capitalist countries are 
technologically more advanced and are therefore the sector of the 
imperialist system which determined the direction of change. A striking 
example to this effect is the fact that synthetic fabrics manufactured in 
the capitalist metropoles have begun to replace fabrics made from raw 
material grown in the colonies. In other words, (within certain limits) it 
is the technologically advanced metropoles who can decide when to end 
their dependence on the colonies in a particular sphere. When that 
happens, it is the colony or neo-colony which goes begging cap in hand 
for a reprieve and a new quota. It is for this reason that a formerly 
colonised nation has no hope of developing until it breaks effectively 
with the vicious circle of dependence and exploitation which 
characterises imperialism.
At the social and cultural level, there are many features which aid in 
keeping underdeveloped countries integrated into the capitalist system 
and at the same time hanging on to the apron strings of the metropoles. 
The Christian Church has always been a major instrument for cultural 
penetration and cultural dominance, in spite of the fact. that in many 
instances Africans sought to set up independent churches. Equally 
important has been the role of education in producing Africans to 
service the capitalist system and to subscribe to its values. Recently, the 
imperialists have been using new universities in Africa to keep 
themselves entrenched at the highest academic level.
Something as basic as language has come to serve as one of the 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (39 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:07 AM]


--- PAGE 46 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
mechanisms of integration and dependence. The French and English 
that is so widely used in Africa is more for the purpose of African 
communicating with the exploiters rather than African with African. 
Actually, it would be difficult to find a sphere which did not reflect the 
economic dependence and structural integration. At a glance, nothing 
could be less harmful and more entertaining than music, and yet this too 
is used as a weapon of cultural domination. The American imperialists 
go so far as to take the folk music, jazz and soul music of oppressed 
black people and transform this into American propaganda over the 
Voice of America beamed at Africa.
During the colonial period, the forms of political subordination in 
Africa were obvious. There were governors, colonial officials and 
police. In politically independent African states, the metropolitan 
capitalists have to ensure favourable political decisions by remote 
control. So they set up their political puppets in many parts of Africa, 
who shamelessly agree to compromise with the vicious Apartheid 
regime of South Africa when their masters tell them to do so. The 
African revolutionary Franz Fanon dealt scorchingly and at length with 
the question of the minority in Africa which serves as the transmission 
line between the metropolitan capitalists and the dependencies in 
Africa. The importance of this group cannot be underestimated. The 
presence of a group of African sell-outs is part of the definition of 
underdevelopment. Any diagnosis of underdevelopment in Africa will 
reveal not just low per capita income and protein deficiencies, but also 
the gentlemen who dance in Abidjan, Accra and Kinshasa when music 
is played in Paris, London and New York.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (40 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:07 AM]


--- PAGE 47 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Political instability is manifesting itself in Africa as a chronic symptom 
of the underdevelopment of political life within the imperialist context. 
Military coups have followed one after the other, usually meaning 
nothing to the mass of the people, and sometimes representing a 
reactionary reversal of the efforts at national liberation. This trend was 
well exemplified in Latin American history, so that its appearance in 
neo-colonial South Vietnam or in neo-colonial Africa is not at all 
surprising. If economic power is centred outside of national African 
boundaries, then political and military power in any real sense is also 
centred outside until and unless the masses of peasants and workers are 
mobilised to offer an alternative to the system of sham political 
independence. All of those features are ramifications of 
underdevelopment and of the exploitation of the imperialist system. In 
most analyses of this question, they are either left out entirely or the 
whole concept of imperialism and neocolonialism is dismissed as mere 
rhetoric-especially by ‘academics’ who claim to be removed from 
‘politics’. During the remainder of this study, a great deal of detail will 
be presented to indicate the grim reality behind the so-called slogans of 
capitalism, imperialism, colonialism, neo-colonialism and the like. For 
the present moment, the position to be adopted can be stated briefly in 
the following terms:
The question as to who and what is responsible for African 
underdevelopment can be answered at two levels. Firstly, the answer is 
that the operation of the imperialist system bears major responsibility 
for African economic retardation by draining African wealth and by 
making it impossible to develop more rapidly the resources of the 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (41 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:07 AM]


--- PAGE 48 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
continent. Secondly, one has to deal with those who manipulate the 
system and those who are either agents or unwitting accomplices of the 
said system. The capitalists of Western Europe were the ones who 
actively extended their exploitation from inside Europe to cover the 
whole of Africa.
In recent times, they were joined and to some extent replaced by 
capitalists from the United States; and for many years now even the 
workers of those metropolitan countries have benefited from the 
exploitation and underdevelopment of Africa. None of these remarks 
are intended to remove the ultimate responsibility for development from 
the shoulders of Africans. Not only are there African accomplices 
inside the imperialist system, but every African has a responsibility to 
understand the system and work for its overthrow.
Brief guide to reading
There is a great deal of literature on ‘development’ and 
‘underdevelopment’, although less than one would expect in view of the 
importance of the subjects. Most of that which is available seeks to 
justify capitalism. Hence, there is a narrow concentration on ‘economic 
development’ and particularly on capitalist economies, rather than any 
analysis of human social development. That approach is challenged by 
Marxist writers in the metropoles and increasingly by scholars from the 
underdeveloped world.
Frederick Engels, Origins of the Family, Private Property and the State.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (42 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:07 AM]


--- PAGE 49 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Karl Marx, Preface to a Contribution to a Critique of Political 
Economy.
Karl Marx, Pre-Capitalist Economic Formations edited by E. J. 
Hobsbawm.
These three works are samples of writing by the founders of what is 
now called Marxism. Most of the publications of Marx and Engels have 
a relevance to the theme of development, with particular emphasis on 
feudal and capitalist times.
Richard T. Gill, Economic Development: Past and Present. 
Ragnar Nurkse, Problems of Capital Formation in Underdeveloped 
Countries.
These are typical examples of bourgeois metropolitan views on 
development and underdevelopment – the first being a text for North 
American college students by a Canadian economist and the second 
being a frequently reprinted work of one of the most prominent 
bourgeois advocates of the ‘vicious circle of poverty’ theory. 
Unfortunately, these are also the kind of books which dominates the 
shelves of any university or public library in Africa. The reader is 
invited to test this generalisation.
J. D. Bernal, Science in History.
Joseph Needham, Science and Civilisation in China.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (43 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:07 AM]


--- PAGE 50 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Both of these are lengthy, but they should be tackled. Science and 
technology derive from the effort to understand and control the natural 
environment. Familiarity with the history of science is essential to an 
awareness of the development of society. Needham’s book is cited here 
as a corrective to the fairly common view that science is something 
peculiarIy European.
Celso Furtado, Development and Underdevelopment.
A. Gunder Frank, Capitalism and Underdevelopment in Latin America.
T. Szentes, The Political Economy of Underdevelopment. (Budapest, 
1971.)
The first writer is from Brazil, a country with a long history of 
dependence on and exploitation by the metropoles of Europe and North 
America. Frank’s book reflects the thinking of many progressive Latin 
American intellectuals and it has now become well entrenched as a 
view of Marxists inside the metropoles. Szentes is a Hungarian 
economist systematically applying Marxist insights to the actual data 
and processes of the underdeveloped world and imperialism as a whole.
Samir Amin, The Class Struggle in Africa. (Africa Research Group, 
Box 213, Cambridge, Massachusetts.)
Samir Amin is a North African. He stands out with regard both to the 
volume of his productions and the quality of his insights. The text cited 
above is very general – covering in outline the period of the coots of 
development in ancient Africa right up to the present and the projected 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (44 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:07 AM]


--- PAGE 51 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Socialist future. It is likely that more of his work will be translated into 
English (French being his working language).
 
Table of Contents 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch01.htm (45 of 45) [8/22/05 11:03:07 AM]


--- PAGE 52 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Chapter Two. How Africa 
Developed Before the Coming of the 
Europeans up to the 15th Century
‘Before even the British came into relations with our people, we were a 
developed people, having our own institutions, having our own ideas of 
government.’
J. E. Casely-Hayford, 1922.
African (Gold Coast) Nationalist.
2.1 General Overview
It has been shown that, using comparative standards, Africa today is 
underdeveloped in relation to Western Europe and a few other parts of 
the world; and that the present position has been arrived at, not by the 
separate evolution of Africa on the one hand and Europe on the other, 
but exploitation. As is well known, Africa has had prolonged and 
extensive contact with Europe, and one has to bear in mind that contact 
between different societies changes their respective rates of 
development. To set the record straight, four operations are required:
(a) Reconstruction of the nature of development in Africa 
before the coming of Europeans.
(b) Reconstruction of the nature of development which took 
place in Europe before expansion abroad.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (1 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:37 AM]


--- PAGE 53 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
(c) Analysis of Africa’s contribution to Europe’s present 
‘developed’ state.
(d) Analysis of Europe’s contribution to Africa’s present 
‘underdeveloped’ state.
The second task has already been extensively carried out in European 
literature, and only passing references need be made; but the others are 
al] deserving of further attention.
The African continent reveals very fully the workings of the law of 
uneven development of societies. There are marked contrasts between 
the Ethiopian empire and the hunting groups of pigmies in the Congo 
forest or between empires of the Western Sudan and the Khoisan hunter-
gatherers of the Kalahari Desert. Indeed, there were striking contrasts 
within any given geographical area. The Ethiopian empire embraced 
literate feudal Amharic noblemen as well as simple Kaffa cultivators 
and Galla pastoralists. The empires of the Western Sudan had 
sophisticated, educated Mandinga townsmen, small communities of 
Bozo fishermen and nomadic Fulani herdsmen. Even among clans and 
lineages that appear roughly similar, there were considerable 
differences. However, it is possible to distinguish between what was 
uniquely ‘African’ and what was universal in the sense of being 
characteristic of al] human societies at a given stage of development. It 
is also essential to recognise the process of dialectical evolution from 
lower to higher forms of social organisation; and, in looking at the most 
advanced social formations, one would appreciate the potential of the 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (2 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:37 AM]


--- PAGE 54 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
continent as a whole and the direction of change.
The moment that the topic of the pre-European African past is raised, 
many individuals are concerned for various reasons to know about the 
existence of African ‘civilisations’. Mainly, this stems from a desire to 
make comparisons with European ‘civilisations’. This is not the context 
in which to evaluate the so-called civilisations of Europe. It is enough 
to note the behaviour of European capitalists from the epoch of slavery 
through colonialism, fascism and genocidal wars in Asia and Africa. 
Such barbarism causes suspicion to attach to the use of the word 
‘civilisation’ to describe Western Europe and North America. As far as 
Africa is concerned during the period of early development, it is 
preferable to speak in terms of ‘cultures’ rather than civilisations.
A culture is a total way of life. It embraces w at people ate and what 
they wore; the way they walked and the way they talked; the manner in 
which they treated death and greeted the new-born. Obviously, unique 
features came into existence in virtually every locality with regard to afl 
social details. In addition, the continent of Africa south of the great 
Sahara desert formed a broad community where resemblances were 
clearly discernible. For example, music and dance had key roles in 
‘uncontaminated’ African society. They were ever present at birth, 
initiation, marriage, death, etc., as well as appearing at times of 
recreation. Africa is the continent of drums and percussion. African 
peoples reached the pinnacl e of achievement in that sphere.
Because of the impact of colonialism and cultural imperialism (which 
will be discussed later), Europeans and Africans themselves in the 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (3 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:37 AM]


--- PAGE 55 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
colonial period lacked due regard for the unique features of African 
culture. Those features have a value of their own that cannot be eclipsed 
by European culture either in the comparable period before 1500 or in 
the subsequent centuries. They cannot be eclipsed because they are not 
really comparable phenomena. Who in this world is competent to judge 
whether an Austrian waltz is better than a Makonde Ngoma? 
Furthermore, even in those spheres of culture that are more readily 
comparable, such as ‘the fine arts’, it is known that African 
achievements of the pre-European period stand as contributions to 
man’s heritage of beautiful creations. The art of Egypt, the Sudan and 
Ethiopia was known to the rest of the world at an early date. That of the 
rest of Africa is still being ‘discovered’ and rediscovered by Europeans 
and present-day Africans. The verdict of art historians on the Ife and 
Benin bronzes is well known. Since they date from the 14th and 15th 
centuries, they are very relevant to any discussion of African 
development in the epoch before the contacts with Europe. Nor should 
they be regarded as unusual, except with regard to the material in which 
the sculptures were executed. The same skill and feeling obviously 
went into sculpture and art-work in non-durable materials, especially 
wood.
African dance and art were almost invariably linked with a religious 
world-outlook in one way or another. As is well known, traditional 
African religious practices exist in great variety, and it should also be 
remembered that both Islam and Christianity found homes on the 
African continent almost from their very inception. The features of the 
traditional African religions help to set African cultures apart from 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (4 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:37 AM]


--- PAGE 56 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
those in other continents; but in this present context it is more important 
to note how much African religion had in common with religion 
elsewhere and how this can be used as an index to the level of 
development in Africa before European impact in the 15th century.
Religion is an aspect of the superstructure of a society, deriving 
ultimately from the degree of control and understanding of the material 
world. However, when man thinks in religious terms, he starts from the 
ideal rather than with the material world (which is beyond his 
comprehension). This creates a non-scientific and metaphysical way of 
viewing the world, which often conflicts with the scientific materialist 
outlook and with the development of society. African ancestral religions 
were no better or worse than other religions as such. But by the end of 
feudalism, Europeans began to narrow the area of human life in which 
religion and the church played a part. Religion ceased to dominate 
politics, geography, medicine, etc. To free those things from religious 
restraints, it had to be argued that religion had its own sphere and the 
things of this world have their own secular sphere. This secularization 
of life speeded up the development of capitalism and later Socialism. In 
contrast, religion pervaded African life in the period before the coming 
of the whites, just as it pervaded life in other pre-feudal societies, such 
as those of the Maoris of Australia or the Afghans of Afghanistan or the 
Vikings of Scandinavia.
Religion can play both a positive and a negative role as an aspect of the 
superstructure. In most instances in early Africa, religious beliefs were 
associated with the mobilisation and discipline of large numbers of 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (5 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:37 AM]


--- PAGE 57 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
people to form states. In a few instances, religion also provided 
concepts in the struggle, for social justice. The negative aspects usually 
arose out of the tendency of religion to persist unchanged for extremely 
long periods, especially when the technology of earning a living 
changes very slowly. This was the case in African societies, as in al] 
other pre-capitalist societies. At the same time, the religious beliefs 
themselves react upon the mode of production, further slowing up 
progress in that respect. For instance, belief in prayer and in the 
intervention of ancestors and various Gods could easily be a substitute 
for innovations designed to control the impact af weather and 
environment.
The same kind of two-sided relationship also exists between the means 
of earning a living and the social patterns that arise in the process of 
work. In Africa, before the 15th century, the predominant principle of 
social relations was that of family and kinship associated with 
communalism. Every member of an African society had his position 
defined in terms of relatives on his mother’s side and on his father’s 
side. Some societies placed greater importance on matrilineal ties and 
others on patrilineal ties. Those things were crucial to the daily 
existence of a member of an African society, because land (the major 
means of production) was owned by groups such as the family or clan-
the head of which was responsible for the land on behalf of al] kin, 
including fore-parents and those yet unborn. In theory, this pattern was 
explained by saying that the residents in any community were all direct 
descendants of the first person who settled the land. When a new group 
arrived, they often made a pretence that they too had ancestry dating 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (6 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:37 AM]


--- PAGE 58 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
back to the settling of the land or else they ensured that members of the 
earliest kin groups continued to perform the ceremonies related to the 
land and water of the region.
Similarly, the labour that worked the land was generally recruited on a 
family basis. A single family or household would till its own plots and 
it would also be available to share certain joint farming activities with 
other members of the extended family or clan. Annual hunts and river 
fishing were also organised by a whole extended family or village 
community. In a matrilineal society such as that of the Bemba 
(Zambia), the bridegroom spent a number of years working for the 
father of his bride; and many young men who had married daughters of 
the same household often formed work-teams to help each other. In 
Dahomey, a young man did not go to live with his wife’s family, but 
the dokpwe or work team allowed a son to participate in carrying out a 
task of some magnitude for the father of his wife. In both of those 
examples, the right of the father-in-law to acquire labour and the 
obligations of the son-in-law to give labour were based on kinship. This 
can be contrasted with capitalism where money buys labour, and with 
feudalism where the serf provides labour in order to have access to a 
portion of land which belongs to the landlord.
Having been produced on land that was family property and through 
family labour, the resultant crops and other goods were distributed on 
the basis of kinship ties. If a man’s crops were destroyed by some 
sudden calamity, relatives in his own village helped him. If the whole 
community was in distress, people moved to live with their kinsmen in 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (7 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:37 AM]


--- PAGE 59 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
another area where food was not scarce. In Akan country (Ghana),
clan system was highly organised, so that a man from Brong could visit 
Fante many hundreds of miles away and receive food and hospitality 
from a complete stranger who happened to be of his own clan.
Numerous examples could be brought forward to show the dominance 
of the family principle in the communal phase of African development. 
It affected the two principal factors of production — land and labour — 
as well as the system of distributing goods. European anthropologists 
who have studied African societies have done so mainly from a very 
prejudiced and racist position, but their researches can nevertheless 
provide abundant facts relating to family homesteads and compounds, 
to the extended family (including affinal members who join by 
association rather than by birth or marriage), and to lineages and clans 
which carried the principles of kinship alliances over large areas. 
However, while the exact details might have differed, similar social 
institutions were to be found among the Gauls of 11th century France, 
among the Viet of Indo-China at the same date, and virtually 
everywhere else in the world at one time or another — because 
communalism is one phase through which all human society passed.
In all African societies during the early epoch, the individual at every 
stage of life had a series of duties and obligations to others in the 
society as well as a set of rights: namely, things that he or she could 
expect or demand from other individuals. Age was a most important 
factor determining the extent of rights and obligations. The oldest 
members of the society were highly respected and usually in authority; 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (8 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:37 AM]


--- PAGE 60 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
and the idea of seniority through age was reflected in the presence of 
age-grades and age-sets in a great many African societies. Circumcision 
meant initiation into the society and into adulthood. From that moment, 
a man was placed with others in his own age-group and a woman 
likewise. Usually, there were at least three age-grades, corresponding 
roughly to the young, the middle-aged and the old.
In large parts of Europe, when communalism broke down it gave way 
to widespread slavery as the new form in which labour was mobilised. 
This slavery continued throughout the European Middle Ages, with the 
Crusades between Christians and Muslims giving an added excuse for 
enslaving people. Slavery in turn gave way to serfdom, whereby the 
labourer was tied to the land and could no longer be sold and 
transported. Because it took many years for the transition from slavery 
to feudalism to take place in Europe, it was common to find that feudal 
society still retained numbers of slaves. Parts of China, Burma and 
India also had considerable numbers of slaves as the society moved 
away from elementary communalism, but there was never any time-
span when slavery was the dominant mode of production in Asia. In 
Africa, there were few slaves and certainly no epoch of slavery. Most of 
the s laves were in North African and other Muslim societies, and in 
those instances a man and his family could have the same slave status 
for generations, within the overall feudal structure of the society. 
Elsewhere in Africa, communal societies were introduced to the 
concept of owning alien human beings when they made captives in war. 
At first, those captives were in a very disadvantaged position, 
comparable to that of slaves, but very rapidly captives or their off-
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (9 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:37 AM]


--- PAGE 61 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
spring became ordinary members of the society, because there was no 
scope for the perpetual exploitation of man by man in a context that was 
neither feudal nor capitalist.
Both Marxists and non-Marxists alike (with different motivations) have 
pointed out that the sequence of modes of production noted in Europe 
were not reproduced in Africa. In Africa, after the communal stage 
there was no epoch of slavery arising out of internal evolution. Nor was 
there a mode of production which was the replica of European 
feudalism. Marx himself recognised that the stages of development in 
Asia had produced a form of society which could not easily be fitted 
into a European slot. That he called ‘the Asian mode of production’. 
Following along those lines, a number of Marxists have recently been 
discussing whether Africa was in the same category as Asia or whether 
Africa has its own ‘African mode of production’. The implications of 
the arguments are very progressive, because they are concerned with 
the concrete conditions of Africa rather than with preconceptions 
brought from Europe. But the scholars concerned seem to be bent on 
finding a single term to cover a variety of social formations which were 
existing in Africa from about the 5th century A.D. to the coming of 
colonialism. The assumption that will underlie this study is that most 
African societies before 1500 were in a transitional stage between the 
practice of agriculture (plus fishing and herding) in family communities 
and the practice of the same activities within states and societies 
comparable to feudalism.
In a sense, all history is transition from one stage to another, but some 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (10 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:37 AM]


--- PAGE 62 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
historical situations along the line have more clearly distinguishable 
characteristics than others. Thus under communalism there were no 
classes and there was equal access to land, and equality in distribution 
— at a low level¡ of technology and production. Feudalism involved 
great inequality in distribution of land and social products. The landlord 
class and its bureaucracy controlled the state and used it as an 
instrument for oppressing peasants, serfs, slaves and even craftsmen 
and merchants. The movement from communalism to feudalism in 
every continent took several centuries, and in some instances the 
interruption of internal evolution never allowed the process to mature. 
In Africa, there is no doubt that the societies which eventually reached 
feudalism were extremely few. So long as the feudal state was still in 
the making, elements that were communal co-existed with elements that 
were feudal and with some peculiarities due to African conditions. The 
transition was also characterised by a variety of social formations: 
There were pastoralists and cultivators, fishing societies and trading 
societies, raiders and nomads. They were all being progressively drawn 
into a relationship with the land, with each other, and with the state, 
through the expansion of productive forces and the network of 
distribution.
In feudal societies, there were clashes between the landlord and peasant 
classes and later on between the landlord and merchant classes. Under 
capitalism, the principal class contradiction inside Europe was between 
the proletariat and the bourgeoisie. Those hostile class relations 
provided the motive force within the respective societies. African 
communal societies had differences such as age-grades and differences 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (11 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:37 AM]


--- PAGE 63 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
between ordinary members and religious leaders such as rain-makers. 
However, those were not exploitative or antagonistic relations. The 
concept of class as a motive force in social development had not yet 
come about; and in the communal phase one must look at the 
fundamental forces of production to understand the process of change.
Using a number of methods and concepts, it is possible to reconstruct 
the most likely manner in which isolated family living was broken 
down and production increased. For instance, the rise of age-grades can 
be seen as responding to the need for greater solidarity, because age-
grades included and cut across many families. Similarly, communal 
labour was entered into by cross-sections of the community to make 
work more efficient. The dokpwe work-group of Dahomey mentioned 
above had a wider application in serving the whole community to 
perform the heavy tasks of clearing land, housebuilding, etc. With the 
offer of some food and beer or palm wine, a work team or ‘work-bee’ 
could be mobilised in a short time in most African communities, 
including those of the light-skinned Berbers of North Africa.
Of course, while the organisation of labour might have helped to 
produce more, the principal change in the productive forces was that 
which comprised new techniques — using the word in its broadest 
sense to include both tools and skills in dealing with the environment 
and new plant and animal species. The first prerequisite for mastery of 
the environment is knowledge of that environment. By the 15th century, 
Africans everywhere had arrived at a considerable understanding of the 
total ecology — of the soils, climate, animals, plants and their multiple 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (12 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:37 AM]


--- PAGE 64 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
interrelationships. The practical application of this lay in the need lo 
trap animals, to build houses, to make utensils, to find medicines, and 
above al] to devise systems of agriculture.
In the centuries before the contact with Europeans, the overwhelmingly 
dominant activity in Africa was agriculture. In all the settled 
agricultural communities, people observed the peculiarities of their own 
environment and tried to find techniques for dealing with it in a rational 
manner. Advanced methods were used in some areas, such as terracing, 
crop rotation, green manuring, mixed farming and regulated swamp 
farming. The single most important technological change underlying 
African agricultural development was the introduction of iron tools, 
notably the axe and the hoe, replacing wooden and stone tools. It was 
on the basis of the iron tools that new skills were elaborated in 
agriculture as well as in other spheres of economic activity.
The coming of iron, the rise of cereal-growing and the making of 
pottery were all closely related phenomena. In most parts of Africa, it 
was in the period after the birth of Christ that those things came about. 
The rate of change over a few centuries was quite impressive. Millet 
and rice had been domesticated from wild grasses just as yams were 
made to evolve from selected wild roots. Most African societies raised 
the cultivation of their own particular staple to a fine art. Even the 
widespread resort to shifting cultivation with burning and light hoeing 
was not as childish as the first European colonialists supposed. That 
simple form of agriculture was based on a correct evaluation of the soil-
potential, which was not as great as initially appears from the heavy 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (13 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:37 AM]


--- PAGE 65 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
vegetation; and when the colonialists started up-setting the thin top-soil 
the result was disastrous.
The above remarks show that when an outsider comes into a new 
ecological system, even if he is more skilled he does not necessarily 
function as effectively as those who have familiarised themselves with 
the environment over centuries; and the newcomer is likely to look 
more ridiculous if he is too arrogant lo realise that he has something to 
learn from the ‘Natives’. However, it is not being suggested that 
African agriculture in the early period was superior lo that of other 
continents. On the contrary, African standards of husbandry on the land 
and with livestock were not as high as those independently evolved in 
most parts of Asia and Europe. The weakness in Africa seemed to have 
been the lack of a professional interest in acquiring more scientific 
knowledge and in devising tools to lighten the load of labour as well as 
to transform hostile environments into areas suitable for human activity. 
As far as agriculture in Europe was concerned, this professionalism was 
undertaken by the class with a vested interest in the land — namely, the 
feudalist landowners and later the capitalist farmers.
It has previously been stated that development is very much determined 
by the social relations of production: i.e., those which have to do with 
people’s functions in producing wealth. Where a few people owned the 
land and the majority were tenants, this injustice at a particular stage of 
history allowed the few to concentrate on improving their land. In 
contrast, under communalism every African was assured of sufficient 
land to meet his own needs by virtue of being a member of a family or 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (14 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:37 AM]


--- PAGE 66 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
community. For that reason and because land was relatively abundant, 
there were few social pressures or incentives for technical changes to 
increase productivity.
In Asia, where much of the land was communally owned, there were 
tremendous advances in some types of farming, especially irrigated 
farming. This was because the state m India, China, Ceylon and other 
places intervened and engaged in irrigation and other hydraulic works 
on a large scale. This was also true of North Africa, which in most 
respects followed a pattern of evolution similar to that of Asia. The 
African land tenure pattern was closer to that of Asia than to that of 
Europe, but even the most politically developed African states did not p 
ay the role of initiators and supervisors of agricultural development. 
One reason may have been the lack of population pressure and hence 
the scattered nature of settlements. Another may have been state 
concentration on trading non-agricultural products to the exclusion of 
other things. Certainly, when African societies became linked up with 
other social systems outside the continent on the basis of trade, little 
attention was paid to agriculture.
When it comes Lo t he question of manufacturing in Africa before the 
time of the white man, it is also essential to recognise where 
achievements have been underestimated. African manufactures have 
been contemptuously treated or overlooked by European writers, 
because the modern conception of the world brings to mind factories 
and machines. However, ‘manufactures’ means literally ‘things made 
by hand’, and African manufacture in this sense had advanced 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (15 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:37 AM]


--- PAGE 67 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
appreciably. Most African societies fulfilled their own needs for a wide 
range of articles of domestic use as well as for farming tools and 
weapons.
One way of judging the level of economic development in Africa five 
centuries ago is through the quality of the products. Here a few 
examples will be given of articles which came to the notice of the 
outside world. Through North Africa, Europeans became familiar with 
a superior brand of red leather from Africa which was termed 
‘Moroccan leather’. In fact, it was tanned and dyed by Hausa and 
Mandinga specialists in northern Nigeria and Mali. When direct contact 
was established between Europeans and Africans on the East and West 
Coasts, many more impressive items were displayed. As soon as the 
Portuguese reached the old kingdom of Kongo, they sent back word on 
the superb local cloths made from bark and palm fibre-and having a 
finish comparable to velvet. The Baganda were also expert bark-cloth 
makers. Yet, Africa had even better to offer in the form of cotton cloth, 
which was widely manufactured before the coming of the Europeans. 
Well into the present century, local cottons from the Guinea coast were 
stronger than Manchester cottons. Once European products reached 
Africa, Africans too were in a position to make comparisons between 
their commodities and those from outside. In Katanga and Zambia, the 
local copper continued to be preferred to the imported item, while the 
same held true for iron ‘in a place like Sierra Leone.
It was at the level of scale that African manufactures had not made a 
breakthrough. That is to say, the cotton looms were small, the iron 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (16 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:37 AM]


--- PAGE 68 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
smelters were small, the pottery was turned slowly by hand and not on a 
wheel, etc. Yet some changes were taking place in this context. Under 
communalism, each household met its own needs by making its own 
clothes, pots, mats, etc. That was true of every continent. However, 
economic expansion from there on was associated with specialisation 
and localisation of industry — people’s needs being met by exchange. 
This trend was displayed in the principal African manufactures, and 
notably in the cloth industry. Cotton fibre had to be ginned (separated 
from the seed), then carded and spun into yarn, before being woven.
Either the yarn or the woven cloth had to be dyed, and the making of 
the dye itself was a complex process. There was a time when all these 
stages would be performed by a single family or rather by the women in 
a single family, as in Yorubaland. But economic development was 
reflected in the separation of dyeing from cloth-making, and the 
separation of spinning from weaving. Each separation marked greater 
specialisation and quantitative and qualitative changes in output.
European industry has been intensively studied, and it is generally 
recognised that in addition to new machinery a most decisive factor in 
the growth of industry was the changeover from domestic production to 
the factory system, with the guild marking an intermediary stage. The 
guild was an association of specialists, passing on their skills by 
training apprentices and working in buildings set aside for that purpose. 
Africa, too, had elements of the guild system. At Timbuctu, there were 
tailoring guilds, while in Benin guilds of a very restricted caste type 
controlled the famous brass and bronze industry. In Nupe (now northern 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (17 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:37 AM]


--- PAGE 69 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Nigeria) the glass and bead industry operated on a guild basis. Each 
Nupe guild had a common workshop and a master. The master obtained 
contracts, financed the guild, and disposed of the product. Both his own 
relatives as well as strangers were free to enter the guild and learn the 
various specialised tasks within the glass industry. What this amounted 
to was simply that there was increasing specialisation and division of 
labour.
Traditional African economies are usually called ‘subsistence’ 
economies. Often, small villages farmed, hunted, fished, etc., and 
looked after themselves independently with little reference to the rest of 
the continent. Yet, at the same time, the vast majority of African 
communities fulfilled at least a few of their needs by trade. Africa was a 
continent of innumerable trade routes. Some extended for huge 
distances like the routes across the Sahara or the routes connected with 
Katanga copper. But in the main, it was trade between neighbouring or 
not too far distant societies. Such trade was always a function of 
production. Various communities were producing surpluses of given 
commodities which could be exchanged for items which they lacked. In 
that way, the salt industry of one locality would be stimulated while the 
iron industry would be encouraged in another. In a coastal, lake or 
riverain area, dried fish could become profitable, while yams and mi4let 
would be grown in abundance elsewhere to provide a basis for 
exchange. The trade so readily distinguishable in every part of the 
continent between the 10th and 15th centuries was an excellent 
indicator of economic expansion and other forms of development which 
accompanied increasing mastery over the environment.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (18 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:37 AM]


--- PAGE 70 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
As part of the extension of trade, it was noticeable that barter was 
giving way to some forms of money exchange. Barter was generally 
practised when the volume of trade was small and when only a few 
commodities were involved. However, as trade became more 
complicated, some items began to be used as the standards for 
measuring other goods. Those items could be kept as a form of wealth 
easily transformed into other commodities when the need arose. For 
example, sa4t, cloth, iron hoes and cowry shells were popular forms of 
money in Africa — apart from gold and copper, which were much rarer 
and therefore restricted to measuring things of great value. In a few 
places, such as North Africa, Ethiopia and the Kongo, the monetary 
systems were quite sophisticated indicating that the economy was far 
removed from simple barter and subsistence.
There were many other changes of a socio-political nature 
accompanying the expansion of the productive forces. Indeed, things 
such as agricultural practices, industry, trade, money and political 
structures were inseparable — each interacting with the others. The 
most developed areas of Africa were those where all the elements 
converged, and the two socio-political features which were the 
outstanding indices to development were the increase of stratification 
and the consolidation of states.
The principles of family and deferment to age were slowly breaking 
down throughout the centuries preceding the arrival of Europeans in 
their sailing ships. Changes in technology and in the division of labour 
made that inevitable. The introduction of iron, for example, gave 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (19 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:37 AM]


--- PAGE 71 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
economic and military strength to those who could make and acquire it. 
Better tools meant more food and a greater population, but the latter 
tended to outrun the supplies of material goods, and the possibilities of 
wealth opened up by the possession of iron were seized upon by a few 
to their own advantage. Skilled workers in iron, cloth, pottery, leather, 
salt-making, etc. tended to pass on their skills in closed groups known 
as castes. That ensured that the division of labour operated in their 
favour, because their position was privileged and
strategic. Iron workers were particularly favoured in some African 
societies in which they either became the ruling groups or were very 
close to the top of the social hierarchy. The division of labour also 
carried over into non-material spheres, producing professional minstrels 
and historians. They too had certain special rights and privileges, 
notably the ability to criticise freely without fear of reprisal. In some 
circumstances, skilled castes were reduced to very low status. But what 
was rare, and in any case it does not contradict the general assertion that 
the tendency was for communalism to give rise to more and more 
stratification.
Social stratification was the basis for the rise of classes and for social 
antagonisms. To some extent, this was a logical follow-up of the 
previous non-antagonistic differences in communal society. For 
instance, old men could use their control over land allocation, over 
bride-price and over other traditional exchanges to try and establish 
themselves as a privileged economic stratum. Secret Societies arose in 
the area that is now Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea, and they 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (20 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:37 AM]


--- PAGE 72 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
permitted knowledge, power and wealth to pass into the hands of the 
elders and ultimately to the elders of particular lineages.
The contradiction between young men and their elders was not the type 
that caused violent revolutions. But young men clearly had reasons for 
resenting their dependence on elders, especially when it came to such 
vital personal matters as the acquisition of wives. When disgruntled, 
they could either leave their communities and set up for themselves or 
they could challenge the principles within the society. In either case, the 
trend was that some individuals and families were more successful than 
others, and those families established themselves as permanent rulers. 
Then age ceased to matter as much because even a junior could succeed 
to his father, once the notion of royal blood or royal lineage was 
established.
In the period of transition, while African society retained many features 
that were undisputably communal, it also accepted the principle that 
some families or clans or lineages were destined to rule and others were 
not. This was true not only of cultivators but of pastoralists as well. In 
fact, livestock became unevenly distributed much more readily van 
[and; and those families with the largest herds became socially and 
politically dominant.
An even more important aspect of the process of social stratification 
was that brought about by contact between different social formations. 
Fishermen had to relate to cultivators and the latter to pastoralists. 
There were even social formations such as bands of hunters and food-
gatherers who had not yet entered the phase of communal co-operation 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (21 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:37 AM]


--- PAGE 73 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Often the relationship was peaceful. In many parts of the African 
continent, there arose what is known as ‘symbiosis’ between groups 
earning their living in different ways -which really means that they 
agreed to exchange goods and co-exist to their mutual advantage. 
However, there was also room for considerable conflict; and when one 
group imposed itself by force on another, the result was invariably the 
rise of social classes with the conquerors on top and the conquered at 
the bottom.
The most common clashes between different social formations were 
those between pastoralists and cultivators. In some instances, the 
cultivators had the upper hand, as for instance in West Africa, were 
cultivators like the Mandinga and Hausa were the overlords of the 
Fulani cattle en right up 18th and 19th centuries. The reverse situation 
was found in the Horn of Africa and most of East Africa. Another type 
of clash was that in which raiding peoples took power over 
agriculturalists, as happened in Angola and in and around the Sahara, 
where the Moors and Tuareg exacted tribute from and even enslaved 
more peaceful and sedentary peoples. The result in each case was that a 
relatively small faction held control of the land and (where relevant) 
cattle, mines and long-distance trade. It meant also that the minority 
group could make demands on the labour of their subjects — not on the 
basis of kinship but because a relationship of domination and 
subordination existed
In truly communal societies, the leadership was based on religion and 
family ties. The senior, members of the society shared the work with 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (22 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:37 AM]


--- PAGE 74 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
others and received more or less the same share of the total product. 
Certainly, no one starved while others stuffed themselves and threw 
away the excess. However, once African societies began to expand by 
internal evolution, conquest or trade, the style of life of the ruling group 
became noticeably different. They consumed the most and the best that 
the society offered. Yet, they were least directly involved in the 
production of wealth by farming, cattle herding, fishing, etc. The ruling 
class and the kings in particular had the right to call upon the labour of 
the common man for certain projects and for a given number of days 
per year. This is known as corvée labour, from a similar procedure 
followed in feudal France. Such a system meant greater exploitation 
and at the same time greater development of productive resources.
Social stratification as outlined above went hand in hand with the rise of 
the state. The notion of royal lineages and commoner clans could not 
have any meaning except in a political state with a concrete 
geographical existence. It is significant that the great dynasties of the 
world ruled over feudal states. To the European or European-trained 
ear, the names of the Tudors, Bourbons, Hohenzollerns and Romanovs 
would already be familiar. Japan had its Kamakuras and its Tokugawas 
; China had its T'ang and its Ming; India had its Guptas and its 
Marathas; and so on. All of those were feudal dynasties existing in a 
period some centuries after the birth of Christ, but in addition there 
were dynasties which ruled in each of those countries before feudal land-
tenure and class relations had fully crystallized. It means that the 
transition to feudalism in Europe [* In Europe, communalism gave way 
to slaver and therefore dynasties an strong states were present on the 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (23 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:37 AM]


--- PAGE 75 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
eve of the slavery epoch.] and Asia saw the rise of ruling groups and the 
state as inter-dependent parts of the same process. In that respect, 
Africa was no different.
From a political perspective, the period of transition from communalism 
to feudalism in Africa was one of state formation. At the beginning (and 
for many centuries), the state remained weak and immature. It acquired 
definite territorial boundaries, but inside those boundaries subjects lived 
in their own communities with scarcely any contact with the ruling 
class until the time came to pay an annual tax or tribute. Only when a 
group within the state refused to pay the tribute did the early African 
states mobilise their repressive machinery in the form of an army to 
demand what it considered as its rights from subjects. Slowly, various 
states acquired greater power over their many communities of citizens. 
They exacted corvée labour, they enlisted soldiers, and they appointed 
regular tax-collectors and local administrators. The areas of Africa in 
which labour relations were breaking out of communal restrictions 
corresponded to areas in which sophisticated political states were 
emerging. The rise of states
was itself a form of development, which increased the scale of African 
politics and merged small ethnic groups into wider identities suggestive 
of nations.
In some ways, too much importance is attached to the growth of 
political states. It was in Europe that the nation state reached an 
advanced stage, and Europeans tended to use the presence or absence of 
well-organised polities as a measure of ‘civilisation’. That is not 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (24 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:37 AM]


--- PAGE 76 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
entirely justified, because in Africa there were small political units 
which had relatively advanced material and non-material cultures. For 
instance, neither the Ibo people of Nigeria nor the Kikuyu of Kenya 
ever produced large centralised governments in their traditional setting. 
But both had sophisticated systems of political rule based on clans and 
(in the case of the Ibo) on religious oracles and ‘Secret Societies’. Both 
of them were efficient agriculturalists and iron workers, and the Ibo 
were manufacturing brass and bronze items ever since the 9th century 
A.D., if not earlier.
However, after making the above qualification, it can be conceded that 
on the whole the larger states in Africa had the most effective no 
political structures and greater capacity or producing food ,clothing, 
minerals and other material artefacts. It can readily be understood that 
those societies which 
had ruling classes were concerned with acquiring luxury and prestige 
items. The privileged groups in control of the state were keen to 
stimulate manufactures as well as to acquire them through trade. They 
were the ones that mobilised labour to produce a greater surplus above 
subsistence needs, and in the process they encouraged specialisation 
and the division of labour.
Scholars often distinguish between groups in Africa which had states 
and those which were ‘stateless’. Sometimes, the word stateless is 
carelessly or even abusively used; but it does describe those peoples 
who had no machinery of government coercion and no concept of a 
political unit wider than the family or the village. After al], if there is no 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (25 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:37 AM]


--- PAGE 77 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
class stratification in a society, it follows that there is no state, because 
the state arose as an instrument to be used by a particular class to 
control the rest of society in its own interests. Generally speaking, one 
can consider the stateless societies as among the older forms of socio-
political organisation in Africa, while the large states represented an 
evolution away from communalism — sometimes to the point of 
feudalism.
Again, it must be emphasised that a survey of the scene in Africa before 
the coming of Europeans would reveal considerable unevenness of 
development. There were social formations representing hunting bands, 
communalism feudalism and many positions intermediate between the 
last two. The remainder of this section will be devoted to a review of 
the principal features of several of the most developed societies and 
states of Africa in the last thousand years or so before Africa came into 
permanent contact with Europe. The areas to be considered are Egypt, 
Ethiopia, Nubia, Morocco, the Western Sudan, the inter-lacustrine zone 
of East Africa and Zimbabwe. Each serves as an example of what 
development meant in early Africa and what was the direction of social 
movement. To a greater or lesser extent, each was also a leading force 
on the continent in the sense of carrying neighbours along the same 
path, either by absorbing them or influencing them more indirectly.
2.2 Some concrete examples
(a) Egypt
It is logical to start with Egypt as the oldest culture in Africa which rose 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (26 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:37 AM]


--- PAGE 78 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
to eminence. The glories of Egypt under the Pharaohs are well known 
and do not need recounting. At one time, it used to be said or assumed 
that ancient Egypt was not ‘African'-a curious view which is no longer 
seriously propounded. However, for the present purposes, it is more 
relevant to refer to Egypt under Arab and Turkish rule from the 7th 
century onwards. During that latter period, the ruling class was foreign, 
and that meant that Egypt’s internal development was tied up with other 
countries, notably Arabia and Turkey. Colonised Egypt sent abroad 
great amounts of wealth in the form of food and revenue and that was a 
very negative factor. But the tendency was for the ruling foreigners to 
deal with their own imperial masters and to act simply as a ruling elite 
within Egypt, which became an independent feudal state.
One of the first features of feudalism to arrive in Egypt was the military 
aspect. The Arabs, Turks and Circassian invaders were all militarily 
inclined. This was particularly true of the Mamluks who held power 
from the 13th century onwards. Political power in Egypt from the 7th 
century lay in the hands of a military oligarchy which delegated the 
actual government to bureaucrats, thereby creating a situation similar to 
that in places like China and Indo-China. Even more fundamental was 
the fact that land tenure relations were undergoing change in such a way 
that a true feudal class came on the scene. All the conquerors made land-
grants to their followers and military captains. Initially, the land in 
Egypt was the property of the state to be rented out to cultivators. The 
state then had the right to re-appropriate the land and allocate it once 
more, somewhat like the head of a village community acting as the 
guardian of the lands of related families. However, the ruling military 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (27 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:37 AM]


--- PAGE 79 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
elements also became a new class of landowners. By the 15th century, 
most of the land in Egypt was the property of the Sultan and his 
military lords.
If there was a small class which monopolised most of the land, it 
followed that there was a large class of landless. Peasant cultivators 
were soon converted into mere agricultural labourers, tied to the soil as 
tenants or vassals of the feudal landlords. These peasants with little or 
no land were known as the fellahin. In Europe, there are legends about 
the exploitation and suffering of the Russian serfs or muhzík under 
feudalism. In Egypt, the exploitation of the fellahin was carried out 
even more thoroughly. The feudalists had no interest in the fellahín 
beyond seeing that they produced revenue. Most of what the peasants 
produced was taken from them in the form of tax, and the tax-collectors 
were asked to perform the miracle of taking from the peasants even that 
which they did not have! When their demands were not met, the 
peasants were brutalised.
The antagonistic nature of the contradiction between the feudal warrior 
landlords and the fellahin was revealed by a number of peasant revolts, 
notably in the early part of the 8th century. In no continent was 
feudalism an epoch of romance for the labouring classes, but the 
elements of development were seen in the technology and the increase 
in productive capacity. Under the patronage of the Fatimid dynasty (969 
A.D. to 1170 n.n.), science flourished and industry reached a new level 
in Egypt. Windmills and waterwheels were introduced from Persia in 
the 10th century. New industries were introduced-paper-making, sugar-
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (28 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:37 AM]


--- PAGE 80 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
refining, porcelain, and the distillation of gasolene. The older industries 
of textiles, leather and metal were improved upon. The succeeding 
dynasties of the Ayyubids and the Mamluks also achieved a great deal, 
especially in the building of canals, dams, bridges and aqueducts, and in 
stimulating commerce with Europe. Egypt at that time was still able to 
teach Europe many things and was flexible enough to receive new 
techniques in return.
Although feudalism was based on the land, it usually developed towns 
at the expense of the countryside. The high points of Egyptian feudal 
culture were associated with the towns. The Fatimids founded the city 
of Cairo, which became one of the most famous and most cultured in 
the world, seat to the legendary ‘Arabian Knights’. At the same time, 
they established the Azhar University which exists today as one of the 
oldest in the world. The feudalists and the rich merchants were the ones 
who benefitted most, but the craftsmen and other city dwellers of Cairo, 
Alexandria, etc. were able to participate to some extent in the leisured 
lives of the towns.
(b) Ethiopia
Ethiopia too, at the start of its history as a great power, was ruled over 
by foreigners. The kingdom of Axum was one o the most important 
nuclei around which feudal Ethiopia eventually emerged, and Axum 
was founded near the Red Sea coast by a dynasty of Sabean origin from 
the other side of the Red Sea. But the kings of Axum were never agents 
of foreign powers, and they became completely Africanised. The 
founding of Axum goes back to the lst century n.D. and its ruling class 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (29 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:37 AM]


--- PAGE 81 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
was Christianised within a few centuries. After that they moved inland 
and participated in the development of the Christian feudal Ethiopian 
state.
The Ethiopian, Tigrean and Amharic ruling class was a proud one, 
tracing its descent to Solomon. As a state which incorporated several 
other smaller states and kingdoms, it was an empire in the same sense 
as feudal Austria or Prussia. The Emperor of Ethiopia was addressed as 
‘Conquering Lion of the Tribe of Judah, Elect of God, Emperor of 
Ethiopia, King of Kings’. In practice, however, the ‘Solomonic’ line 
was not unbroken. Most of the consolidation of the inland Ethiopian 
plateau was carried out in the 12th century by an intruding dynasty, the 
Zagwe, who made claims to descent from Moses. The Zagwe kings 
distinguished themselves by building several churches cut out of solid 
rock. The architectural achievements attest to the level of skill reached 
by Ethiopians as well as the capacity of the state to mobilise labour on a 
huge scale. Such tasks could not have been achieved by voluntary 
family labour but only through the labour of an exploited class.
A great deal is known of the superstructure of the Ethiopian empire, 
especially its Christianity and its literate culture. History was written to 
glorify the king and the nobility, especially under the restored 
‘Solomonic’ dynasty which replaced the Zagwe in 1270 A.D. Fine 
illuminated books and manuscripts became a prominent element of 
Amharic culture. Equally fine garments and jewellery were produced 
for the ruling class and for the church. The top ecclesiastics were part of 
the nobility, and the institution of the monastery grew to great 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (30 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:37 AM]


--- PAGE 82 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
proportions in Ethiopia. The association of organised religion with the 
state was implicit in communal societies, where the distinction between 
politics, economics, religion, medicine, etc. was scarcely drawn. Under 
feudalism everywhere, Church and State were in close alliance. The 
Buddhists were pre-eminent in feudal Vietnam, Burma, Japan and to a 
lesser extent in China. In India, a limited Buddhist influence was 
overwhelmed by that of the Hindus and Muslims; and of course in 
feudal Europe it was the Catholic Church which played the role 
paralleled by the Orthodox Church in Ethiopia.
The wealth of Ethiopia rested on an agricultural base. The fertile 
uplands supported cereal-growing and there was considerable livestock 
raising, including the rearing of horses. Craft skills were developed in a 
number of spheres, and foreign craftsmen were encouraged. For 
instance, early in the 15th century, Turkish artisans settled in the 
country and made coats of mail and weapons for the Ethiopian army. 
Coptics from Egypt were also introduced to help run the financial 
administration. No one denies that the word ‘Feudal’ can be applied to 
Ethiopia in those centuries, because there existed a clear-cut class 
contradiction between the landlords and the peasants. Those relations 
grew out of communalism that had characterised Ethiopia much earlier 
like other parts of Africa.
Feudal Ethiopia included lands that were communally owned by village 
and ethnic communities as well as lands belonging directly to the 
crown; but in addition large territories were conferred by the 
conquering Amharic dynasties on members of the royal family, on 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (31 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:37 AM]


--- PAGE 83 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
soldiers and priests. Those who received huge areas of land became Ras 
or provincial princes, and they had judges appointed by the emperor 
attached to them. The peasants in their domain were reduced to tenants 
who could earn their living only by offering produce to the landlord and 
taxes to the state (also in produce). The landlords exempted themselves 
from tax — a typical situation in feudal societies, and one which fed the 
fires of revolution in Europe when the bourgeois class grew powerful 
enough to challenge the fact that the feudalists were, using political 
power to tax everyone but themselves. Ethiopia of course never reached 
that stage of transition to capitalism. What is clear is that the transition 
to feudalism had been made.
(c) Nubia
Nubia was another Christian region in Africa, but one which is not as 
famous as Ethiopia. In the 6th century A.D., Christianity was 
introduced onto the middle Nile in the districts once ruled by the 
famous state of Kush or Meroe. In the period before the birth of Christ, 
Kush was a rival to Egypt in splendour, and it ruled Egypt for a number 
of years. Its decline in the 4th century A.D. was completed by attacks 
from the then expanding Axum. The three small Nubian states which 
arose some time afterwards were to some extent the heirs of Kush, 
although after their conversion to Christianity it was this religion which 
dominated Nubian culture.
The Nubian states (which had consolidated to two by about the 8th 
century) achieved most from the 9th to the 11th centuries, in spite of 
great pressures from Arab and Islamic enemies,, and they did not finally 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (32 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:37 AM]


--- PAGE 84 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
succumb until the 14th century. Scholarly interest in Nubia has 
focussed on the ruins of large red-brick churches and monasteries which 
had murals and frescoes of fine quality. Several conclusions can be 
drawn from that material evidence. In the first place, a great deal of 
labour was required to build those churches along with the stone 
fortifications which often surrounded them. As with the pyramids of 
Egypt or the feudal castles of Europe, the common builders were 
intensely exploited and probably coerced. Secondly, skilled labour was 
involved in the making of the bricks and m the architecture. The 
paintings indicate that the skills surpassed mere manual dexterity, and 
the same artistic merit is noticeable in fragments of painted pottery 
recovered from Nubia.
It has already been indicated that the church and monasteries played a 
major role in Ethiopia, and this is worth elaborating on with respect to 
Nubia. The monastery was a major unit of production. Numerous 
peasant huts were clustered round each monastery, which functioned 
very much like the manor of a feudal lord. The wealth that accumulated 
inside the churches was alienated from the peasants, while the finest 
aspects of the non-material culture such as books were accessible only 
to a small minority. Not only were the peasants illiterate, but in many 
cases they were non-Christians or only nominally Christian — judging 
from the better known Ethiopian example of the same date. When the 
Christian ruling class of Nubia was eliminated by the Muslims, very 
little of the achievements of the old state remained in the fabric of the 
people’s daily lives. Such reversals in the historical process are not 
uncommon throughout human experience. Ultimately, the dialectic of 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (33 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:37 AM]


--- PAGE 85 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
development asserts itself, but some ebbing and flowing is inevitable. 
The Nubian states were not in existence in the 15th century, but they 
constitute a legitimate example of h e potentialities of African 
development.
One can go further and discern that Kush was still contributing to 
African development long after the kingdom had declined and given 
way to Christian Nubia. It is clear that Kush was a centre from which 
many positive cultural elements diffused to the rest of Africa. Brass-
work of striking similarity to that of Meroe was re-produced in West 
Africa. and the technique by which West Africans cast their brass is 
generally held to have originated in Egypt and to have been passed on 
via Kush. Above all, Kush was one of the earliest and most vigorous 
centres of iron mining and smelting in Africa, and it was certainly one 
of the sources from which this crucial aspect of technology passed to 
the rest of the continent. That is why the middle Nile was a leading 
force in the social, economic and political development of Africá as a 
whole.
(d) The Maghreb
Islam was the great ‘revealed’ religion which played the major role in 
the period of the feudal development of the Maghreb — the lands at the 
western extremity of the Islamic empires that stretched across Africa, 
Asia and Europe within years of the Prophet Muhammad’s death in the 
7th century of the Christian era. The Arab empire-building under the 
banner of Islam is a classic example of the role of religion in that 
respect. Ibn Khaldun, a great 14th century North African historian, was 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (34 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:37 AM]


--- PAGE 86 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
of the opinion that Islam was the most important force allowing the 
Arabs to transcend the narrow boundaries of small family communities 
which were constantly struggling among each other. He wrote:
Arab pride, touchiness and intense jealousy of power render it impossible 
for them lo agree. Only when their nature has been permeated by a 
religious impulse are they transformed, so that the tendency lo anarchy is 
replaced by a spirit of mutual defence. Consider the moment when 
religion dominated their policy and led them lo observe a religious law 
designed lo promote the moral and material interests of civilisation. Under 
a series of successors to the Prophet (Muhammad), how vast their empire 
became and haw strongly was it established.
The above remarks by Ibn Khaldun cover only one aspect of Arab 
imperial expansion, but it was certainly a crucial one, and attested to the 
essential role of ideology in the developmental process. That has to be 
considered in relation w and in addition to the material circumstances. 
Furthermore, in judging the material conditions at any given time which 
might form the basis for further expansion of production and further 
growth of the society’s power, it is also necessary to consider the 
historical legacy. Like Islamic Egypt and Christian Nubia, the Maghreb 
of the Islamic dynasties inherited a rich historical and cultural tradition. 
It was the seat of the famous society of Carthage which flourished 
between 1200 B.C. and 200 B.C., and which was a blend of foreign 
influences from the eastern Mediterranean with the Berber peoples of 
the Maghreb. The region had subsequently been an important section of 
the Roman and Byzantine empires; and before becoming Muslim the 
Maghreb had actually distinguished itself as a centre of non-conformist 
Christianity which went under the name of Donatism.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (35 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:37 AM]


--- PAGE 87 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
The striking achievements of Muslim Maghreb were spread over the 
naval, military, commercial and cultural spheres. Its navies controlled 
the western Mediterranean and its armies took over most of Portugal 
and Spain. When the Muslim advance into Europe was turned back in 
the year 732 A.D., North African armies were already deep into France. 
In the 11th century, the armies of the Almoravid dynasty gathered 
strength from deep within Senegal and Mauretania and launched 
themselves across the Strait of Gibraltar to reinforce Islam in Spain 
which was being threatened by Christian kings. For over a century, the 
Almoravid rule in North Africa and Iberia was characterised by 
commercial wealth and a resplendent literary and architectural record. 
After being ejected from Spain in the 1230s, the Maghreb Muslims or 
Moors as they were called continued to maintain a dynamic society on 
African soil. As one index to the standard of social life, it has been 
pointed out that public baths, were common in the cities of Maghreb at 
a time when in Oxford the doctrine was still being propounded that the 
washing of the body was dangerous act.
One of the most instructive aspects of the history of the Maghreb is the 
inter-action of social formations to produce the state. A major problem 
that had to be resolved was that of integrating the isolated Berber 
groups into larger political communities. There were also contradictions 
between sedentary groups and nomadic pastoral sectors of the 
population.
The Berbers were mainly pastoralists organised in patriarchal clans, and 
in groups of clans connected by a democratic council of all adult males. 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (36 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:38 AM]


--- PAGE 88 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Grazing land was under communal ownership, and maintaining 
irrigation was also a collective responsibility for the agriculturalists. 
Yet, cooperation within kin-groups contrasted with hostility between 
those who had no immediate blood ties, and it was only in the face of 
the Arab invaders that the Berbers united-using a nonconformist 
Kharijite Islam as their ideology. The Kharijite revolt of 739 A.D. is 
considered in one sense as being nationalistic and in another sense a 
revolt of the exploited classes against the Arab military, bureaucratic 
and theocratic elite, who professed the orthodox Sunni Islam. That 
revolt of the Berber masses laid the basis for Moroccan nationalism, 
and three centuries later the Almohad dynasty (1147-1270) brought 
political unity to the whole of Maghreb as a product of the synthesis of 
Berber and Arab achievements in the sphere of state-building.
Unfortunately, the Maghreb nation did not last; and instead the region 
was bequeathed with the nuclei of three nation states-Morocco, Algeria 
and Tunisia. Within each of the three areas, divisive tendencies were 
very strong in the 14th and 15th centuries. For instance, in Tunisia the 
ruling Hafsid dynasty was constantly involved in crushing local 
rebellions and defending the integrity of the state. It has been noted 
already that the political state in Africa and elsewhere was a 
consequence of development of the productive forces, but the state in 
turn also conditioned the rate at which the economy advanced, because 
the two were dialectically inter-related. Therefore, the failure of the 
Maghreb to build a nation state and the difficulties of consolidating 
state power even within the three divisions of Morocco, Algeria and 
Tunisia were factors holding back the further development of the 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (37 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:38 AM]


--- PAGE 89 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
region. Moreover, political division weakened the Maghreb vis a vis 
foreign enemies, and Europe was soon to take advantage of those 
internal weaknesses, by launching attacks from the year 1415 onwards.
The experience of the Maghreb can be drawn upon to illustrate the 
lengthy nature of transition from the one mode of production to another 
and the fact that two different ways of organising society could co-exist 
side by side over centuries. Throughout the period under discussion, a 
great deal of land in that part of Africa retained its communal 
ownership and family labour. Meanwhile, considerable socioeconomic 
stratification had taken place and antagonistic classes had emerged. At 
the very bottom of the ladder were the slaves or harratine, who were 
most often black Africans from south of the Sahara. Then came the 
akhamme or landless peasants who worked the proprietors’ land and 
gave the latter four-fifths of whatever was produced. Special mention 
should be made of the position of women, who were not a class by 
themselves but who suffered from deprivations at the hands of their 
own menfolk and of the male-controlled ruling class. Therefore, the 
women in the akhamme class were in a very depressed condition. At the 
top of the society were the big landowners, who wielded political power 
along with other devotees of the Muslim religion.
None of the African societies discussed so far can be said to have 
thrown up capitalist forms to the point where the accumulation of 
capital became the principal motive force. However, they all had 
flourishing commercial sectors, moneylenders and strong handicraft 
industries which were the features which ultimately gave birth to 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (38 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:38 AM]


--- PAGE 90 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
modern capitalism through evolution and revolution. The Maghreb 
merchants were quite wealthy. They gained from the energies of the 
cultivators, cattlemen and shepherds; they indirectly or directly 
mobilised the labour in the mines of copper, lead, antimony and iron; 
and they appropriated surplus from the skills of the craftsmen making 
textiles, carpets, leather, pottery and articles of brass and iron. The 
merchants were a class of accumulators, and their dynamism made 
itself felt not only in the Maghreb but also in the Sahara and across the 
Sahara in West Africa. In that way, the development of the Maghreb 
acted as a factor in the development of what was called the Western 
Sudan. 
(e) The Western Sudan
To the Arabs, the whole of Africa south of the Sahara was the Bilad as 
Sudan — the land of the Blacks. The name survives today only in the 
Republic of Sudan on the Nile, but references to the Western Sudan in 
early times concern the zone presently occupied by Senegal, Mali, 
Upper Volta and Niger, plus parts of Mauretania, Guinea and Nigeria. 
The Western Sudanic empires of Ghana, Mali and Songhai have 
become by-words in the struggle to illustrate the achievements of the 
African past. That is the area to which African nationalists and 
progressive whites point when they want to prove that Africans too 
were capable of political, administrative and military greatness in the 
epoch before the white men. However, a people’s demands at any given 
time change the kinds of questions to which historians are expected to 
provide answers. Today the masses of Africa seek ‘development’ and 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (39 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:38 AM]


--- PAGE 91 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
total emancipation. The issues that need resolution with regard to 
Western Sudanic history are those which illumine the principles 
underlying the impressive development of certain states in the heart of 
Africa.
The origins of the empire of Ghana go back to the 5th century A.D., but 
it reached its peak between the 9th and 11th centuries. Mali had its rime 
in the 13th and 14th centuries, and Songhai in the two subsequent 
centuries. None of the three were in exactly the same location; and the 
ethnic origin of the three ruling classes was different; but they should be 
regarded as ‘successor states’, following essentially the same line of 
evolution and growth. They have been called trading states so o ten t at 
it is almost forgotten that the principal activity of the population was 
agriculture. It was a zone in which several species of millet were 
domesticated, along with a species of rice, several other food plants and 
at least one type of cotton. It was a zone which saw the relatively early 
introduction of iron in the millennium before the birth of Christ, and 
iron tools exercised their attendant benefits on agriculture. The open 
savannah country of the Western Sudan also favoured livestock. Some 
groups such as the Fulani were exclusively pastoralist, but livestock 
was to be found in varying degrees throughout the huge region. Cattle 
were the most significant domesticated animals, followed by goats. The 
rearing of horses, mules and donkeys was also carried on which was 
made possible by wide tsetse-free areas. To add further variety, the 
great Niger river allowed for the rise of specialist fishermen.
Population, the indispensable factor of production, could only have 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (40 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:38 AM]


--- PAGE 92 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
reached the density which it did because of increasing food supplies; 
while handicraft industry and trade sprang primarily from the products 
of agriculture. Cotton cultivation led to the making of cotton cloth with 
such a variety of specialisation that there was internal trade in particular 
cotton cloths, such as the unbleached fabric of Futa Djalon and the blue 
cloth of Jenne. Pastoralism provided a variety of products for 
manufacture, notably cattle hides and goatskins which went into the 
making of sandals, leather jackets for military use, leather pouches for 
amulets, and so on. Horses served as a means of transport to the ruling 
class and made a major contribution to warfare and the size of the state. 
For the purposes of interbreeding, some horses were imported from 
North Africa where the Arab bloodstock was of the finest quality. For 
pack transport, the donkey was of course better fitted; and the Mossi 
kingdom of Upper Volta for a long time specialised in breeding those 
pack animals which were associated with long distance trade within the 
vast region. On the edge of the Sahara, the camel took over-another 
‘technological’ asset introduced from the north.
Mining was a sphere in which production was important. Some of the 
royal clans in the Western Sudan, such as that of the Kante were 
specialist blacksmiths. In a period of expansion by warfare, the control 
over iron supplies and over iron-working skills was obviously decisive. 
Besides, the two most important articles of long distance trade were salt 
and gold, both obtained principally by mining. Neither the salt supplies 
nor the gold supplies were originally within the domains of Ghana, but 
it took steps to integrate them either by trade or by territorial expansion. 
Ghana struck north into the Sahara, and towards the very end of the 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (41 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:38 AM]


--- PAGE 93 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
10th century it captured the town of Awdaghast from the Berbers-a 
town useful for the control of the incoming salt mined in the middle of 
the desert. Similarly Mali and Songhai sought to secure control of 
Taghaza which was the largest single centre of salt mining. Songhai 
took the prize of Taghaza from the desert Berbers and held it for many 
years in the face of opposition from Morocco. Another crucial but 
seldom stressed element in the pattern of production was the ownership 
of copper mines in the Sahara by both Mali and Songhai.
To the south of Ghana lay the important sources of gold on the Upper 
Senegal and its tributary the Faleme. It is said that Ghana obtained its 
gold by ‘silent’ or ‘dumb’ barter which was described as follows:
The merchants beat great drums to summon the local natives, who were 
naked and lived in holes in the ground. From these holes, which were 
doubtless the pits from which they dug the gold, they refused to emerge in 
the presence of the foreign merchants. The latter, therefore, used to 
arrange their trade goods in piles on the river bank and retire out of sight. 
The local natives then came and placed a heap of gold beside each pile and 
withdrew. If the merchants were satisfied they took the gold and retreated, 
beating their drums to signify that the market was over.
The writer of the above lines (E. W. Bovill) a supposed European 
authority on the Western Sudan, then goes on to say that silent trade or 
dumb barter was a feature of the Western Sudan’s gold trade throughout 
all the centuries until modern times. Actually, the only thing dumb 
about the trade is what he writes about it. The story of dumb barter for 
gold in West Africa is repeated in several accounts, starting with 
ancient Greek scripts. It is clearly a rough approximation of the first 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (42 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:38 AM]


--- PAGE 94 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
attempts at exchange of a people coming into contact with strangers, 
and it was not a permanent procedure. During the rule of Ghana, the 
people of the two principal goldfields of Bambuk and Boure were 
drawn into regular trade relations with the Western Sudan. Ghana 
probably and Mali certainly exercised political rule over the two 
regions, where the mining and distribution of gold became a very 
complicated process. During the centuries of Mali’s greatness, 
extensive mining of gold began in the forest of modern Ghana to supply 
the trans-Saharan gold trade. The existing social systems expanded and 
strong states emerged to deal with the sale of gold. The merchants who 
come from the great cities of the Western Sudan had to buy the gold by 
weight, using a small accurate measurement known as the benda.
When the Portuguese arrived at the river Gambia and got a glimpse at 
how gold was traded on the upper reaches of the river, the marvelled at 
the dexterity shown by the Mandinga merchants. The latter carried very 
finely balanced scales, inlaid with silver and suspended from cords of 
twisted silk. The gold dust and nuggets were weighed with brass 
weights. The expertise of the Mandinga in measuring gold and in other 
forms of commerce was largely due to the fact that within that ethnic 
group there was a core of professional traders, commonly referred to as 
the Dioulas. They were not very wealthy, but were distinguished by 
their willingness to travel thousands of miles from one end of the 
Western Sudan to another. They also reached the coast or very near to 
the coast in Gambia, Sierra Leone, Liberia. Ivory Coast and Ghana. The 
Dioulas handled a long list of African products — salt from the Atlantic 
coast and the Sahara, kola nuts from the forests of Liberia and Ivory 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (43 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:38 AM]


--- PAGE 95 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Coast, gold from Akan country in modern Ghana, leather from 
Hausaland, dried fish from the coast, cotton cloth from many districts 
and especially from the central arcas of the Western Sudan, iron from 
Futa Djalon in modern Guinea, shea butter from the upper Gambia, and 
a host of other local articles. In addition, the trade of the Western Sudan 
involved the circulation of goods originating in North Africa, notably 
fabrics from Egypt and the Maghreb and coral beads from Ceuta on the 
Mediterranean coast. Therefore, the pattern of Western Sudanic and 
trans-Saharan commerce was integrating the resources of a wide area 
stretching from the Mediterranean to the Atlantic Ocean.
Long-distance trade across the Sahara had special characteristics. Some 
scholars have spoken of the camel as the ship of the Sahara, and the 
towns which the camel caravans entered on either side of the desert 
were called ‘ports’. In practice, the trans-Saharan trade was as great an 
achievement as crossing an ocean. Much more than local trade, it 
stimulated the famous cities of the region such as Walata, Timbuctu, 
Gao and Jenne; and it brought in the literate Islamic culture. Long-
distance trade strengthened state power, which meant in effect the 
power of the lineages who transformed themselves into a permanent 
aristocracy. However, it is a gross oversimplification of cause and effect 
to say that it was the trans-Saharan trade which built the Western 
Sudanic empires. Ghana, Mali and Songhai grew out of their 
environment, and out of the efforts of their own population; and it was 
only after they had a certain status that their ruling classes could express 
an interest in long-distance trade and could provide the security to 
permit that trade to flourish.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (44 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:38 AM]


--- PAGE 96 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
It is significant that the Western Sudan never provided any significant 
capital for the trans-Saharan trade. The capital came from the merchants 
of Fez, Tlemcen and other cities of the Maghreb; and they sent their 
agents to reside m e Western Sudan. To some extent, it was a colonial 
relationship because the exchange was unequal in North Africa’s 
favour. However, the gold trade was at least capable of stimulating the 
development of the productive forces within West Africa, while the 
accompanying trade in slaves had no such benefits. Ghana, Mali and 
Songhai all exported small numbers of slaves, and the empire of Kanem-
Bornu gave slave exports a much higher priority because it controlled 
no gold supplies. Kanem-Bornu used its power to raid for captives to 
the south as far as Adamawa in modern Cameroons. The negative 
implications of such policies were to be fully brought out in later 
centuries, when the steady trickle of slaves from a few parts of West 
Africa across the Sahara was joined by the massive flow of the 
continent’s peoples towards destinations named by Europeans.
Though falling considerably short of the feudal stage, state formation 
was more advanced in the Western Sudan than in most other parts of 
Africa in the period 500 A.D. to 1500 A.D. part from Ghana, Mali, 
Songhai and Kanem-Bornu, there were outstanding kingdoms in 
Hausaland, in Mossi, in Senegal, in the Futa Djalon mountains of 
Guinea and in the basin of the Benue tributary of the river Niger. The 
Western Sudanic techniques of political organisation and administration 
spread out to many neighbouring regions, and influenced the rise of 
innumerable small states scattered throughout the coastal region from 
the river Senegal to the Cameroon mountains. Some specific Sudanic 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (45 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:38 AM]


--- PAGE 97 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
features were discernible in many kingdoms, notably the position of the 
‘Queen Mother’ in the political structure.
The strengths and weaknesses of the Western Sudanic states attest to 
the point which they had reached on the long road away from 
communalism — with respect to social relations and to the level of 
production. The state held together several clashing social formations 
and ethnic groups. In the case of Kanem-Bornu, pastoralists and 
cultivators were even able to integrate the camel nomads of the desert. 
Elsewhere, the Tuareg nomads were kept at bay, so that cultivators and 
other sedentary peoples could live their lives in peace. Men, domestic 
beasts and goods were free to move for thousands of miles in security. 
However, the state had not yet broken down the barriers between 
different social formations. The state existed as an institution which 
collected tribute from the various communities and restrained them 
from clashing. In periods of weakness, the superstructure of the state 
almost disappeared and left free scope for divisive political and social 
tendencies. Each successive great state was a further experiment to deal 
with the problem of unity, sometimes on a conscious level and more 
often as an unconscious by-product of the struggle for survival.
Under feudalism, the ruling class in the state for the first time tore away 
the social institutions which prevented the first embryo states from 
exercising direct action on each subject. That is to say, feudalism 
brought about a series of direct obligatory ties between the landed rulers 
and the landless subjects. In the Western Sudan, that clear-cut class 
division had not come into existence. By the time of Mali’s pre-
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (46 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:38 AM]


--- PAGE 98 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
eminence in the 13th and 14th centuries, a small amount of local 
slavery had come into existence, and by the end of the 15th century 
there were both chattel slaves and ‘domestic slaves’ comparable to 
feudal serfs. For instance, in Senegal the Portuguese traders found that 
there were elements in the population who worked most days for their 
masters and a few days per month for themselves — a budding feudalist 
tendency. Nevertheless, most of the population still had ample access to 
land through their kin, and in political terms that means that the 
authority of the ruling class was exercised over heads of families and 
clans rather than over each subject.
Although communal egalitarianism was on its way out, communal 
relations still persisted and had by the 15th century become a brake on 
the development of the Western Sudan. Such surplus as was being 
produced by the society over and above subsistence needs came out of 
tribute from the collective communities rather than directly from the 
producer to the exploiting class. That gave an incentive for maintaining 
the old social structures, although they were incapable of increasing 
labour mobilisation and specialisation to a much greater degree. It was 
unlikely that there would be a violent social revolution because classes 
were not yet formed to spearhead a revolution. Under those 
circumstances, major advances of technology were required to spark off 
further changes. The degree of economic integration had to be enhanced 
by greater productivity in various areas — allowing for more trade, 
more specialisation in the division of labour, and the possibility of 
surplus accumulation. But wheeled vehicles and the plow stopped in 
North Africa, and so too did large-scale irrigation. Indeed, through the 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (47 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:38 AM]


--- PAGE 99 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
critical absence of large-scale irrigation, the productive base in the 
Western u an actually decreased, for the Sahara was advancing. Ghana 
had stood on fertile agricultural land, but both Mali and Songhai had 
their centres further south, because the former northern terrain of Ghana 
was claimed by the Sahara through dessication. Techniques necessary 
for the control of this hostile environment and for the increase of 
agricultural and manufacturing capacity had either to evolve locally or 
to be brought in from outside. In the next phase of African history after 
the coming of the white men, both of those alternatives were virtually 
ruled out in West Africa.
(f) The Inter-lacustrine Zone
The high level of social evolution in the Western Sudan has been the 
cause of lengthy debates as to whether the region had achieved 
feudalism of the European variety, or whether it should be classed 
together with the great Asian empires, or whether it created a new and 
unique category of its own. On the eastern side of the continent, 
development in the same period was definitely slower. For one thing, 
the people of East Africa acquired iron tools at a much later date than 
their brothers in the North and West; and, secondly, the range of their 
technology and skills was narrower. However, by the 14th century, state 
formation was well under way, and the principles of development 
revealed in the process are worth considering. An area of special 
interest is that of the great lakes of Africa and particularly the zone 
around the group of lakes which the British thought fit to rename in 
honour of various members of the British ruling family-Victoria, 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (48 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:38 AM]


--- PAGE 100 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Albert, Edward, George In that inter-lacustrine zone, several famous 
states eventually emerged, one of the earliest and largest being that of 
Bunyoro-Kitara.
Bunyoro-Kitara comprised in whole or in part the regions which today 
are called Bunyoro, Ankole, Toro, Karagwe and Buganda — all of 
which fall in Uganda, except Karagwe which is in Tanzania. Historical 
traditions have been orally preserved by these various peoples who at 
one time fell within the boundaries of Bunyoro-Kitara; and the 
traditions concentrate on the ruling dynasty, which is known as the 
Bachwezi. The Bachwezi were supposedly an immigrant pastoralist 
group. They introduced long-horned humped cattle, which later became 
the major species in the inter-lacustrine zone. Posession of these cattle 
undoubtedly aided them to become a ruling aristocracy in the 14th and 
15th centuries. They became a social stratum above the clans which 
previously existed, and which had narrow territorial bases. The period 
of Bachwezi pre-eminence is also associated with iron-working, the 
manufacture of bark-cloth, the technique of sinking well-shafts through 
rocks, and (most striking of all) the construction of extensive earthwork 
systems, used apparently both for defence and for enclosing large herds 
of cattle. The largest of the earthworks was at Bigo, with ditches 
extending over six and a half miles.
The division of labour between pastoralists and cultivators and the 
nature of their contacts intensified the process of caste formation and 
class stratification in the inter-lacustrine area. The pastoralist Bahima 
had imposed their rule over the cultivators or Bairu. Social classes grew 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (49 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:38 AM]


--- PAGE 101 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
out of a situation of changing labour relations. The earthworks of Bigo 
and elsewhere are were not built by voluntary family labour, and some 
form of coercion must also have been used to get the cultivators to 
produce a surplus for their new lords. For instance, the Bachwezi are 
said to have established a system by which young men were conscripted 
into the king’s service and were maintained by Bairu who occupied and 
cultivated land assigned for the support of the army. They also 
introduced slave artisans and administrators. When administrative 
officials were appointed at a local level to rule on behalf of the 
aristocrats, that was a first step towards setting up feudal fiefs as in 
Ethiopia; for while the question of land grants had not yet entered the 
picture, it must be borne in mind that inequality in the distribution of 
cattle meant in fact unequal access to the means of production.
Much uncertainty surrounds the precise identification of the Bachwezi. 
It is possible that they were not immigrants. Nevertheless, it is generally 
held that they were light-complexioned pastoralists coming from the 
north. Assuming that this was so, it is essential to stress that whatever 
was achieved in the inter-lacustrine region in the 14th and 15th 
centuries was a product of the evolution of African society as a whole 
and not a transplant from outside. In order to place those East African 
events within the context of universal human achievement, a parallel 
can be drawn with India. Centuries before the birth of Christ, Northern 
India was also the recipient of light-complexioned pastoral immigrants 
known as Aryans. There was a time when everything in Indian culture 
was attributed to the Aryans ; but then careful scrutiny revealed that the 
basis of Indian society and culture had been laid by the earlier 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (50 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:38 AM]


--- PAGE 102 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
population known as the Dravidians. Therefore, it is now considered far 
more sensible to see the achievements of North India as a product of 
synthesis or combination of Aryan and Dravidian. Similarly in East 
Africa, one needs to seek the elements of synthesis between the new 
and the old and that in effect was the path of development in the inter-
lacustrine zone in the 14th and 15th centuries.
As has just been noted, the Bachwezi are associated with techniques 
such as iron working and bark cloth manufacture. It is not at all clearly 
established that they introduced such techniques for the first time, and it 
is much more probable that they presided over the elaboration of such 
skills. Certainly, iron-using societies were known in East Africa several 
centuries before the Bachwezi period. At Engaruka, just south of the 
present Kenya/Tanzania border, there are to be found the ruins of a 
small but impressive iron age society, which flourished sometime 
before the end of the first millennium A.D. (i.e. before 1000 A.D.). 
Engaruka was a concentrated agricultural settlement engaging in 
terracing, irrigation and the construction of walls by the technique 
known as dry stone building, whereby no lime was required to hold the 
stones together. In the inter-lacustrine area itself, there had emerged a 
banana-based agriculture, which was capable of supporting a large 
sedentary population. That was the sort of pre-condition for moving 
from communal isolation to statehood.
It is significant that orally-preserved traditions imply the existence of 
kingdoms in Bunyoro and Karagwe before the Bachwezi. State 
formation was already in an embryo stage when the outsiders arrived, 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (51 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:38 AM]


--- PAGE 103 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
and the likelihood is that they did not remain outsiders for long. Unlike 
the Aryans in India, the Bachwezi did not even impose their own 
language, but adopted the Bantu speech of the local inhabitants. That 
reflects the dominance of local rather than foreign elements in the 
synthesis. In any event, the cultural product was African, and was part 
of the pattern of development through localised evolution combined 
with the interplay of social formations on a continent-wide scale.
Among the contributions supposedly made by the Bachwezi to the inter-
lacustrine kingdoms was the introduction of religion based on the 
phases of the moon. In all of the situations examined so far, religion 
played a significant role in promoting the building of the state leading 
away from the simple organisation of the family community. 
Christianity and Islam have been most frequently associated with large 
scale building both inside and outside of Africa. That is to be explained 
not so much by the actual religious beliefs, but because membership in 
a powerful universal church gave the ruling class of a young state many 
advantages. A Christian or Muslim prince had access to a literate 
culture and a wider- world. He dealt with traders and craftsmen 
professing that religion he used administrators and churchmen who 
were literate; and he could travel to parts of the world such as Mecca. 
Above all, the universal religions replaced ‘traditional’ African 
ancestral religions in Ethiopia, Sudan, Egypt, Maghreb and 
progressively in the Western Sudan because Christianity and Islam 
were not rooted in any given family community and therefore could be 
used to mobilise the many communities that were merging into the 
state. However, religious beliefs which had been accepted by a single 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (52 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:38 AM]


--- PAGE 104 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
clan or ethnic group could be elevated in the same form or in a slightly 
altered form to become the religion of the whole state. This was the 
situation in the inter-lacustrine zone, and indeed in most other parts of 
Africa outside the regions already described.
(g) Zimbabwe
In Zimbabwe, one of the great constructions in brick (dated around the 
14th century) is commonly referred to as ‘temple’ and is felt to have 
served religious purposes. Even from the scanty evidence, it is clear that 
the religious aspect of social development was of the greatest 
importance in serving to cement ties between individuals in that 
emergent African society. For instance, the ruling class in the 15th 
century empire of Mutapa in Zimbabwe were pastoralists and their 
religious ritual included objects that were symbolic of cattle, as was 
found in the inter-lacustrine kingdoms such as Bunyoro and Karagwe. 
One can guess that the rituals also symbolised the dominance of the 
cattle owners, just as they also paid respect to pre-existing ideas of the 
cultivators in order to effect a stable synthesis. The details of the picture 
are not available in the present stage of knowledge, but what is required 
is that any discussion of African religion must seek to present it in a 
mobile evolutionary manner and to relate it to changing socio-economic 
forms and institutions. That task being beyond the confines of the 
present study, it is proposed to examine Zimbabwe as yet another 
region where the productive base and the political superstructure can be 
ascertained to have developed appreciably in the last few centuries 
before Africa was drawn into contact with Europe.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (53 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:38 AM]


--- PAGE 105 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Within the southernmost section of the continent, the area in which 
striking achievements were registered by the 15th century was that 
between the rivers Zambezi and Limpopo, covering the territories that 
were later to be called Mozambique and Rhodesia. Iron-using and state-
building peoples were active there from early in the first millennium A 
.D., and eventually there emerged in the 15th century the empire which 
Europeans called Monomotapa. The term ‘Zimbabwe’ is being used 
here to designate the Zambesi / Limpopo cultures in the few centuries 
preceding the European arrival, because it was from the 11th to the 14th 
century that there flourished the societies whose most characteristic 
feature was the building of large stone palaces, known collectively as 
Zimbabwe.
Much has been written about the buildings which distinguish the 
Zimbabwe culture. They are a direct response to the environment of 
granite rocks, being built upon granite hills and of flaked granite. The 
most famous site of surviving stone ruins is that of Great Zimbabwe, 
north of the river Sabi. One of the principal structures at Great 
Zimbabwe was some 300 feet long and 220 feet broad, with the walls 
being 30 feet high and 20 feet thick. The technique of laying the bricks 
one on the other without lime to act as a cement was the same style 
noted in the description of Engaruka in northern Tanzania. It was in fact 
a peculiar aspect of material culture in Africa, being widely found in 
Ethiopia and the Sudan. The style of the encircling brick walls at Great 
Zimbabwe and other sites was also characteristically African in that it 
was an elaboration of the mud enclosures or kraals of many Bantu-
speaking people.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (54 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:38 AM]


--- PAGE 106 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
One European archaeologist is reported to have said that there was as 
much labour expended in Zimbabwe as on the Pyramids in Egypt. That 
is surely an overstatement, for the Pyramids were raised through an 
incredible amount of slave labour, which could not possibly have been 
at the disposal of the rulers in Zimbabwe. However, it is definitely 
necessary to reflect on the amount of labour which would have been 
required to construct the buildings within the Zimbabwe region up until 
the 15th century. The workers may well have been from particular 
ethnic groups who were subjugated by other ethnic groups, but in the 
process of subjugation they were acquiring the character of a social 
class whose labour was being exploited. Nor was it sheer manual 
labour. Skill, creativity and artistry went into the construction of the 
walls, especially with regard to the decorations, the inner recesses and 
the doors.
When Cecil Rhodes sent in his agents to rob and steal in Zimbabwe, 
they and other Europeans marvelled at the surviving ruins of the 
Zimbabwe culture, and automatically assumed that it had been built by 
white people. Even today there is still a tendency to consider the 
achievements with a sense of wonder rather than with the calm 
acceptance that it was a perfectly logical outgrowth of human social 
development within Africa, as part of the universal process by which 
man’s labour opened up new horizons. The sense of reality can only be 
restored by making it clear that the architecture rested on a foundation 
of advanced agriculture and mining, which had come into existence 
over centuries of evolution.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (55 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:38 AM]


--- PAGE 107 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Zimbabwe was a zone of mixed farming, with cattle being important, 
since the area is free from tsetse flies. Irrigation and terracing reached 
considerable proportions. There was no single dam or aqueduct 
comparable to those in Asia or ancient Rome, but countless small 
streams were diverted and made to flow around hills, in a manner that 
indicated an awareness of the scientific principles governing the motion 
of water. In effect, the people of Zimbabwe had produced 
‘hidrologists’, through their understanding of the material environment. 
On the mining side, it is equally striking that the African peoples in the 
zone in question had produced prospectors and ‘geologists’ who had a 
clear idea of where ‘to look for gold and copper in the sub-soil. When 
the European colonialists arrived in the 19th century, they found that 
virtually all the gold-bearing and copper-bearing strata had been mined 
previously by Africans — though of course not on the same scale as 
Europeans were to achieve with drilling equipment. Among the 
Zimbabwe people, there also arose craftmen who worked the gold into 
ornaments with tremendous skill and lightness of touch.
The presence of gold in particular was a stimulus to external trade, and 
in turn it was external demand which did most to accelerate mining. In 
the first millennium A.D., there was a gold-using aristocracy at 
Ingombe Ilede just north of the Zambezi. Presumably, they got their 
supplies from gold mines further south. However, gold is required in 
large quantities only in a society which produces a very large economic 
surplus and can afford to transform part of that surplus into gold for 
prestige purposes, (as in India) or into coinage and money to promote 
capitalism (as in Western Europe). The pre-feudal African societies did 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (56 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:38 AM]


--- PAGE 108 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
not have such a surplus nor the social relations which made it necessary 
for gold to circulate a great deal internally. Hence, it was the presence 
of Arab traders as far south as Sofala in the Mozambique channel which 
spurred Zimbabwe to mine more gold for export just about the same 
time in the 11th century when stonebuilding was beginning. The 
implication is that a number of factors coincided: namely, the 
intensification of class stratification, of state consolidation, of 
production and building techniques, and of trade.
Several different ethnic groups contributed to Zimbabwe society. The 
earliest populations of the region were the ‘Bushmen’ and Khoisan type 
of hunters who today are found only in small numbers in Southern 
Africa. They were incorporated into the physical stock of newcomers 
from further north speaking Bantu languages, and in fact they made 
their contribution to the Bantu languages of the area. Among the Bantu 
speakers, there were also several different groups coming into their own 
at different times. The material evidence which has been revealed by 
archaeologists shows various pottery styles, contrasting burial positions 
and different bone structures among skeletons. Other material artefacts 
show that over the centuries many societies occupied the region of 
Zimbabwe. Much of the interpenetration of one group by another was 
done peacefully, although at the same time, the very existence of the 
fortified hill-tops and stone defences shows that the largest states were 
engaged in military struggles for survival and pre-eminence. 
Furthermore, some ethnic groups must have been permanently relegated 
to inferior status, so as to provide the labour for agriculture, building 
and mining. Other clans specialised in pastoralism, warfare and the 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (57 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:38 AM]


--- PAGE 109 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
control of religious apparatus such as divination and rainmaking.
It is believed that the inhabitants of Zimbabwe in the 11th to the 14th 
centuries were Sotho-speaking ; but by the time the Portuguese arrived 
a Shona-speaking dynasty had taken control of most of the region. That 
was the Rozwi clan which set up the state of Mutapa, between the 
Zambezi and the Limpopo. The ruler was known as the Mwene Mutapa, 
which apparently meant ‘the great Lord of Mutapa’ to his own 
followers, but was held to mean ‘the great pillager’, by peoples whom 
he conquered and wielded together into a single empire. The first 
individual to hold the title Mwene Mutapa ruled from about 1415-1450, 
but the dynasty had already been growing prominent before that date. 
The capital was at first sited at Great Zimbabwe, and later moved north. 
What was important was that the Mwene Mutapa appointed governors 
to rule over various localities outside the capital, in a manner 
comparable to that of the Western Sudanic empires or the inter-
lacustrine ‘Bachwezi’ states.
The Rozwi lords of Mutapa did most to encourage production for 
export trade, notably in gold, ivory and copper. Arab merchants came to 
reside in the kingdom and the Zimbabwe region became involved in the 
network of Indian Ocean commerce, which linked them with India, 
Indonesia, and China. One of the principal achievements of the Rozwi 
lords of Mutapa was to organise a single system of production and 
trade. They exacted tribute from the various communities in their 
kingdoms, which was both a sign of sovereignty and a form of trade, 
because the movement of goods was stimulated. There is no doubt that 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (58 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:38 AM]


--- PAGE 110 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
the foreign trade strengthened the Mutapa state ; but above all it 
strengthened the ruling strata which had a monopoly over that aspect of 
economic activity. In comparison with other African elites at that time, 
the Rozwi of Zimbabwe still had a long way to go. They were not in the 
same category as the Amharic nobility of Ethiopia or the Arab/Berber 
feudal lords of the Maghreb. They did imbibe a few influences from 
outside, but they did not travel like the rulers of Mali and Songhai who 
made the pilgrimage to Mecca. Their dress was still mainly animal 
skins, and such cloth as they utilised were recent imports from the Arab 
traders rather than the product of the evolution of their own skills in that 
field. In that respect, Zimbabwe also trailed behind other early African 
states such as Oyo in Yorubaland, Benin in the same . :. and the 14th-
century empire of Kongo (which Europeans referred to as the greatest 
state in West Africa at the time of their arrival).
It has been considered necessary for the purposes of illustration to 
consider some (though by no means all) of the outstanding areas of 
development in Africa before the coming of the Europeans. Nor should 
it be forgotten that there were innumerable village communities 
emerging to become states that were small in size, but were sometimes 
sharply stratified internally and displayed an impressive level of 
material advance. Those described above should be sufficient to 
establish that Africa in the 15th century was not just a jumble of 
different ‘tribes’. There was a pattern and there was historical 
movement. Societies such as feudal Ethiopia and Egypt were at the 
furthest point of the process of evolutionary development. Zimbabwe 
and the Bachwezi states were also clearly on the ascendant away from 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (59 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:38 AM]


--- PAGE 111 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
communalism, but at a lower level than the feudal states and a few 
others that were not yet feudal such as those in the Western Sudan.
Conclusion
In introducing the concept of development, attention was drawn to the 
fact that the slow imperceptible expansion in social productive capacity 
ultimately amounted to a qualitative difference, with the arrival at the 
new stage sometimes being announced by social violence. It can be said 
that most African societies had not reached a new stage that was 
markedly different from communalism, and hence the use in this study 
of the cautious term, ‘transitional’. It can also be noted that nowhere 
had there been any internal social revolutions. The latter have taken 
place in European and world history only where class consciousness led 
to the massive intervention of people’s wills within the otherwise 
involuntary socio-economic process. Such observations help to situate 
African development up to the 15th century at a level that was below 
mature class-ridden feudalism.
It should also be re-iterated that slavery as a mode of production was 
not present in any African society, although some slaves were to be 
found where the decomposition of communal equality had gone 
furthest. This is an outstanding feature illustrating the autonomy of the 
African path within the, broader framework of universal advance. One 
of the paradoxes in studying this early period of African history is that 
it cannot be fully comprehended without first deepening our knowledge 
of the world at large, and yet the true picture of the complexities of the 
development of man and society can only be drawn after intensive 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (60 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:38 AM]


--- PAGE 112 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
study of the long neglected African continent. There is no escaping the 
use of comparisons as an aid to clarity; and indeed the parallels have 
been narrowly restricted to Europe when they could also be provided by 
examples from Asian history. Therein lies the cultural imperialism 
which makes it easier for the European-educated African to recall 
names like the (French) Capetians and the (Prussian) Hohenzollerns 
rather than the Vietnamese dynasties of Id and Tran for the latter are 
either unknown to him, or would be considered unimportant if known, 
or might even be judged too difficult to pronounce!
Several historians of Africa have pointed out that after surveying the 
developed areas of the continent in the 15th century and those within 
Europe at the same date, the difference between the two was in no way 
to Africa’s discredit. Indeed, the first Europeans to reach West and East 
Africa by sea were the ones who indicated that in most respects African 
development was comparable to that which they knew. To take but one 
example, when the Dutch visited the city of Benin they described it 
thus:
The town seems to be very great. When you enter into it, you go into a 
great broad street, not paved, which seems to be seven or eight times 
broader than the Warmoes street in Amsterdam....
The king’s palace is a collection of buildings which occupy as much space 
as the town of Harlem, and which is enclosed with walls. There are 
numerous apartments for the Prince’s ministers and fine galleries, most of 
which are as big as those on the Exchange at Amsterdam. They are 
supported by wooden pillars encased with copper, where their victories are 
depicted, and which are carefully kept very clean.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (61 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:38 AM]


--- PAGE 113 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
The town is composed of thirty main streets, very straight and 120 feet 
wide, apart from an infinity of small intersecting streets. The houses are 
close to one another, arranged in good order. These people are in no way 
inferior to the Dutch as regards cleanliness; they wash and scrub their 
houses so well that they are polished and shining like a looking-glass.
Yet, it would be self delusion to imagine that all things are exactly 
equal in Benin and in Holland. European society was already more 
aggressive, more expansionist and more dynamic in producing new 
forms. The dynamism within Europe was contained within the merchant 
and manufacturing class. In the galleries of the exchange at Amsterdam 
sat Dutch burghers — the ancestors of the modern bourgeoisie of 
industry and finance. This class in 15th century Europe was able to 
push the feudal landowners forward or aside. They began to discard 
conservatism and to create the intellectual climate in which change was 
seen as desirable. A spirit of innovation arose in technology and 
transformation of the mode of production was quickened. When Europe 
and Africa established close relations through trade, there was therefore 
already a slight edge in Europe’s favour — an edge representing the 
difference between a fledgling capitalist society and one that was still 
emerging from communalism.
Brief Guide to Reading
Studies on early African history are lacking for many reasons, the most 
obvious being that African history was for a long time considered by 
the colonialists as having so little value that it was not worth 
reconstructing. Another decisive factor is that studies of Africa were 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (62 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:38 AM]


--- PAGE 114 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
mainly carried out by European bourgeois anthropologists, whose 
philosophical outlook on ‘primitive societies’ caused them to separate 
African society from its historical context. There was a concentration 
on micro-units and no reference to overall patterns. The new African 
scholarship has been under way for too short a time to have provided 
any significant breakthrough. The few books cited below are part of the 
new approach.
B. Davidson, Africa in History.
Henri Labouret, Africa before the White Man 
M. Shinnie, Ancient African Kingdoms.
M. Panikkar, The Serpent and the Crescent.
The above group of books are assessments by non-Africans from a 
sympathetic perspective and with sufficient value for them to be 
respected and widely used inside Africa. M. Panikkar is an unusual 
example of an Asian scholar with a professional interest in the African 
continent.
J. Ajayi and I. Espie (editors), A Thousand Years of West African 
History.
B. A. Ogot and J. A. Kieran (editors), Zamani, a Survey of East African 
History.
African historians have begun to provide syntheses of the continent’s 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (63 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:38 AM]


--- PAGE 115 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
history by putting together relevant collections — usually on some 
section of the continent, as in the two examples above. Unfortunately, 
the quality varies from one selection to another, and African writers 
have not as yet provided any coherent overview of the regions with 
which the are supposedly dealing.
G. Afolabi Ojo, Yoruba Culture, a Geographical Analysis.
B. M. Fagan, Southern Africa during the Iron Age.
What these two dissimilar books have in common is an awareness of 
the material environment. Afolabi Ojo is a Nigerian geographer and B. 
M. Fagan is an English archaeologist.
 
Table of Contents 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch02.htm (64 of 64) [8/22/05 11:03:38 AM]


--- PAGE 116 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Chapter Three. Africa’s 
Contribution to European Capitalist 
Development — the Pre-Colonial 
Period
‘British trade is a magnificent superstructure of American commerce and 
naval power on an African foundation.’
Malachi Postlethwayt,
‘The African Trade, the Great Pillar and Support of the British Plantation 
Trade in North America, 1745.’
‘If you were to lose each year more than 200 million livres that you now 
get from your colonies; if you had not the exclusive trade with your 
colonies lo feed your manufactures, lo maintain your navy, lo keep your 
agriculture going, lo repay for your imports, lo provide for your luxury 
needs, lo advantageously balance your trade with Europe and Asia, then I 
say it clearly, the kingdom would be irretrievably lost.’
Bishop Maury (of France) : Argument against France’s ending the slave 
trade and giving freedom to its slave colonies. Presented in the French 
National Assembly, 1791.
3.1 How Europe Became the Dominant Section of a World-
wide Trade System
Because of the superficiality of many of the approaches to 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch03.htm (1 of 28) [8/22/05 11:05:43 AM]


--- PAGE 117 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
‘underdevelopment’, and because of resulting misconceptions, it is 
necessary to re-emphasise that development and underdevelopment are 
not only comparative terms, but that they also have a dialectical 
relationship one to the other: that is to say, the two help produce each 
other by interaction. Western Europe and Africa had a relationship 
which ensured the transfer of wealth from Africa to Europe. The 
transfer was possible only after trade became truly international; and 
that takes one back to the late 15th century when Africa and Europe 
were drawn into common relations for the first time — along with Asia 
and the Americas. The developed and underdeveloped parts of the 
present capitalist section of the world have been in continuous contact 
four and a half centuries. The contention here is that over that period 
Africa helped to develop Western Europe in the same proportion as 
Western Europe helped to underdevelop Africa.
The first significant thing about the internationalisation of trade in the 
15th century was that Europeans took the initiative and went to other 
parts of the world. No Chinese boats reached Europe, and if any African 
canoes reached the Americas (as is sometimes maintained) they did not 
establish two-way links. What was called international trade was 
nothing but the extension overseas of European interests. The strategy 
behind international trade and the production that supported it was 
firmly in European hands, and specifically, in the hands of the sea-
going nations from the North Sea to the Mediterranean. They owned 
and directed the great majority of the world’s sea-going vessels, and 
they controlled the financing of the trade between four continents. 
Africans ,a little clue as to the tri-continental links between Africa, 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch03.htm (2 of 28) [8/22/05 11:05:43 AM]


--- PAGE 118 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Europe and the Americas. Europe had a monopoly of knowledge about 
the international exchange system seen as a whole, for Western Europe 
was the only sector capable of viewing the system as a whole.
Europeans used the superiority of their ships and cannon to gain control 
of al] the world’s waterways, starting with the western Mediterranean 
and the Atlantic coast of North Africa. From 1415, when the Portuguese 
captured Ceuta near Gibraltar, they maintained the offensive against the 
Maghreb. Within the next sixty years, they seized ports such as Arzila, 
El-Ksar-es-Seghir and Tangier, and fortified them. By the second half 
of the 15th century, the Portuguese controlled the Atlantic coast of 
Morocco and used its economic and strategic advantages to prepare for 
further navigations which eventually carried their ships round the Cape 
of Good Hope in 1495. After reaching the Indian Ocean, the Portuguese 
sought with some success to replace Arabs as the merchants who tied 
East Africa to India and the rest of Asia. the 17th and 18th centuries, the 
Portuguese carried most of the East African ivory which was marketed 
in India; while Indian cloth and beads were sold in East and West 
Africa by the Portuguese, Dutch, English and French. The same applied 
to cowry shells from the East Indies. Therefore, by control of the seas, 
Europe took the first steps towards transforming the several parts of 
Africa and Asia into economic satellites.
When the Portuguese and the Spanish were still in command of a major 
sector of world trade in the first half of the seventeenth century, they 
engaged in buying cotton cloth in India to exchange for slaves in Africa 
to mine gold in Central and South America. Part of the gold in the 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch03.htm (3 of 28) [8/22/05 11:05:43 AM]


--- PAGE 119 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Americas would then be used to purchase spices and silks from the Far 
East. The concept of metropole and dependency automatically came 
into existence when parts of Africa were caught up in the web of 
international commerce. On the one hand, there were the European 
countries who decided on the role to be played by the African economy; 
and on the other hand, Africa formed an extension to the European 
capitalist market. As far as foreign trade was concerned, Africa was 
dependent on what Europeans were prepared to buy and sell.
Europe exported to Africa goods which were already being produced 
and used in Europe itself — Dutch linen, Spanish iron, English pewter, 
Portuguese wines, French brandy, Venetian glass beads, German 
muskets, etc. Europeans were also able to unload on the African 
continent goods which had become unsaleable in Europe. Thus, items 
like old sheets, cast-off uniforms, technologically outdated firearms, 
and lots of odds and ends found guaranteed markets in Africa. Africans 
slowly became aware of the possibility of demanding and obtaining 
better imported goods, and pressure was exerted on the captains of 
European ships; but the overall range of trade goods which left the 
European ports of Hamburg, Copenhagen and Liverpool was 
determined almost exclusively by the pattern of production and 
consumption within Europe.
From the beginning, Europe assumed the power to make decisions 
within the international trading system. An excellent illustration of that 
is the fact that the so-called international law which governed the 
conduct of nations on the high seas was nothing else but European law. 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch03.htm (4 of 28) [8/22/05 11:05:43 AM]


--- PAGE 120 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Africans did not participate in its making, and in many instances 
African people were simply the victims, for the law recognised them 
only as transportable merchandise. If the African slave was thrown 
overboard at sea, the only legal problem that arose was whether or not 
the slave-ship could claim compensation from the insurers! Above all, 
European decision-making power was exercised in selecting what 
Africa should export — in accordance with European. needs.
The ships of the Portuguese gave the search for gold the highest 
priority, partly on the basis of well-known information that West 
African gold reached Europe across the Sahara and partly on the basis 
of guesswork. The Portuguese were successful in obtaining gold in 
parts of West Africa and in eastern Central Africa; and it was the ‘Gold 
Coast’ which attracted the greatest attention from Europeans in the 16th 
and 17th centuries. The number of forts built there was proof to that 
effect, and the nations involved included the Scandinavians and the 
Prussians (Germans) apart from other colonial stalwarts like the British, 
Dutch and Portuguese.
Europeans were anxious to acquire gold in Africa because there was a 
pressing need for gold coin within the growing capitalist money 
economy. Since gold was limited to very small areas of Africa as far as 
Europeans were then aware, the principal export was human beings. 
Only in a very few places at given times was the export of another 
commodity of equal or greater importance. For instance, in the Senegal 
there was gum, in Sierra Leone camwood, and in Mozambique ivory. 
However, even after taking those things into account, one can say that 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch03.htm (5 of 28) [8/22/05 11:05:43 AM]


--- PAGE 121 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Europe allocated to Africa the role of supplier of human captives to be 
used as slaves in various parts of the world.
When Europeans reached the Americas, they recognised its enormous 
potential in gold and silver and tropical produce. But that potential 
could not be made a reality without adequate labour supplies. The 
indigenous Indian population could not withstand new European 
diseases such as small-pox, nor could they bear the organised toil of 
slave plantations and slave mines, having barely emerged from the 
hunting stage. That is why in islands like Cuba and Hispaniola, the 
local Indian population was virtually wiped out by the white invaders. 
At the same time, Europe itself had a very small population and could 
not afford to release the labour required to tap the wealth of the 
Americas. Therefore, they turned to the nearest continent, Africa, which 
incidentally had a population accustomed to settled agriculture and 
disciplined labour in many spheres. Those were the objective conditions 
lying behind the start of the European slave trade, and those are the 
reasons why the capitalist class in Europe used their control of 
international trade to ensure that Africa specialised in exporting 
captives.
Obviously, if Europe could tell Africans what to export that was an 
expression of European power. However, it would be a mistake to 
believe that it was an overwhelming military power. Europeans found it 
impossible to conquer Africans during the early centuries of trade, 
except in isolated spots on the coast. European power resided in their 
system of production which was at a somewhat higher level than 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch03.htm (6 of 28) [8/22/05 11:05:43 AM]


--- PAGE 122 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Africa’s at that time. European society was leaving feudalism and was 
moving towards capitalism; African society was then entering a phase 
comparable to feudalism.
The fact that Europe was the first part of the world to move from 
feudalism towards capitalism gave Europeans a headstart over humanity 
elsewhere in the scientific understanding of the universe, the making of 
tools and the efficient organisation of labour. European technical 
superiority did not apply to all aspects of production, but the advantage 
which they possessed in a few key areas proved decisive. For example, 
African canoes on the river Nile and the Senegal coast were of a high 
standard, but the relevant sphere of operations was the ocean, where 
European ships could take command. West Africans had developed 
metal casting to a fine artistic perfection in many parts of Nigeria, but 
when it came to the meeting with Europe beautiful bronzes were far less 
relevant than the crudest cannon. African wooden utensils were 
sometimes works of great beauty, but Europe produced pots and pans 
that had many practical advantages. Literacy, organisational experience, 
and the capacity to produce on an ever-expanding scale also counted in 
the European favour.
European manufactures in the early years of trade with Africa were 
often of poor quality, but they were of new varieties and were found 
attractive. Estaban Montejo, an African who ran away from a Cuban 
slave plantation in the 19th century, recalled that his people were 
enticed into slavery by the colour red. He said:
It was the scarlet which did for the Africans; both the kings and the rest 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch03.htm (7 of 28) [8/22/05 11:05:43 AM]


--- PAGE 123 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
surrendered without a struggle. When the kings saw that the whites were 
taking out these scarlet handkerchiefs as if they were waving, they told the 
blacks, ‘Go on then, go and get a scarlet handkerchief’, and the blacks 
were so excited 6y the scarlet they ran down lo the ships like sheep and 
there they were captured.
That version by one of the victims of slavery is very poetic. What it 
means is that some African rulers found European goods sufficiently 
desirable to hand over captives which they had taken in warfare. Soon, 
war began to be fought between one community and another for the 
sole purpose of getting prisoners for sale to Europeans, and even inside 
a given community a ruler might be tempted to exploit his own subjects 
and capture them for sale. A chain reaction was started by European 
demand for slaves (and only slaves) and by their offer of consumer 
goods — this process being connected with divisions within African 
society.
It is often said for the colonial period that vertical political divisions in 
Africa made conquest easy. This is even more true of the way that 
Africa succumbed to the slave trade. National unification was a product 
of mature feudalism and of capitalism. Inside of Europe, there were far 
fewer political divisions than in Africa where communalism meant 
political fragmentation with the family as the nucleus, and there were 
only a few states that had real territorial solidity. Furthermore, when 
one European nation challenged another to obtain captives from an 
African ruler, Europe benefitted from whichever of the two nations won 
the conflict. Any European trader could arrive on the coast of West 
Africa and exploit the political differences which he found there. For 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch03.htm (8 of 28) [8/22/05 11:05:43 AM]


--- PAGE 124 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
example, in the small territory that the Portuguese later claimed as 
Guinea-Bissau, there were more than a dozen ethnic groups. It was so 
easy to set one off against another that Europeans called it a ‘slave 
trader’s paradise’.
Although class divisions were not pronounced in African society, they 
too contributed to the case with which Europe imposed itself 
commercially on large parts of the African continent. The rulers had a 
certain status and authority, and when bamboozled by European goods 
they began to use that position to raid outside their societies as well as 
to exploit a internally by victimizing some of their own subjects. In the 
simplest of societies where there were no kings, it proved impossible 
for Europeans to strike up the alliance which was necessary to carry on 
a trade in captives on the coast. In those societies with ruling groups, 
the association with Europeans was easily established; and afterwards 
Europe hardened the existing internal class divisions and created new 
ones.
In effect, particular aspects of African society became weaknesses when 
Europeans arrived as representatives of a different phase of 
development. And yet the subjugation of the African economy through 
slave trade was a slow process at the outset, and in some instances 
African opposition or disinterest had to be overcome. In the Congo, the 
slave trade did not get under way without grave doubts and opposition 
from the king of the state of Kongo at the beginning of the 16th century. 
He asked for masons, priests, clerks, physicians, etc.; but instead he was 
overwhelmed by slave ships sent from Portugal, and a vicious trade was 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch03.htm (9 of 28) [8/22/05 11:05:43 AM]


--- PAGE 125 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
opened up by playing off one part of the Kongo Kingdom against 
another. The king of the Kongo had conceived of possibilities of 
mutually beneficial interchange between his people and the European 
state, but the latter forced him to specialise in the export of human 
cargo. It is also interesting to note that while the Oba (king) of Benin 
was willing to sell a few female captives, it took a great deal of 
persuasion and pressure from Europeans to get him to sell male African 
prisoners of war, who would otherwise have been brought into the ranks 
of Benin society.
Once trade in slaves had been started in any given part of Africa, it soon 
became clear that it was beyond the capacity of any single African state 
to change the situation. In Angola, the Portuguese employed an unusual 
number of their own troops and tried to seize political power from 
Africans. The Angolan state of Matamba on the river Kwango was 
founded around 1630 as a direct reaction against the Portuguese. With 
Queen Nzinga at its head, Matamba tried to co-ordinate resistance 
against the Portuguese in Angola. However, Portugal gained the upper 
hand in 1648, and this left Matamba isolated. Matamba could not 
forever stand aside. So long as it opposed trade with the Portuguese, it 
was an object of hostility from neighbouring African states which had 
compromised with Europeans and slave trading. So in 1656 queen 
Nzinga resumed business with the Portuguese — a major concession to 
the decision-making role of Europeans within the Angolan economy.
Another example of African resistance during the course of the slave 
trade comes from the Baga people in what is now the Republic of 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch03.htm (10 of 28) [8/22/05 11:05:43 AM]


--- PAGE 126 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Guinea. The Baga lived in small states, and about 1720 one of their 
leaders (Tomba by name) aimed at securing an alliance to stop the slave 
traffic. He was defeated by local European resident-traders, mulattoes 
and other slave-trading Africans. It is not difficult to understand why 
Europeans should have taken immediate steps to see that Tomba and his 
Baga followers did not opt out of the role allocated to them by Europe. 
A parallel which presents itself is the manner in which Europeans got 
together to wage the ‘Opium War’ against China in the 19th century to 
ensure that Western capitalists would make profit while the Chinese 
were turned into dope addicts.
Of course, it is only as a last resort that the capitalist metropoles need to 
use armed force to ensure the pursuit of favourable policies in the 
dependent areas. Normally, economic weapons are sufficient. In the 
1720s, Dahomey opposed European slave traders, and was deprived of 
European imports — some of which had become necessary by that 
time. Agaja Trudo, Dahomey’s greatest king, appreciated that European 
demand for slaves and the pursuit of slaving in and around Dahomey 
was in conflict with Dahomey’s development. Between 1724 and 1726, 
he looted and burnt European forts and slave camps; and he reduced the 
trade from the ‘Slave Coast’ to a mere trickle, by blocking the paths 
leading to sources of supply in the interior. European salve dealers were 
very bitter, and they tried to sponsor some African collaborators against 
Agaja Trudo. They failed to unseat him or to crush the Dahomian state, 
but in turn Agaja failed to persuade them to develop new lines of 
economic activity, such as local plantation agriculture; and, being 
anxious to acquire firearms and cowries through the Europeans, he had 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch03.htm (11 of 28) [8/22/05 11:05:43 AM]


--- PAGE 127 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
to agree to the resumption of slave trading in 1730.
After 1730, Dahomian slaving was placed under royal control and was 
much more restricted than previously. Yet, the failure of this 
determined effort demonstrated that a single African state at that time 
could not emancipate itself from European control. The small size of 
African states and the numerous political divisions made it so much 
easier for Europe to make the decisions as to Africa’s role in world 
production and trade.
Many guilty consciences have been created by the slave trade. 
Europeans know that they carried on the slave trade, and Africans are 
aware that the trade would have been impossible if certain Africans did 
not co-operate with the slave ships. To case their guilty conscience, 
Europeans try to throw the major responsibility for the slave trade on to 
the Africans. One European author of a book on the slave trade 
(appropriately entitled Sins of Our Fathers) explained how many other 
white people urged him to state that the trade was the responsibility of 
African chiefs, and that Europeans merely turned up to buy the captives 
— as though without European demand there would have been captives 
sitting on the beach by the millions! Issues such as those are not the 
principal concern of this study, but they can be correctly approached 
only after understanding that Europe became the centre of a world-wide 
system and that it was European capitalism which set slavery and the 
Atlantic slave trade in motion.
The trade in human beings from Africa was a response to external 
factors. At first, the labour was needed in Portugal, Spain and in 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch03.htm (12 of 28) [8/22/05 11:05:43 AM]


--- PAGE 128 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Atlantic islands such as Sâo Tome, Cape Verde and the Canaries; then 
came the period when the Greater Antilles and the Spanish American 
mainland needed replacements for the Indians who were victims of 
genocide ; and then the demands of Caribbean and mainland plantation 
societies had to be met. The records show direct connections between 
levels of exports from Africa and European demand for slave labour in 
some part of the American plantation economy. When the Dutch took 
Pernambuco in Brazil in 1634, the Director of the Dutch West Indian 
Company immediately informed their agents on the ‘Gold Coast’ that 
they were to take the necessary steps to pursue the trade in slaves on the 
adjacent coast east of the Volta — thus creating for that area the 
infamous name of the ‘Slave Coast.’ When the British West Indian 
islands took to growing sugar cane, the Gambia was one of the first 
places to respond. Examples of this kind of external control can be 
instanced right up to the end of the trade, and this embraces Eastern 
Africa also, since European markets in the Indian Ocean islands became 
important in the 18th and 19th centuries, and since demand in places 
like Brazil caused Mozambicans to be shipped round the Cape of Good 
Hope.
3. 2 Africa’s contribution to the economy and beliefs of early 
capitalist Europe
The kinds of benefits which Europe derived from its control of world 
commerce are fairly well known, although it is curious that the 
recognition of Africa’s major contribution to European development is 
usually made in works devoted specifically to that subject; while 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch03.htm (13 of 28) [8/22/05 11:05:43 AM]


--- PAGE 129 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
European scholars of Europe often treat the European economy as if it 
were entirely independent. European economists of the 19th century 
certainly had no illusions about the inter-connections between their 
national economies and the world at large. J.S. Mill, as spokesman for 
British capitalism, said that as .far as England was concerned, ‘the trade 
of the West Indies is hardly to be considered as external trade, but more 
resembles the traffic between town and country.’ By the phrase ‘trade 
of the West Indies’ Mill meant the commerce between Africa, England 
and the West Indies, because without African labour the West Indies 
were valueless. Karl Marx also commented on the way that European 
capitalists tied Africa, the West Indies and Latin America into the 
capitalist system; and (being the most bitter critic of capitalism) Marx 
went on to point out that what was good for Europeans was obtained at 
the expense of untold suffering by Africans and American Indians. 
Marx noted that ‘the discovery of gold and silver in America, the 
extirpation, enslavement and entombment in mines of the aboriginal 
population, the turning of Africa into a commercial warren for the 
hunting of black skins signalised the rosy dawn of the era of capitalist 
production’.
Some attempts have been made to try and quantify the :actual monetary 
profits made by Europeans from engaging rn the slave trade. The actual 
dimensions are not easy to fix, but the profits were fabulous. John 
Hawkins made three trips to West Africa in the 1560s, and stole 
Africans whom he sold to the Spanish in America. On returning to 
England after the first trip, his profit was so handsome that Queen 
Elizabeth I became interested in directly participating in his next 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch03.htm (14 of 28) [8/22/05 11:05:43 AM]


--- PAGE 130 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
venture ; and she provided for that purpose a ship named the Jesus. 
Hawkins left with the Jesus to steal some more Africans, and he 
returned to England with such dividends that Queen Elizabeth made 
him a knight. Hawkins chose as his coat of arms the representation of 
an African in chains.
Of course, there were inevitably voyages that failed, slave ships that 
were lost at sea, etc. Sometimes trade in Africa did well, while at other 
times it was the profit in the Americas that was really substantial. When 
all the ups and downs are ironed out, the level of profit had to be 
enough to justify continued participation in that particular form of trade 
for centuries. A few bourgeois scholars have tried to suggest that the 
trade in slaves did not have worthwhile monetary returns. They would 
have us believe that the same entrepreneurs whom they praise in other 
contexts as the heroes of capitalist development were so dumb with 
regard to slavery and slave trade, that for centuries they absorbed 
themselves in a non-profit venture! This kind of argument is worth 
noting more as an example of the distortions of which white bourgeois 
scholarship is capable than as something requiring serious 
consideration. Besides, quite apart from capital accumulation, Europe’s 
trade with Africa gave numerous stimuli to Europe’s growth.
Central and South American gold and silver — mined by Africans — 
played a crucial role in meeting the need for coin in the expanding 
capitalist money economy of Western Europe, while African gold was 
also significant in that respect. African gold helped the Portuguese to 
finance further navigations around the Cape of Good Hope and into 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch03.htm (15 of 28) [8/22/05 11:05:43 AM]


--- PAGE 131 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Asia ever since the 15th century. African gold was also the main source 
for the mintage of Dutch gold coin in the 17th century ; helping 
Amsterdam to become the financial capital of Europe in that period; 
and further it was no coincidence that when the English struck a new 
gold coin in 1663 they called it the ‘guinea’. The Encyclopaedia 
Britannica explains that the guinea was ‘a gold coin at one time current 
in the United Kingdom. It was first coined in 1663, in the reign of 
Charles II, from gold imported from the Guinea Coast of West Africa 
by a company of merchants trading under charter from the British 
crown — hence the name.’
Throughout the 17th and 18th centuries, and for most o the 19th 
century, the exploitation of Africa and African labour continued to be a 
source for the accumulation o capital to be re-invested in Western 
Europe. The African contribution to European capitalist growth 
extended over such vital sectors as shipping, insurance, the formation 
companies, capitalist agriculture, technology and the manufacture of 
machinery. The effects were so wide-ranging that many are seldom 
brought to the notice of the reading public. For instance, the French St. 
Malo fishing industry was revived by the opening up of markets in the 
French slave plantations; while the Portuguese in Europe depended 
heavily on dyes like indigo, camwood, Brazil wood and cochineal 
brought from Africa and the Americas. Gum from Africa also played a 
part in the textile industry, which is acknowledged as having been one 
of the most powerful engines growth within the European economy. 
Then there was the export of ivory from Africa, enriching many 
merchants in London’s Mincing Lane, and providing the raw material 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch03.htm (16 of 28) [8/22/05 11:05:43 AM]


--- PAGE 132 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
for industries in England, France, Germany, Switzerland, and North 
America — producing items ranging from knife handles piano keys.
Africa’s being drawn into the orbit of Western Europe speed up the 
latter’s technological development. For example, the evolution of 
European shipbuilding from the 16th century to the 19th century was a 
logical consequence of their monopoly of sea commerce in that period. 
During that time, the North Africans were bottled up in the 
Mediterranean. and although it was from them that Europeans initially 
borrowed a great deal of nautical instrumentation, North Africans made 
no further worthwhile advances. Where the original European 
advantage was not sufficient to assure supremacy, they deliberately 
undermined other people’s efforts. The Indian navy, for instance, 
suffered from the rigid enforcement of the English Navigation Laws. 
Yet, the expenses involved in building new and better European ships 
were met from the profits of overseas trade with India, Africa, etc. The 
Dutch were pioneers in improving upon the which took the Spanish and 
Portuguese out across the Atlantic, and the succession of Dutch trading 
companies operating in Asia, Africa and America were the ones 
responsible for experimentation. By the 18th century, the British were 
using Dutch know-how as a basis for surpassing the Dutch themselves, 
and the Atlantic was their laboratory. It used to be said that the slave 
trade was a training ground for British seamen. It is probably more 
significant to note that the Atlantic trade was the stimulator of 
consistent advances in naval technology.
The most spectacular feature in Europe which was connected with 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch03.htm (17 of 28) [8/22/05 11:05:43 AM]


--- PAGE 133 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
African trade was the rise of sea-port towns — - notably Bristol, 
Liverpool, Nantes, Bordeaux and Seville. Directly or indirectly 
connected to those ports, there often emerged the manufacturing centres 
which gave rise to the ‘industrial revolution’. In England, it was the 
county of Lancashire which was the first centre of the industrial 
revolution and the economic advance in Lancashire depended first on 
the growth of the port of Liverpool through slave trading.
The connections between slavery and capitalism in the growth of 
England is adequately documented by Eric Williams in his well-known 
book Capitalism and Slavery. Williams gives a clear picture of the 
numerous benefits which England derived from trading and exploiting 
slaves, and he identified by name several of the personalities and 
capitalist firms who were the beneficiaries. Outstanding examples are 
provided in the persons of David and Alexander Barclay, who were 
engaging in slave trade in 1756 and who later used the loot to set up 
Barclays’ Bank. There was a similar progression in the case of Lloyds 
— from being a small London coffee house to being one of the world’s 
largest banking and insurance houses, after dipping into profits from 
slave trade and slavery. Then there was James Watt, expressing eternal 
gratitude to the West Indian slave owners who directly financed his 
famous steam engine, and took it from the drawing-board to the factory.
A similar picture would emerge from any detailed study of French 
capitalism and slavery, given the fact that during the 18th century the 
West Indies accounted for 20% of France’s external trade-much more 
than the whole of Africa in the present century. Of course, benefits were 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch03.htm (18 of 28) [8/22/05 11:05:43 AM]


--- PAGE 134 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
not always directly proportionate to the amount of involvement of a 
given European state in the Atlantic trade. The enormous profits of 
Portuguese overseas enterprise passed rapidly out of the Portuguese 
economy into the hands of the more developed Western European 
capitalist nations who supplied Portugal with capital, ships and trade 
goods. Germany was included in this category, along with England, 
Holland and France.
Commerce deriving from Africa helped a great deal to strengthen trans-
national links within the Western European economy, bearing in mind 
that American produce was the consequence of African labour. 
Brazilian dyewoods, for example, were re-exported from Portugal into 
the Mediterranean, the North Sea and the Baltic, and passed into the 
continental cloth industry of the 17th century. Sugar from the Caribbean 
was re-exported from England and France to other parts of Europe to 
such an extent that Hamburg in Germany was the biggest sugar-refining 
centre in Europe in the first half of the 18th century. Germany supplied 
manufactures to Scandinavia, Holland, England, France and Portugal 
for resale in Africa. England, France and Holland found it necessary to 
exchange various classes of goods the better to deal with Africans for 
gold, slaves and ivory. The financiers and merchants of Genoa were the 
powers behind the markets of Lisbon and Seville; while Dutch bankers 
played a similar role with respect to Scandinavia and England. 
Western Europe was that part of Europe in which by the 15th century 
the trend was most visible that feudalism was giving way to 
capitalism.* [* In Eastern Europe, feudalism was still strong in the 19th 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch03.htm (19 of 28) [8/22/05 11:05:43 AM]


--- PAGE 135 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
century.]The peasants were being driven off the land in England, and 
agriculture was becoming a capitalist operation. It was also becoming 
technologically more advanced — producing food and fibres to support 
a larger population and to provide a more effective basis for the woollen 
and linen industries in particular. The technological base of industry as 
well as its social and economic organisation, was being transformed. 
African trade speeded up several aspects, including the integration of 
Western Europe, as noted above. That is why the African connection 
contributed not merely to economic growth (which relates to 
quantitative dimensions) but also to real development in the sense of 
increased capacity for further growth and independence.
In speaking of the European slave trade, mention must be made of the 
U.S.A., not only because its dominant population was European, but 
also because Europe transferred its capitalist institutions more 
completely to North America than to any other part of the globe, and 
established a powerful form of capitalism — after eliminating the 
indigenous inhabitants and exploiting the labour of millions of 
Africans: Like other parts of the New World, the American colonies of 
the British crown were used as means of accumulating primary capital 
for re-export to Europe. But the Northern colonies also had direct 
access to benefits from slavery in the American South and in the British 
and French West Indies. As in Europe, the profits made from slavery 
and slave trade went firstly to commercial ports and industrial areas, 
which meant mainly the north-eastern sea-board district known as New 
England and the state of New York. The Pan-Africanist, W. E. B. Du 
Bois, in a study of the American slave trade, quoted a report of 1862 as 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch03.htm (20 of 28) [8/22/05 11:05:43 AM]


--- PAGE 136 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
follows:
the number of persons engaged in the slave trade and the amount of capital 
embarked in it exceed our powers of calculation. The city of New York 
has been until of late (1862) the principal port of the world for this 
infamous commerce; although the cities of Portland and Boston me only 
second to her in that distribution.
American economic development up to mid-19th century rested 
squarely on foreign commerce, of which slavery was a pivot. In the 
1830s, slave-grown cotton accounted for about half the value of all 
exports from the United States of America. Furthermore, in the case of 
the American colonies of the 18th century, it can again be observed that 
Africa contributed in a variety of ways — one thing leading to another. 
For instance, in New England, trade with Africa, Europe and the West 
Indies in slaves and slave-grown products supplied cargo for their 
merchant marine, stimulated the growth of their ship-building industry, 
built up their towns and their cities, and enabled them to utilise their 
forests, fisheries and soil more effectively. Finally, it was the carrying 
trade between the West Indian slave colonies and Europe which lay 
behind the emancipation of the American colonies from British rule, 
and it was no accident that the struggle for American independence 
started in the leading New England town of Boston. In the 19th century, 
the connection with Africa continued to play an indirect role in 
American political growth. In the first place, profits from the slave 
activities went into the coffers of political parties, and even more 
important the African stimulation and black labour played a vital role in 
extending European control over the present territory of the U.S.A. — 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch03.htm (21 of 28) [8/22/05 11:05:43 AM]


--- PAGE 137 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
notably in the South, but including also the so-called ‘Wild West’ 
where black cowboys were active.
Slavery is useful for early accumulation of capital, but it is too rigid for 
industrial development. Slaves had to be given crude non-breakable 
tools which held back the capitalist development of agriculture and 
industry. That explains the fact that the northern portions of the U.S.A. 
gained far more industrial benefits from slavery than the South which 
actually had slave institutions on its soil; and ultimately the stage was 
reached during the American Civil War when the Northern capitalists 
fought to end slavery within the boundaries of the U.S.A., so that the 
country as a whole could advance to a higher level of capitalism.
In effect, one can say that within the U.S.A. the slave relations in the 
South had by the second half of the 19th century come into conflict 
with the further expansion of the productive base inside the U.S.A. as a 
whole, and a violent clash ensued before the capitalist relations of 
legally free labour became generalised. Europe maintained slavery in 
places that were physically remote from European society; and 
therefore inside Europe itself, capitalist relations were elaborated 
without being adversely affected by slavery in the Americas. However, 
even in Europe there came a moment when the leading capitalist states 
found that the trade in :slaves and the use of slave labour in the 
Americas was no longer in the interest of their further development. 
Britain made this decision early in the 19th century, to be followed later 
by France.
Since capitalism, like any other mode of production, is a total system 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch03.htm (22 of 28) [8/22/05 11:05:43 AM]


--- PAGE 138 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
which involves an ideological aspect, it is also necessary to focus on the 
effects of the ties with Africa on the development of ideas within the 
superstructure of European capitalist society. In that sphere, the most 
striking feature is undoubtedly the rise of racism as a widespread and 
deeply rooted element in European thought. The role of slavery in 
promoting racist prejudice and ideology has been carefully studied in 
certain situations, especially in the U.S.A. The simple fact is that no 
people can enslave another for centuries without coming out with a 
notion of superiority, and when the colour and other physical traits of 
those peoples were quite different it was inevitable that the prejudice 
should take a racist form. Within Africa itself, the same can be said for 
the situation in the Cape Province of South Africa where white men 
were establishing military and social superiority over non-whites ever 
since 1650.
It would be much too sweeping a statement to say that all racial and 
colour prejudice in Europe derived from the enslavement of Africans 
and the exploitation of non-white peoples in the early centuries of 
international trade. There was also anti-Semitism at an even earlier date 
inside Europe and there is always an element of suspicion and 
incomprehension when peoples of different cultures come together. 
However, it can be affirmed without reservations that the white racism 
which came to pervade the world was an integral part of the capitalist 
mode of production. Nor was it merely a question of how the individual 
white person treated a black person. The racism of Europe was a set of 
generalisations and assumptions, which had no scientific basis, but were 
rationalised in every sphere from theology to biology.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch03.htm (23 of 28) [8/22/05 11:05:43 AM]


--- PAGE 139 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Occasionally, it is mistakenly held that Europeans enslaved Africans for 
racist reasons. European planters and miners enslaved Africans for 
economic reasons, so that their labour power could be exploited. 
Indeed, it would have been impossible to open up the New World and 
to use it as a constant generator of wealth, had it not been for African 
labour. There were no other alternatives: the American (Indian) 
population was virtually wiped out and Europe’s population was too 
small for settlement overseas at that time. Then, having become utterly 
dependent on African labour, Europeans at home and abroad found it 
necessary to rationalise that exploitation in racist terms as well. 
Oppression follows logically from exploitation, so as to guarantee the 
latter. Oppression of African people on purely racial grounds 
accompanied, strengthened and became indistinguishable from 
oppression for economic reasons.
C. L. R. James, noted Pan-Africanist and Marxist, once remarked that
The race question is subsidiary to the class question in politics, and to 
think of imperialism in terms of race is disastrous. But lo neglect the racial 
factor as merely incidental is an error only less grave than lo make it 
fundamental.
It can further be argued that by the 19th century white racism had 
become so institutionalised in the capitalist world (and notably in the 
U.S.A.) that it sometimes ranked above the maximisation of profit as a 
motive for oppressing black people.
In the short run, European racism seemed to have done Europeans no 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch03.htm (24 of 28) [8/22/05 11:05:43 AM]


--- PAGE 140 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
harm, and they used those erroneous ideas to justify their further 
domination of non-European peoples in the colonial epoch. But the 
international proliferation of bigoted and unscientific racist ideas was 
bound to have its negative consequences in the long run. When 
Europeans put millions of their brothers (Jews) into ovens under the 
Nazis, the chickens were coming home to roost. Such behaviour inside 
of ‘democratic’ Europe was not as strange as it is sometimes made out 
to be. There was always a contradiction between the elaboration of 
democratic ideas inside Europe and the elaboration of authoritarian and 
thuggish practices by Europeans with respect to Africans. When the 
French Revolution was made in the name of ‘Liberty, Equality and 
Fraternity’, it did not extend to black Africans who were enslaved by 
France in the West Indies and the Indian Ocean. Indeed, France fought 
against the efforts of those people to emancipate themselves, and the 
leaders of their bourgeois revolution said plainly that they did not make 
it on behalf of black humanity.
It is not even true to say that capitalism developed democracy at home 
in Europe and not abroad. At home, it was responsible for a talk or 
certain rhetoric of freedom but it was never extended from the 
bourgeoisie to the oppressed workers; and the treatment of Africans 
must surely have made such hypocrisy a habit of European life, 
especially within the ruling class. How else can one explain the fact that 
the Christian church participated fully in the maintenance of slavery and 
still talked about saving souls! The hypocrisy reached its highest levels 
inside the U.S.A. The first martyr in the American national war of 
liberation against the British colonialists in the 18th century was an 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch03.htm (25 of 28) [8/22/05 11:05:43 AM]


--- PAGE 141 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
African descendant, Crispus Attucks; and both slave and free Africans 
played a key role in Washington’s armies. And yet, the American 
Constitution with its famous preamble that ‘all men are created equal’ 
sanctioned the continued enslavement of Africans. In recent times, it 
has become an object of concern to some liberals that the U.S.A. is 
capable of war crimes of the order of My Lai in Vietnam. But the fact 
of the matter is that the My Lais began with the enslavement of 
Africans and American Indians. Racism, violence and brutality were the 
concomitants of the capitalist system when it extended itself abroad in 
the early centuries of international trade.
Brief Guide to Reading
The subject of Africa’s contribution to European development reveals 
several of the factors which limit a writer’s representation of reality. 
Language and nationality, for instance, are effective barriers to 
communication. Works in English seldom take account of the effect 
brought about in France, Holland or Portugal by participation in slaving 
and other forms of commerce which exploited Africa in the pre-colonial 
period. The ideological gulf is responsible for the fact that most 
bourgeois scholars write about phenomena such as the Industrial 
Revolution in England without once mentioning the European slave 
trade as a factor in primary accumulation of capital. Marx himself had 
laid great emphasis on sources of overseas capital accumulation. But 
Marxists (as prominent as Maurice Dobb and E. J. Hobsbawm) for 
many years concentrated on examining the evolution of capitalism out 
of feudalism inside Europe, with only marginal reference to the massive 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch03.htm (26 of 28) [8/22/05 11:05:43 AM]


--- PAGE 142 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
exploitation of Africans, Asians and American Indians.
Eric Williams, Capitalism and Slavery,
Oliver Cox, Capitalism as a System.
Cox, an African American, makes the basic point that capitalism has 
from very early times been an international system. Eric Williams, a 
West Indian, was very precise and very detailed in illustrating the 
connection between British capitalism and the enslavement of Africans.
W. E. B. du Bois, The Suppression of the Atlantic Slave Trade lo the 
U.S.A.
Richard Pares, Yankees and Creoles: the trade between North America.
Both of these provide data on the contribution of African labour to the 
development of capitalism in the U.S.A. in the epoch of slavery.
Leo Huberman, Man’s Worldly Goods: The Story of the Wealth of 
Nations.
F. Clairemonte, Economic Liberalism and Underdevelopment.
Huberman’s book is an excellent overall treatment of the development 
of capitalism out of feudalism in Europe. It includes a section in which 
the role of slavery is highlighted. Clairemonte’s study accords 
recognition to the role played by the sub-continent of India in building 
Europe.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch03.htm (27 of 28) [8/22/05 11:05:43 AM]


--- PAGE 143 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
P. Curtin, The Image of Africa.
Winthrop Jordan, White Over Black: American attitudes towards the 
Negro.
These two texts are relevant to the question of the rise of white racism, 
although neither of the two make sufficiently explicit the connection 
between racism and capitalism
 
Table of Contents 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch03.htm (28 of 28) [8/22/05 11:05:43 AM]


--- PAGE 144 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Chapter Four. Europe and the Roots 
of African Underdevelopment — to 
1885
‘The relation between the degree of destitution of peoples of Africa and 
the length and nature of the exploitation they had to endure is evident. 
Africa remains marked by the crimes of the slave-traders: up to now, her 
potentialities are restricted by under-population.’
Ahmed Sekou Toure, 
Republic of Guinea, 1962
4.1 The European Slave Trade as a Basic Factor in African 
Underdevelopment
To discuss trade between Africans and Europeans in the four centuries 
before colonial rule is virtually to discuss slave trade. Strictly speaking, 
the African only became a slave when he reached a society where he 
worked as a slave. Before that, he was first a free man and then a 
captive. Nevertheless, it is acceptable to talk about the trade in slaves to 
refer to the shipment of captives from Africa to various other parts of 
the world where they were to live and work as the property of 
Europeans. The title of this section is deliberately chosen to call 
attention to the fact that the shipments were all by Europeans to markets 
controlled by Europeans, and this was in the interest of European 
capitalism and nothing else. In East Africa and the Sudan, many 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (1 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:22 AM]


--- PAGE 145 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Africans were taken by Arabs and were sold to Arab buyers. This is 
known (in European books) as the ‘Arab Slave Trade’. Therefore, let it 
be clear that when Europeans shipped Africans to European buyers it 
was the ‘European Slave trade’ from Africa.
Undoubtedly, with few exceptions such as Hawkins, European buyers 
purchased African captives on the coasts of Africa and the transaction 
between themselves and Africans was a form of trade. It is also true that 
very often a captive was sold and resold as he made his way from the 
interior to the port of embarkation — and that too was form of trade. 
However, on the whole, the process by which captives were obtained on 
African soil was not trade at all. It was through warfare, trickery, 
banditry and kidnapping. When one tries to measure the effect of 
European slave trading on the African continent, it is very essential to 
realise that one is measuring the effect of social violence rather than 
trade in any normal sense of the word.
Many things remain uncertain about the slave trade and its 
consequences for Africa, but the general picture of destructiveness is 
clear, and that destructiveness can be shown to be the logical 
consequence of the manner of recruitment of captives in Africa. One of 
the uncertainties concerns the basic question of how many Africans 
were imported. This has long been an object of speculation, with 
estimates ranging from a few millions to over one hundred million. A 
recent study has suggested a figure of about ten million Africans landed 
alive in the Americas, the Atlantic islands and Europe. Because it is a 
low figure, it is already being used by European scholars who are 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (2 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:22 AM]


--- PAGE 146 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
apologists for the capitalist system and its long record of brutality in 
Europe and abroad. In order to white-wash the European slave trade, 
they find it convenient to start by minimising the numbers concerned. 
The truth is that any figure of Africans imported into the Americas 
which is narrowly based on the surviving records is bound to be low, 
because there were so many people at the time who had a vested 
interest in smuggling slaves (and withholding data). Nevertheless, if the 
low figure of ten million was accepted as a basis for evaluating the 
impact of slaving on Africa as a whole, the conclusions that could 
legitimately be drawn would confound those who attempt to make light 
of the experience of the rape of Africans from 1445 to 1870.
On any basic figure of Africans landed alive in the Americas, one 
would have to make several extensions — starting with a calculation to 
cover mortality in transhipment. The Atlantic crossing or ‘Middle 
Passage’, as it was called by European slavers, was notorious for the 
number of deaths incurred, averaging in the vicinity of 15% to 20%. 
There were also numerous deaths in Africa between time of capture and 
time of embarkation, especially in cases where captives had to travel 
hundreds of miles to the coast. Most important of all (given that warfare 
was the principal means of obtaining captives) it is necessary to make 
some estimate as to the number of people killed and injured so as to 
extract the millions who were taken alive and sound. The resultant 
figure would be many times the millions landed alive outside of Africa, 
and it is that figure which represents the number of Africans directly 
removed from the population and labour force of Africa because of the 
establishment of slave production by Europeans.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (3 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:22 AM]


--- PAGE 147 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
The massive loss to the African labour force was made more critical 
because it was composed of able-bodied young men and young women. 
Slave buyers preferred their victims between the ages of 15 and 35, and 
preferably in the early twenties; the sex ratio being about two men to 
one woman. Europeans often accepted younger African children, but 
rarely any older person. They shipped the most healthy wherever 
possible, taking the trouble to get those who had already survived an 
attack of smallpox, and who were therefore immune from further 
attacks of that disease, which was then one of the world’s great killer 
diseases.
Absence of data about the size of Africa’s population in the 15th 
century makes it difficult to carry out any scientific assessment of the 
results of the population outflow. But, nothing suggests that there was 
any increase in the continent’s population over the centuries of slaving, 
although that was the trend in other parts of the world. Obviously, fewer 
babies were born than would otherwise have been the case if millions of 
child-bearing ages were not eliminated. Besides, it is essential to 
recognise that the slave trade across the Atlantic Ocean was not the only 
connection which Europeans had with slaving in Africa. The slave trade 
on the Indian Ocean has been called the ‘East African slave trade’ and 
the ‘Arab slave trade’ for so long that it hides the extent to which it was 
also a European slave trade. When the slave trade from East Africa was 
at its height in the 18th century and in the early 19th century, the 
destination of most captives was the European-owned plantation 
economies of Mauritius, Réunion and Seychelles-as well as the 
Americas, via the Jape of Good Hope. Resides, Africans labouring as 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (4 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:22 AM]


--- PAGE 148 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
slaves in certain Arab countries in the 18th and 19th centuries were all 
ultimately serving the European capitalist system which set up a 
demand for slave-grown products, such as the cloves grown — 
Zanzibar under the supervision of Arab masters.
No one has been able to come up with a figure representing total losses 
to the African population sustained through the extraction of slave 
labour from all areas to all destinations over the many centuries that 
slave trade existed. However, on every other continent from the 15th 
century onwards, the population showed constant and sometimes 
spectacular natural increase; while it is striking that the same did not 
apply to Africa. One European scholar gave the following estimates of 
world population (in millions) according to continents:
1650 1750 1850 1900
Africa 100 100 100 120
Europe 103 144 274 423
Asia 257 437 656 857
None of the above figures are really precise, but they do indicate a 
consensus among researchers on population that the huge African 
continent has an abnormal record of stagnation in this respect, and there 
is no causative factor other than the trade in slaves to which attention 
can be drawn.
An emphasis on population loss as such is highly relevant to the 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (5 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:22 AM]


--- PAGE 149 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
question of socio-economic development. Population growth played a 
major role in European development in providing labour, markets, and 
the pressures which led to further advance. Japanese population growth 
had similar positive effects; and in other parts of Asia which remained 
pre-capitalist, the size of the population led to a much more intensive 
exploitation of the land than has ever been the case in what is still a 
sparsely-peopled African continent.
So long as the population density was low, then human beings viewed 
as units of labour were far more important than other factors of 
production such as land. From one end of the continent to the other, it is 
easy to find examples that African people were conscious that 
population was in their circumstances the most important factor of 
production. Among the Bemba, for instance, numbers of subjects were 
held to be more important than land. Among the Shambala of Tanzania, 
the same feeling was expressed in the saying ‘a king is people’. Among 
the Balanta of Guinea-Bissau, the family’s strength is represented by 
the number of hands there are to cultivate the land. Certainly, many 
African rulers acquiesced in the European slave trade for what they 
considered to be reasons of self-interest, but on no scale of rationality 
could the outflow of population be measured as being anything but 
disastrous for African societies.
African economic activity was affected both directly and indirectly by 
population loss. For instance, when the inhabitants of a given area were 
reduced below a certain number in an environment where tsetse fly was 
present, the remaining few had to abandon the area. In effect, 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (6 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:22 AM]


--- PAGE 150 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
enslavement was causing these people to lose their battle to tame and 
harness nature — a battle which is at the basis of development. 
Violence also meant insecurity. The opportunity presented by European 
slave dealers became the major (though not the only) stimulus for a 
great deal of social violence between different African communities and 
within any given community. It took the form more of raiding and 
kidnapping than of regular warfare, and that fact increased the element 
of fear and uncertainty.
Both openly and by implication, all the European powers n the 19th 
century indicated their awareness of the fact that the activities 
connected with producing captives were inconsistent with other 
economic pursuits. That was the time when Britain in particular wanted 
Africans to collect palm produce and rubber and to grow agricultural 
crops for export in place of slaves; and it was clear that slave-raiding 
was violently conflicting with that objective in Western, Eastern and 
Central Africa. Long before that date, Europeans accepted that fact 
when their self-interest was involved. For example, in the 17th century, 
the Portuguese and Dutch actually discouraged slave trade on the ‘Gold 
Coast’ for they recognised that it could be incompatible with gold trade. 
However, by the end of that century, gold had been discovered in 
Brazil, and the importance of gold supplies from Africa was lessened. 
Within the total Atlantic pattern, African slaves became more important 
than gold, and Brazilian gold was offered for African captives at 
Whydah (Dahomey) and Accra. At that point, slaving began 
undermining the ‘Gold Coast’ economy and destroying the gold trade. 
Slave-raiding and kidnapping made it unsafe to mine and to travel with 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (7 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:22 AM]


--- PAGE 151 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
gold; and raiding for captives proved more profitable than gold-mining. 
One European on the scene noted that ‘as one fortunate marauding 
makes a native rich in a day, they therefore exert themselves rather in 
war, robbery and plunder than in their old business of digging and 
collecting gold’.
The above changeover from gold-mining to slave-raiding took place 
within a period of a few years between 1700 and 1710, when the ‘Gold 
Coast’ came to supply about 5,000 to 6,000 captives per year. By the 
end of the 18th century, a much smaller number of captives were 
exported from the ‘Go1d Coast’, but the damage had already been done. 
It is worth noting that Europeans sought out different parts of West and 
Central Africa at different times to play the role of major suppliers of 
slaves to the Americas. This meant that virtually every section of the 
long western coastline between the Senegal and Cunene rivers had at 
least a few years experience of intensive trade in slaves — with all its 
consequences. Besides, in the history of Eastern Nigeria, the Congo, 
Northern Angola and Dahomey, there were periods extending over 
decades when exports remained at an average of many thousands per 
year. Most of those areas were also relatively highly developed within 
the African context. They were lead rig forces inside Africa, whose 
energies would otherwise have gone towards their own self-
improvement and the betterment of the continent as a whole.
The changeover to warlike activities and kidnapping must have affected 
all branches of economic activity, and agriculture in particular. 
Occasionally, in certain localities food production was increased to 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (8 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:22 AM]


--- PAGE 152 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
provide supplies for slave ships, but the overall consequence of slaving 
on agricultural activities in Western, Eastern and Central Africa were 
negative. Labour was drawn off from agriculture and conditions became 
unsettled. Dahomey, which in the 16th century was known for 
exporting food to parts of what is now Togo, was suffering from 
famines in the 19th century. The present generation of Africans will 
readily recall that in the colonial period when able-bodied men left their 
homes as migrant labourers that upset the farming routine in the home 
districts and often caused famines. Slave trading after all, meant 
migration of labour in a manner one hundred times more brutal and 
disruptive.
To achieve economic development, one essential condition is to make 
the maximum use of the country’s labour and natural resources. 
Usually, that demands peaceful conditions, but there have been times in 
history when social groups have grown stronger by raiding their 
neighbours for women, cattle and goods, because they then used the 
‘booty’ from the raids for the benefit of their own community. Slaving 
in Africa did not even have that redeeming value. Captives were 
shipped outside instead of being utilised within any given African 
community for creating wealth from nature. It was only as an accidental 
by-product that in some areas Africans who recruited captives for 
Europeans realised that they were better off keeping some captives for 
themselves. In any case, slaving prevented the remaining population 
from effectively engaging in agriculture and industry, and it employed 
professional slave hunters and warriors to destroy rather than build. 
Mite apart from the moral aspect and the immense suffering that it 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (9 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:22 AM]


--- PAGE 153 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
caused, the European slave trade was economically totally irrational 
from the viewpoint of African development.
For certain purposes, it is necessary to be more specific and to speak of 
the trade in slaves not in general continent-wide terms but rather with 
reference to the varying impact on several regions. The relative 
intensity of slave-raiding in different areas is fairly well known. Some 
South African peoples were enslaved by the Boers and some North 
African Muslims by Christian Europeans, but those were minor 
episodes. The zones most notorious for human exports were, firstly, 
West Africa from Senegal to Angola along a belt extending about 200 
miles inland and, secondly, that part of East Central Africa which today 
covers, Tanzania, Mozambique, Malawi, Northern Zambia and Eastern 
Congo. Furthermore, within each of those broad areas, finer distinctions 
can be drawn.
It might therefore appear that slave trade did not adversely affect the 
development of some parts of Africa, simply because exports were non-
existent or at a low level. However, the contention that European slave 
trade was an underdeveloping factor for the continent as a whole must 
be upheld, because it does not follow that an African district which did 
not trade with Europe was entirely free from whatever influences were 
exerted by Europe. European trade goods percolated into the deepest 
interior, and (more significantly) the orientation of large areas of the 
continent towards human exports that other positive inter-actions were 
thereby ruled out.
The above proposition may be more fully grasped by making some 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (10 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:22 AM]


--- PAGE 154 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
comparisons. In any given economy, the various components reflect the 
well-being of others. Therefore, when there is depression in one sector, 
that depression invariably transfers itself to others to some extent. 
Similarly, when there is buoyancy in one sector then others benefit. 
Turning to biological sciences, it will be found that students of ecology 
recognise that a single change, such as the disappearance of a small 
species could trigger off negative or positive reactions in spheres that 
superficially appear unconnected. Parts of Africa left ‘free’ by export 
trends in captives must have been affected by the tremendous 
dislocation — in ways that are not easy to comprehend, because it is so 
much a question of what might have happened.
Hypothetical questions such as ‘what might have happened if . . . ?’ 
sometimes lead to absurd speculations. But it is entirely legitimate and 
very necessary to ask ‘what might have happened in Barotseland 
(southern Zambia) if there were not generalised slave-trading across the 
whole belt of central Africa which lay immediately north of 
Barotseland?’. ‘What would have happened in Buganda if the 
Katangese were concentrating on selling copper to the Baganda instead 
of captives to Europeans?’
During the colonial epoch, the British forced Africans to sing
Rule Britannia, Britannia rule the waves 
Britons never never never shall be slaves
The British themselves started singing the tune in the early 18th 
century, at the height of using Africans as slaves. ‘What would have 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (11 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:22 AM]


--- PAGE 155 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
been Britain’s level of development had millions of them been put to 
work as slaves outside of their homeland over a period of four 
centuries?’ Furthermore, assuming that those wonderful fellows could 
never never never have been slaves, one could speculate further on the 
probable effects on their development had continental Europe been 
enslaved. Had that been the case, its nearest neighbours would have 
been removed from the ambit of fruitful trade with Britain. After all, 
trade between the British Isles and places like the Baltic and the 
Mediterranean is unanimously considered by scholars to have been the 
earliest stimulus to the English economy in the late feudal and early 
capitalist period, even before the era of overseas expansion.
One tactic that is now being employed by certain European (including 
American) scholars is to say that the European slave trade was 
undoubtedly a moral evil, but it was economically good for Africa. 
Here attention will be drawn only very briefly to a few of those 
arguments to indicate how ridiculous they can be. One that receives 
much emphasis that African rulers and other persons obtained Europe 
commodities in exchange for their captives, and this was how Africans 
gained ‘wealth’. This suggestion fails to take into account the fact that 
several European imports were competing with and strangling African 
products; it fails to take into account the fact that none of the long list of 
European articles were of the type which entered into the productive 
process, but were rather items to be rapidly consumed or stowed away 
uselessly; and it incredibly overlooks the fact that the majority of the 
imports were of the worst quality even as consumer goods — cheap gin, 
cheap gunpowder, pots and kettles full of holes, beads, and other 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (12 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:22 AM]


--- PAGE 156 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
assorted rubbish.
Following from the above, it is suggested that certain African kingdoms 
grew strong economically and politically a consequence of the trade 
with Europeans. The greatest of the West African kingdoms, such as 
Oyo, Benin, Dahomey and Asante are cited as examples. Oyo and 
Benin were great, before making contact with Europeans, and while 
both Dahomey and Asante grew stronger during the period of the 
European slave trade, the roots of their achievements went back to 
much earlier years. Furthermore — and this is a major fallacy in the 
argument of the slave trade apologists — the fact that a given African 
state grew politically more powerful at the same time as it engaged in 
selling captives to Europeans is not automatically to be attributed to the 
credit of the trade in slaves. A cholera epidemic may kill thousands in a 
country and yet the population increases. The increase obviously came 
about in spite of and not because of the cholera. This simple logic 
escapes those who speak about the European slave trade benefitting 
Africa. The destructive tendency of slave trading can be clearly 
established; and, wherever a state seemingly progressed in the epoch of 
slave trading, the conclusion is simply that it did so in spite of the 
adverse effects of a process that was more damaging than cholera. This 
is the picture that emerges from a detailed study of Dahomey, for 
instance, and in the final analysis although Dahomey did its best to 
expand politically and militarily while still tied to slave trade, that form 
of economic activity seriously undermined its economic base and left it 
much worse off.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (13 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:22 AM]


--- PAGE 157 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
A few of the arguments about the economic benefits of the European 
slave trade for Africa amount to nothing more than saying that 
exporting millions of captives was a way pf avoiding starvation in 
Africa! To attempt to reply to that would be painful and time-wasting. 
But, perhaps a slightly more subtle version of the same argument 
requires a reply: namely, the argument that Africa gained because in the 
process of slave trading new food crops were acquired from the 
American continent and these became staples in Africa. The crops in 
question are maize and cassava, which became staples in Africa late in 
the 19th century and in the present century. But the spread of food crops 
is one of the most common phenomena in human history. Most crops 
originated in only one of the continents, and then social contact caused 
their transfer to other parts of the world. Trading in slaves has no 
special bearing on whether crops spread-the simplest forms of trade 
would have achieved the same result. Today, the Italians have (hard) 
wheat foods like spaghetti and macaroni as their staple, while most 
Europeans use the potato. The Italians took the idea of the spaghetti 
type foods from the Chinese noodle after Marco Polo returned from 
travels there, while Europe adopted the potato from American Indians. 
In neither case were Europeans enslaved before they could receive a 
benefit that was the logical heritage of all mankind, but Africans are to 
be told that the European slave trade developed us by bringing us maize 
and cassava.
All of the above points are taken from books and articles published 
recently, as the fruit of research in major British and American 
Universities. They are probably not the commonest views even among 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (14 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:22 AM]


--- PAGE 158 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
European bourgeois scholars, but they are representative of a growing 
trend that seems likely to become the new accepted orthodoxy in 
metropolitan capitalist countries; and this significantly coincides with 
Europe’s struggle against the further decolonization of Africa 
economically and mentally. In one sense, it is preferable to ignore such 
rubbish and isolate our youth from its insults; but unfortunately one of 
the aspects of current African underdevelopment is that the capitalist 
publishers and bourgeois scholars dominate the scene and help mould 
opinions the world over. It is for that reason that writing of the type 
which justifies the trade in slaves has to be exposed as racist bourgeois 
propaganda, having no connection with reality or logic. It is a question 
not merely of history but of present day liberation struggle in Africa.
4.2 Technological Stagnation and Distortion of the African 
Economy in the Pre-Colonial Epoch.
It has already been indicated that in the 15th century European 
technology was not totally superior to that of other parts of the world. 
There were certain specific features which were highly advantageous to 
Europe-such as shipping and (to a lesser extent) guns. Europeans 
trading to Africa had to make use of Asian and African consumer 
goods, showing that their system of production was not absolutely 
superior. It is particularly striking that in the early centuries of trade, 
Europeans relied heavily on Indian cloths for resale in Africa, and they 
also purchased cloths on several parts of the West African coast for 
resale elsewhere. Morocco, Mauretania, Senegambia, Ivory Coast, 
Benin, Yorubaland and Loango were all exporters to other parts of 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (15 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:22 AM]


--- PAGE 159 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Africa — through European middlemen. Yet, by the time that Africa 
entered the colonial era, it was concentrating almost entirely on the 
export of raw cotton and the import of manufactured cotton cloth. This 
remarkable reversal is tied to technological advance in Europe and to 
stagnation of technology in Africa owing to the very trade with Europe.
Cloth manufacture in the world went through a stage of handlooms and 
small-scale craft production. Up to the 16th century, that was the 
general pattern in Africa, Asia and Europe: with Asian cloth makers 
being the most skilled in the world. India is the classic example where 
the British used every means at their disposal to kill the cloth industry, 
so that British cloth could be marketed everywhere, including inside 
India itself. In Africa, the situation was not so clear-cut, nor did it 
require as much conscious effort by Europeans to destroy African cloth 
manufacture, but the trend was the same. Europe benefitted 
technologically from its external trade contacts, while Africa either 
failed to benefit or actually lost. Vital inventions and innovations 
appeared in England in the late 18th century, after profits from external 
trade had been re-invested. Indeed, the new machinery represented the 
investment of primary capital accumulated from trading and from 
slavery. African and Indian trade strengthened British industry, which 
in turn crushed whatever industry existed in that is now called the 
‘underdeveloped’ countries.
African demand for cloth was increasing rapidly in the 15th, 16th and 
17th centuries, so that there was a market for all cloth produced locally 
as well as room for imports from Europe and Asia. But, directed by an 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (16 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:22 AM]


--- PAGE 160 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
acquisitive capitalist class, European industry increased its capacity to 
produce on a large scale by harnessing the energy of wind, water and 
coal. European cloth industry was able to copy fashionable Indian and 
African patterns, and eventually to replace them. Partly by establishing 
a stranglehold on the distribution of cloth around the shores of Africa, 
and partly by swamping African products by importing cloth in bulk, 
European traders eventually succeeded in putting an end to the 
expansion of African cloth manufacture.
There are many varied social factors which combine to determine when 
a society makes a breakthrough from small scale craft technology to 
equipment designed to harness nature so that labour becomes more 
effective. One of the major factors is the existence of a demand for 
more products than can be made by hand, so that technology is asked to 
respond to a definite social need-such as that for clothes. When 
European cloth became dominant on the African market, it meant that 
African producers were cut off from the increasing demand. The craft 
producers either abandoned their tasks in the face of cheap available 
European cloth, or they continued on the same small hand-worked 
instruments to create styles and pieces for localized markets. Therefore, 
there was what can be called ‘technological arrest’ or stagnation, and in 
some instances actual regression, since people forgot even the simple 
technique of their forefathers. The abandonment of traditional iron 
smelting in most parts of Africa is probably the most important instance 
of technological regression.
Development means a capacity for self-sustaining growth. It means that 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (17 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:22 AM]


--- PAGE 161 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
an economy must register advances which in turn will promote further 
progress. The loss of industry and skill in Africa was extremely small, if 
we measure it from the viewpoint of modern scientific achievements or 
even by standards of England in the late 18th century. However, it must 
be borne in mind that to be held back at one stage means that it is 
impossible to go on to a further stage. When a person was forced to 
leave school after only two years of primary school education, it is no 
reflection on him that he is academically and intellectually less 
developed than someone who had the opportunity to be schooled right 
through to university level. What Africa experienced in the early 
centuries of trade was precisely a loss of development opportunity, and 
this is of the greatest importance.
One of the features associated with technological advance is a spirit of 
scientific enquiry closely related to the process of production. This 
leads to inventiveness and innovation. During the period of capitalist 
development in Europe, this was very much the case, and historians lay 
great emphasis on the spirit of inventiveness of the English in the 18th 
century. Socialist societies do not leave inventions merely to chance or 
good luck — they actively cultivate tendencies for innovation. For 
instance, in the German Democratic Republic, the youth established a 
‘Young Innovators’ Fair’ in 1958, calling upon the intellectual 
creativity of socialist youth, so that within ten years over 2,000 new 
inventions were presented at that fair. The connection between Africa 
and Europe from the 15th century onwards served to block this spirit of 
technological innovation both directly and indirectly.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (18 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:22 AM]


--- PAGE 162 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
The European slave trade was a direct block, in removing millions of 
youth and young adults who are the human :agents from whom 
inventiveness springs. Those who remained in areas badly hit by slave-
capturing were preoccupied about their freedom rather than with 
improvements in production. Besides, even the busiest African in West, 
Central, or East Africa was concerned more with trade than with 
production, because of the nature of the contacts with Europe; and that 
situation was not conducive to the introduction of technological 
advances. The most dynamic groups over a great area of Africa became 
associated with foreign trade — notably, the Afro-Portuguese 
middlemen of Upper Guinea, the Akan market women, the Aro traders 
of the Bight of Biafra, the mulattos of Angola, the Yao traders of 
Mozambique, and the Swahili and Wanyamwezi of East Africa. The 
trade which they carried on was in export items like captives and ivory 
which did not require the invention of machinery. Apart from that, they 
were agents for distributing European imports.
When Britain was the world’s leading economic power, it used to be 
referred to as a nation of shopkeepers: but most the goods in their shops 
were produced by themselves, and it was while grappling with the 
problems posed by production that their engineers came up with so 
many inventions. In Africa, the trading groups could make no 
contribution to technological improvement because their role and 
preoccupation took their minds and energies away from production.
Apart from inventiveness, we must also consider the borrowing of 
technology. When a society for whatever reason finds itself 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (19 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:22 AM]


--- PAGE 163 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
technologically trailing behind others, it catches not so much by 
independent inventions but by borrowing. Indeed, very few of man’s 
major scientific discoveries have been separately discovered in different 
places by different people. Once a principle or a tool is known, it 
spreads or diffuses to other peoples. Why then did European technology 
failed to make its way into Africa during the many centuries of contact 
between the two continents? The basic reason is that the very nature of 
Afro-European trade was highly unfavourable to the movement of 
positive ideas and techniques from the European capitalist system to the 
African pre-capitalist (communal, feudal, and pre-feudal) system of 
production.
The only non-European society that borrowed effectively from Europe 
and became capitalist is that of Japan. Japan was already a highly 
developed feudal society progressing towards its own capitalist forms in 
the 19th century. Its people were neither enslaved nor colonised by 
Europe, and its foreign trade relations were quite advantageous. For 
instance, Japanese textile manufacturers had the stimulus of their own 
growing internal market and some abroad in Asia and Europe. Under 
those circumstances, the young Japanese capitalist class (including 
many former feudalist landowners) borrowed technology from Europe 
and successfully domesticated it before the end of the 19th century. The 
use of this example from outside of Africa is meant to emphasise that 
for Africa to have received European technology the demand would 
have had to come from inside Africa — and most probably from a class 
or group who saw profit in the new technology. There had to be both 
willingness on the part of Europeans to transfer technology and African 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (20 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:22 AM]


--- PAGE 164 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
socio-economic structures capable of making use of that technology and 
internalising it.
Hunting for elephants or captives did not usually induce in Africa a 
demand for any technology other than firearms. The lines of economic 
activity attached to foreign trade were either destructive as slavery was, 
or at best purely extractive, like ivory hunting and cutting camwood 
trees. Therefore, there was no reason for wanting to call upon European 
skills. The African economies would have had little room for such skills 
unless negative types of exports were completely stopped. A 
remarkable fact that is seldom brought to light is that several African 
rulers in different parts of the continent saw the situation clearly, and 
sought European technology for internal development, which was 
meant to replace the trade in slaves.
Europeans deliberately ignored those African requests that Europe 
should place certain skills and techniques at their disposal. This was an 
element in the Kongo situation of the early 16th century, which has 
already been mentioned. It happened in Ethiopia also, though in 
Ethiopia no trade in captives was established with Europeans. A 
Portuguese embassy reached the Ethiopian court in 1520. Having 
examined Portuguese swords, muskets, clothes, books and other 
objects, the Emperor Lebna Dengel felt the need to introduce European 
technical knowledge into Ethiopia. Correspondence exists between the 
Emperor and European rulers such as kings Manuel I and John III of 
Portugal and Pope Leo X, in which requests were made for European 
assistance to Ethiopian industry. Until late in the 19th century, 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (21 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:22 AM]


--- PAGE 165 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Ethiopian , petitions to that effect were being repeated with little or no 
success.
In the first half of the 18th century, there were two further examples of 
African rulers appreciating European technology, and stating their 
preference for skills and not slave ships. When Agaja Trudo of 
Dahomey sought to stop the trade in captives, he made an appeal to 
European craftsmen, and he sent an ambassador to London for that 
purpose. One European who stayed at the court of Dahomey in the late 
1720s told his countrymen that ‘if any tailor, carpenter, smith or any 
other sort of white man that is free be willing to come here, he will find 
very good encouragement’. The Asantehene, Opoku Ware (1720-50), 
also asked Europeans to set up factories and distilleries in Asante, but 
he got no response.
Bearing in mind the history of Japan, it should be noted that the first 
requests for technical assistance came from the Ethiopian and Kongo 
empires, which in the 16th century where at a level undoubtedly 
comparable to most European feudal states, with the important 
exception that they had not produced the seeds of capitalism. During the 
18th century the great African states of Dahomey and Asante became 
prominent. They had passed out of the communal stage and had a 
somewhat feudal class stratification along with specialisation in many 
activities such as the working of gold, iron and cloth. Asante society 
under Opoku Ware had already shown a capacity for seeking out 
innovations, by going to the trouble of taking imported silk and 
unravelling it so as to combine the silk threads with cotton to make the 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (22 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:22 AM]


--- PAGE 166 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
famous kente cloth. In other words, there would have been no difficulty 
in such African societies mastering European technical skills and 
bridging the rather narrow gap which existed between them and Europe 
at that time.
Well into the 19th century, Europe displayed the same indifference to 
requests for practical assistance from Africa, although by that period 
both African rulers and European capitalists were talking about 
replacing slave trade. In the early 19th century, one king of Calabar (in 
Eastern Nigeria) wrote the British asking for a sugar refinery; while 
around 1804 king Adandozan of Dahomey was bold enough to ask for a 
firearms factory! By that date, many parts of West Africa were going to 
war with European firearms and gunpowder. There grew up a saying in 
Dahomey that ‘He who makes the powder wins the war’, which was a 
far-sighted recognition that Africans were bound to fall before the 
superiority of Europeans in the field of arms technology. Of course, 
Europeans were also fully aware that their arms technology was 
decisive, and there was not the slightest chance that they would have 
agreed to teach Africans to make firearms and ammunition.
The circumstances of African trade with Europe were unfavourable to 
creating a consistent African demand for technology relevant to 
development; and when that demand was raised it was ignored or 
rejected by the capitalists. After all, it would not have been in the 
interests of capitalism to develop Africa. In more recent times, Western 
capitalists had refused to build the Volta River Dam for Ghana under 
Kwame Nkrumah, until they realised that the Czechoslovakians would 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (23 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:22 AM]


--- PAGE 167 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
do the job; they refused to build the Aswan Dam for Egypt, and the 
Soviet Union had to come to the rescue; and in a similar situation they 
placed obstacles in the way of the building of a railway from Tanzania 
to Zambia, and it was the Socialist state of China that stepped in to 
express solidarity with African peasants and workers in a practical way. 
Placing the whole question in historical perspective allows us to see that 
capitalism has always discouraged technological evolution in Africa 
and blocks Africa’s access to its own technology. As will be seen in a 
subsequent section, capitalism introduced into Africa only such limited 
aspects of its material culture as were essential to more efficient 
exploitation, but the general tendency has been for capitalism to 
underdevelop Africa in technology.
The European slave trade and overseas trade in general had what are 
known as ‘multiplier effects’ on Europe’s development in a very 
positive sense. This means that the benefits of foreign contacts extended 
to many areas of European life not directly connected with foreign 
trade, and the whole society was better equipped for its own internal 
development. The opposite was true of Africa not only in the crucial 
sphere of technology but also with regard to the size and purpose of 
each economy in Africa. Under the normal processes of evolution, an 
economy grows steadily larger so that after a while two neighbouring 
economies merge into one. That was precisely how national economies 
were created in the states of Western Europe through the gradual 
combination of what were once separate provincial economies. Trade 
with Africa actually helped Europe to weld together more closely the 
different national economies, but in Africa there was disruption and 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (24 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:22 AM]


--- PAGE 168 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
disintegration at the local level. At the same time, each local economy 
ceased to be directed exclusively or even primarily towards the 
satisfaction of the wants of its inhabitants; and (whether or not the 
particular Africans recognised it) their economic effort served external 
interests and made them dependent on those external forces based in 
western Europe. In this way, the African economy taken as a whole was 
diverted away from its previous line of development and became 
distorted.
It has now become common knowledge that one of the principal 
reasons why genuine industrialisation cannot easily be realised in 
Africa today is that the market for manufactured goods in any single 
African country is too small, and there is no integration of the markets 
across large areas of Africa. The kind of relationship which Africa has 
had with Europe from the very beginning, has worked in a direction 
opposite to integration of local economies. Certain interterritorial links 
established on the continent were broken down after the 15th century 
because of European trade. Several examples arose on the West African 
coast down to Angola, because in those parts European trade was most 
voluminous, and the surviving written record is also more extensive.
When the Portuguese arrived in the region of modern Ghana in the 
1470s, they had few commodities to offer the inhabitants in exchange 
for the gold coveted by Europe. However, they were able to tranship 
from Benin in Nigeria supplies of cotton cloths, beads, and female 
slaves, which were saleable on the ‘Gold Coast’. The Portuguese were 
responding to a given demand on the ‘Gold Coast’, so that a previous 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (25 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:22 AM]


--- PAGE 169 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
trade must have been in existence between the people of Benin and 
those of the ‘Gold Coast’, particularly the Akan. The Akan were gold 
producers, and the people of Benin were specialist craftsmen who had a 
surplus of cloth and beads which they manufactured themselves. As an 
expansionist state with a large army, Benin also had access to prisoners 
of war, while the Akan seemed concerned with building their own 
population and labour force, so the latter acquired female captives from 
Benin and rapidly integrated them as wives. When the Portuguese 
intervened in this exchange, it was subordinated to the interests of 
European trade. As soon as Portugal and other European nations had 
sufficient goods so as not to be dependent on the re-export of certain 
commodities from Benin, then all that remained were the links between 
the ‘Gold Coast’ and Europe on the one hand and between Benin and 
Europe on the other.
Probably, Benin products had reached the ‘Gold Coast’ by way of the 
creeks behind the coast of what is now Dahomey and Togo. Therefore, 
it would have been more convenient when Europeans established a 
direct link across the open sea. As pointed out earlier, the superiority of 
Europeans at sea was of the greatest strategic value, along with their 
organisational ability. This was illustrated in several places, beginning 
with the Maghreb and Mauretania. After the Portuguese took control of 
the Atlantic coast of North-West Africa, they were able to secure 
horses, woollen goods and beads, which they shipped further south to 
West Africa for gold and slaves ; up to the early 16th century, the most 
important article brought by the Portuguese for trade in Senegambia 
was the horse. In exchange for one horse they received as many as 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (26 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:22 AM]


--- PAGE 170 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
fifteen captives. North African woollens and beads were also utilised by 
the Portuguese in buying gold on the river Gambia and as far south as 
Sierra Leone.
It needs to be recalled that the Western Sudan had links with the West 
African coast and with North Africa. Long before the European arrival, 
horses were moving from North Africa to be inter-bred with local West 
African stock. Long before the European arrival, the Arabs and 
Mauretanians travelled to the river Senegal and further south to meet 
the Mandinga Djola traders and hand over to them products such as 
beads made in Ceuta and cloth spun from the wool of North African 
sheep. With the advantage of rapidity of transport by sea as opposed to 
overland across the desert, the Portuguese were in effect breaking up 
the economic integration of the region. As with the Benin / Akan 
example, the point to note is that after the Portuguese became 
middlemen they had the opportunity of developing a new trade pattern 
by which both North West Africa and West Africa looked to Europe 
and forgot about each other.
A similar situation came into existence on the Upper Guinea coast, and 
this time the European exploitation was aided by the presence of white 
settlers in the Cape Verde Islands. The Portuguese and the Cape Verde 
settlers broke into the pattern of local Upper Guinea trade ever since the 
1470s. They intervened in transfers of raw cotton and indigo dye from 
one African community to another, and the Cape Verdean settlers 
established a flourishing cotton-growing and cotton-manufacturing 
industry. They used labour and techniques from the mainland, and 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (27 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:22 AM]


--- PAGE 171 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
exported the finished products along the length of the coast down to 
Accra.
The Portuguese also took over the trade in cowries in the Kongo and its 
off-shore islands, the trade in salt along the Angolan coast, and the trade 
in high-quality palm cloth between northern and southern Angola. In 
some instances, they achieved dominance not just because of their ships 
and commercial skills but also by the use of force — providing they 
were operating on the coast and could bring their cannon into use. In 
East Africa, for instance, the Portuguese used violence to capture trade 
from the Arabs and Swahili. The disruption of African commerce 
between the ‘Ivory Coast’ and the ‘Gold Coast’ followed that pattern. A 
strong coastal canoe trade existed between these two regions, with the 
people of Cape Lahou (modern Ivory Coast) sailing past Cape Three 
Points to sell their cloth as far east as Accra. The Portuguese set up a 
fort at Axim near Cape Three Poínts to service gold trade with the 
hinterland; and one of its functions was to chop the east-west coastal 
African trade. They banned Axim residents from going to Cape Lahou, 
and they stopped canoes from ‘Ivory Coast’ from travelling east beyond 
Axim. The purpose was obviously to make both areas separate 
economic entities exclusively tied to Europe.
The above-mentioned African commerce proved to have roots. The 
Dutch found it still going on when they took over Axim in 1637. The 
servants of the Dutch West India Company which was operating on the 
‘Gold Coast’ wanted put a complete stop to the African trade; and when 
that was not achieved they tried to force the people of the ‘Ivory Coast’ 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (28 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:22 AM]


--- PAGE 172 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
to buy a certain amount of Dutch goods. The Dutch ruled that each 
Axim canoeman going to Cape Lahou should carry Dutch goods worth 
at least 4 ounces of gold. The purpose was to convert a purely inter-
African exchange into a European/African trade.
What was doubly detrimental to African attempts to integrate their own 
economies was the fact that when Europeans became middlemen in 
local trade networks, they did so mainly to facilitate the extraction of 
captives, and thereby subordinated the whole economy to the European 
slave trade. In Upper Guinea and the Cape Verde islands, the 
Portuguese and their mulatto descendants engaged in a large variety of 
exchanges involving cotton, dyes, kola nuts and European products. 
The purpose of it all was to fill the holds of slave ships. In Congo and 
Angola, the same picture emerges. The salt, cowry shells and palm 
cloth that came in Portuguese hands made up for their shortage of trade 
goods and served to purchase captives on different parts of the coast 
and deep in the interior.
The element of subordination and dependence is crucial to an 
understanding of African underdevelopment today, and its roots lie far 
back in the era of international trade. It is also worth noting that there is 
a type of false or pseudo integration which is a camouflage for 
dependence. In contemporary times, it takes the form of free-trade areas 
in the formerly colonised sections of the world. Those free-trade areas 
are made to order for the penetration of multi-national corporations. 
From the 15th century onwards, pseudo integration appeared in the 
form of the interlocking of African economies over long distances from 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (29 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:22 AM]


--- PAGE 173 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
the coast, so as to allow the passage of human captives and ivory from a 
given point inland to a given port on the Atlantic or Indian Ocean. For 
example, captives were moved from Congo through what is now 
Zambia and Malawi to Mozambique, where Portuguese, Arab or French 
buyers took them over. That was not genuine integration of the 
economies of the African territories concerned. Such trade merely 
represented the extent of foreign penetration, thereby stifling local 
trades.
The West African gold trade was not destroyed, but it became directly 
dependent on European buyers by being diverted from the northward 
routes across the Sahara. Within the savannah belt of the Western 
Sudan, the trans-Saharan gold trade had nourished one of the most 
highly developed political zones in all Africa from the 5th century 
onwards. But it was more convenient for Europe to obtain its gold on 
the West Coast than through North African intermediaries, and one is 
left to speculate on what might have occurred in the Western Sudan if 
there had been a steady increase in the gold trade over the 17th and 18th 
centuries. Nevertheless, there is something to be said in favour of 
African trade with Europe in this particular commodity. Gold 
production involved mining and an orderly system of distribution 
within Africa. Akan country and parts of Zimbabwe and Mozambique 
sustained flourishing socio-political systems up to the 19th century, 
largely because of gold production.
Certain benefits also derived from the export of ivory. The search for 
ivory became the most important activity in several East African 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (30 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 174 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
societies at one time or another, sometimes in combination with the 
trade in captives. The Wanyamwezi of Tanzania were East Africa’s best 
known traders — acquiring their reputation through carrying goods for 
hundreds of miles between Lake Tanganyika and the Indian Ocean. 
When the Wanyamwezi gave their attention to the export of ivory, this 
sparked off other beneficial developments, such as increased trading in 
hoes, food and salt between themselves and their neighbours.
Yet, ivory was an asset that was rapidly exhausted in any given region, 
and the struggle to secure new supplies could lead to violence 
comparable to that which accompanied the search for human captives. 
Besides, the most decisive limitation of ivory trade was the fact that it 
did not grow logically from local needs and local production. Large 
quantities of ivory were not required by any society inside Africa, and 
no African society turned to elephant hunting and ivory collection on a 
big scale until the demand came from Europe or Asia. Any African 
society which took ivory exports seriously, then had to re-structure its 
economy so as to make ivory trade successful. That in turn led to 
excessive and undesirable dependence on the overseas market and an 
external economy. There could be growth in the volume of commerce 
and the rise of some positive side-effects, but there was decrease in 
capacity to achieve economic independence and self-sustaining social 
progress. Besides, at all times one must keep in mind the dialectical 
opposite of the trade in Africa: namely, production in Europe or in 
America under European control. The few socially-desirable by-
products of elephant hunting within Africa were chicken-feed in 
comparison with the profits, technology and skills associated with the 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (31 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 175 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
product in Europe. In that way, the gap between Africa and Europe was 
constantly widening; and it is on the basis of that gap that we arrive at 
development and underdevelopment.
4.3 Continuing Politico-Military Developments in Africa, — 
1500 to 1885.
Modern African nationalist historians correctly stress that Africa had a 
meaningful past long before the coming of Europeans. They also stress 
that Africans made their own history long after coming into contact 
with Europe, and indeed right up to the period of colonisation. That 
African centred approach to the continent’s past is quite compatible 
with one which equally emphasises the transformatory role of external 
forces, such as overseas trade in slaves, gold, ivory, etc. The 
reconciliation of the two approaches is facilitated by bearing in mind 
the following three factors:
(a) The external (and mainly European) impact up to 1885 
was very uneven in geographical terms, with the coasts being 
obviously more exposed.
(b) Commerce with Europeans affected different aspects of 
African life in varying degrees, with the political, military and 
ideological apparatus being virtually untouched.
(c) Dynamic features of independent African evolution and 
development (as illustrated in chapter 2) continued to operate 
after 1500.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (32 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 176 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
It has already been argued that it would be misleading to try and 
compartmentalise Africa into areas that were affected by slave trading 
and those which were not, for the continent as a whole had to bear the 
costs. However, for present purposes, it is enough to make the crude 
distinction between those parts of Africa which were directly caught up 
in European-generated activities and those parts which to all 
appearances continued in the traditional manner.
Developments continued in certain areas such as south Central Africa,, 
because the population there was free to pursue a path dictated by the 
interplay between African people and the African environment in the 
particular localities. Besides, there were achievements even in those 
societies under the heaviest bombardment of slaving. Slave trading led 
to the commercial domination of Africa by Europe, within the context 
of international trade. In very few instances did Europeans manage to 
displace African political authorities in the various social systems. So 
African states in close contact with Europe in the pre-colonial era 
nevertheless had scope for political manoeuvre, and their evolution 
could and did continue.
Military conquest of Africa awaited the years of the imperialist 
Scramble. In pre-colonial centuries of contact with Europe, African 
armies were in existence, with all the socio-political implications which 
attach to an armed sector in society. Equally important was the fact that 
direct imports; from Europe in the cultural and ideological spheres were 
virtually nil. Christianity tried sporadically and ambivalently to make 
an impact on some parts of the continent. But most of the few 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (33 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 177 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
missionaries in places like the Congo, Angola and Upper Guinea 
concentrated on blessing Africans as they were about to be launched 
across the Atlantic into slavery. As it was, Christianity continued only 
in Ethiopia, where it had indigenous roots. Elsewhere, there flourished 
Islam and other religions which had nothing to do with European trade. 
As before, religion continued to act as an element of the superstructure, 
which was crucial in the development of the state.
So long as there is political power, so long as people can be mobilised 
to use weapons, and so long as society has the opportunity to define its 
own ideology, culture, etc., then the people of that society have some 
control over their own destinies, in spite of constraints such as those 
imposed as the African continent slipped into orbit as a satellite of 
capitalist Europe. After all, although historical development is 
inseparable from material conditions and the state of technology, it is 
also partially controlled by a people’s consciousness at various stages. 
That is part of the interdependence of base and superstructure alluded to 
at the outset.
Revolution is the most dramatic appearance of a conscious people or 
class on the stage of history; but, to greater or lesser extent, the ruling 
class in any society is always engaged in the developmental process as 
conscious instruments of change or conservatism. Attention in this 
section will be focussed on the political sphere and its power 
companion, the military. In those areas, Africans were able to excel 
even in the face of slave trading.
Politico-military development in Africa from 1500 to 1885 meant that 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (34 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 178 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
African social collectives had become more capable of defending the 
interests of their members, as opposed to the interests of people outside 
the given community. It also meant that the individual in a politically 
mature and militarily strong state would be free from external threat of 
physical removal. He would have more opportunities to apply his own 
skill in fields as diversified as minstrelry and bronze-working, under the 
protection of the state. He could also use his creativity and 
inventiveness to refine the religion of his people, or to work out a more 
manageable constitution, or to contribute to new techniques of war, or 
to advance agriculture and trade. Of course, it is also true that the 
benefits of all such contributions went mainly to a small section of 
African society, both within and without the zone of slaving; for, as 
communalism receded, the principle of egalitarian distribution was 
disregarded. These various points can be illustrated by concrete 
historical examples drawn from all over the continent during the pre-
colonial period in question.
(a) The Yoruba
In a previous discussion, the Yoruba state of Oyo was merely listed as 
one of the outstanding representatives of African development up to the 
eve of European arrival in the 15th century. The remarkable 14th- and 
15th-century artistic achievements of Oyo, of its parent state of life, and 
of the related state of Benin have been well studied, because of the 
preservation of ivory, terracotta and bronze sculptures. It is clear that 
the earliest bronzes were the best and that there was a deterioration in 
execution and sensitivity from the 16th through to the 18th century. 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (35 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 179 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
However, politically, states such as Oyo and Benin did continue to 
prosper for a very long time after the arrival of Europeans on the West 
African coast. Since Oyo and the Yoruba people were within an 
intensive area of slave trading, their fate between 1500 and 1885 is of 
considerable significance.
The kingdom of Oyo kept fairly clear of any involvement with slave 
trading until the late 18th century. Instead, its people concentrated on 
local production and trade, and on the consolidation and expansion of 
the trade. Indeed, although the nucleus of the Oyo kingdom had already 
been established in the 15th century, it was during the next three 
centuries that it expanded to take control of most of what was later 
termed Western Nigeria, large zones north of the river Niger and the 
whole of what is now Dahomey. In effect, it was an empire, ruled over 
by an Alafin in conjunction with an aristocracy. It was in the 16th, 17th 
and 18th centuries that the subtle constitutional mechanisms which 
regulated relations between the Alafin and his principal subjects and 
between the capital and the provinces were crystallised.
In so far as Oyo had an interest in the coast, it was as an outlet more for 
cloth than for slaves. Being some distance inland, the Yoruba of Oyo 
concentrated on relations with the hinterland, thereby connecting with 
the Western Sudanic trading zone. It was from the North that Oyo got 
the horses which made its armies feared and respected. Oyo is a prime 
example of that African development which had its roots Jeep in the 
past, in the contradictions between man and environment. Its people 
continued to develop on the basis of forces which they did not 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (36 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 180 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
consciously manipulate, as well as through the deliberate utilisation of 
political techniques.
Early in the 19th century, Oyo and Yorubaland in general began to 
export captives in considerable numbers. They were obtained partly by 
military campaigns outside Yorubaland, but also through local slave 
procuring. Local slave procuring involved kidnapping, armed raids, 
uncertainty and disunity. Those features, together with internal 
constitutional tensions and an external threat from the Islamic North, 
brought about the downfall of the Oyo empire by about 1830. The 
famous Yoruba ancestral home of Ife was also despoiled and its citizens 
turned into refugees, because of quarrels among the Yoruba over 
kidnapping for sale into slavery.
But it was testimony to the level of development in that part of Africa 
that, within a few years the inhabitants were able to reconstruct new 
political states: notably those of New Oyo, Ibadan, Ijaye, Abeokuta and 
Ijebu — each centred on a town, and with enough land for successful 
agriculture. Until the British arrived to kindly impose ‘order’ in Nigeria, 
the Yoruba people kept experimenting with various political forms, 
with heavy emphasis on the military, and keeping to the religion of their 
forefathers.
Being conscious of territorial boundaries, the inhabitants and rulers of 
any given state invariably become involved in clashes with 
neighbouring states. The state in the feudal epoch in Europe and Asia 
was particularly concerned with its military capacity. The ruling class 
comprised in whole or in part the professional fighting forces of the 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (37 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 181 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
state. One rationalisation by which they justified their enjoyment of the 
major portion of the surplus of society was that they offered armed 
protection to the ordinary peasant or serf. This generalisation was as 
true of 19th-century Yorubaland as it was of Prussia and Japan. Without 
a doubt, Africans in that region were proceeding along the line of 
development leading to social organisation comparable to feudalism in 
Europe, Asia and parts of Africa such as Ethiopia and the Maghreb, 
which were at that stage some centuries earlier.
In the Oyo empire, the civil power was dominant, and the military 
generals were servants of the king. Subsequently, however, the military 
took over effective political power. For instance, the Ajaye state was 
founded by Kurunmi, said to have been the greatest Yoruba general of 
those troubled times following the fall of Oyo. Kurunmi established a 
personal military ascendancy in Ajaye. Ibadan was slightly different, in 
that there it was a group of military officers who collectively formed the 
political elite. Efforts to put civilians back in power were half-hearted 
and unsuccessful. After all, the town itself grew out of a military 
encampment.
The city-state of Abeokuta perhaps made the most consistent effort to 
make the military an arm of the civil state. But, what mattered most was 
the defence of the townships within the fortified walls of Abeokuta. 
Abeokuta’s fortified walls became famous as the place where many a 
rival army met disaster; and, under those circumstances, the Ologun or 
war-chiefs were the social and political powers.
While the militarisation of politics was going on in Yorubaland, 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (38 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 182 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
changes were taking place in the structure of the society, which brought 
about sharper class stratification. Numerous captives were taken in war, 
most of whom were sold to Europeans, so that Yorubaland became 
notorious as a slave supplying region right up to the 1860s. But many 
war prisoners were retained locally, in conditions approximating either 
to slavery or to serfdom, depending on whether or not they were first-
generation captives. Sometimes, refugees fleeing from destroyed towns 
also had no option other than to become clients or serfs of other free 
Yoruba. Such refugees were made to give service to their new overlords 
by farming the land, in return for armed protection. However, serfs 
were also used as soldiers, which means that they had access to the 
means of production (the land) only through meeting an obligation in 
military labour. That is a measure of the extent to which the principle of 
kinship had been weakened, and it indicates that, in contrast to the 
typical communal village, states such as those in 19th-century 
Yorubaland allocated roles and rewards to their citizens on the basis of 
reciprocal obligations characteristic of feudalism.
During the period under discussion, the division of labour among the 
Yoruba was extended with the rise of professional soldiers or ‘war-
boys,’ as they were called. The professional soldiers, who were sons of 
aristocrats, left farming disdainfully to prisoners and serfs-the large 
number of whom ensured agricultural plenty. Other branches of 
economic activity also flourished, notably the making of cloth and palm 
oil and the trade in various products. These things were true, in spite of 
the fact that by that time some labour was being lost both in the form of 
slaves exported and in the form of labour power devoted to capturing 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (39 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 183 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
people for export. European visitors to Yorubaland in the middle of the 
19th century could still admire the level of its material culture, along 
with the highly colourful and impressive aspects of its non-material 
culture such as the annual ‘Yam Festivals’ and the ritual of the religious 
cults of Shango, Ogboni, etc.
One item of European technology that was anxiously sought by 
Africans and that was fairly easily obtainable from Europeans was the 
firearm. From the 1820s onwards, the Yoruba acquired European 
firearms in large numbers, and integrated them into the pattern of trade, 
politics and military strategy. On the eve of colonial rule, Yoruba 
generals were reaching out for breech-loading rifles and even rockets; 
but Europe stepped in too quickly for that move to get very far. 
Through a series of actions which started as early as 1860 in Lagos (and 
which included missionary infiltration as well as armed invasion) the 
British managed to bring that part of Africa under colonial rule.
Economic development is a matter of an increasing capacity to produce, 
and it is tied up with patterns of land tenure and class relations. These 
basic facts were well brought out both positively and negatively in 
Yoruba history, in the decades before independence was lost. So long as 
agricultural production was not disrupted, then for so long any given 
Yoruba state remained in a strong position. Ibadan was once the 
greatest military power in Yorubaland, selling captives as well as 
retaining many for use as labourers for its own benefit. But Ibadan’s 
farming areas were hit by war, and Ibadan’s rulers also started 
removing prisoners farming the land and selling them instead to 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (40 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 184 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Europeans. That became necessary because Ibadan needed firearms, 
and those could be obtained only by selling slaves. It was at that point 
that the undermining effect of the presence of European slave buyers on 
the coast became really paramount.
By selling its own captives and serfs, Ibadan was undermining its own 
socio-economic base. If the prisoners were to develop into a true serf 
class, then those prisoners would have had to be guaranteed the right to 
remain fixed on the soil and protected from sale. That was one of the 
reasons why slavery as a mode of production in Europe had to give way 
to serfdom and feudalism; and, under normal circumstances, Yoruba 
society did rapidly guarantee the irremovability of those captives who 
were integrated into the local production pattern. But, forces unleashed 
by the European presence as slave buyers were too great to be 
withstood, and any hope of solving the problem disappeared with the 
loss of political power under colonialism.
Too often, historians lay undue emphasis on the failure of 19th-century 
Yoruba states to unite and produce an entity as large as the former 
empire of Oyo. But, firstly, the size of a political unit is not the most 
important criterion for evaluating the achievement of its peoples. And, 
secondly, a given people can disintegrate politically and later integrate 
even more effectively. The Yoruba states of Ibadan, Abeokuta, Ijaye, 
etc., had populations of up to 100,000 citizens — as large as most of the 
city-states, principalities and palatinates of feudal Germany. That is a 
comparison which is worth bringing to light, and it is one that struck 
European observers who happened to visit Yorubaland in the middle 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (41 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 185 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
years of the 19th century.
Germany has long had a common culture and language, and there was a 
form of political unity under the Holy Roman Empire from the 12th to 
the 15th century. However, after the Reformation and the break-up of 
the Holy Roman Empire, the German people were divided into as many 
separate political entities as there are days in the year, some of them 
being hardly bigger than a public park. Yet, the internal class relations 
and productive forces continued to develop throughout Germany, and 
ultimately by 1870 unity was again achieved, with feudalism giving 
way to a powerful capitalist nation state. Similarly, the Yoruba were a 
widely spread cultural entity with a single language. After the fall of the 
Oyo empire the developmental processes were slowed down by both 
internal and external factors, but they were not stopped. It took the 
arrival of European colonialism to do that.
Within the sphere of West and Central African slaving, state building 
continued with varying degrees of success. For instance, the Akan state 
system grew up in a manner as impressive as that of the Oyo empire. 
Fortunately for the Akan, slave exports reached alarming proportions 
only during the first half of the 18th century. By that time, a state such 
as Asante had sunk roots deep enough to withstand the adverse effects 
of slaving. It continued to be incorporated with the heartlands of the 
Western Sudan, and by the 1870s when the British tried to dictate to 
Asante, these famous African people did not give up without heroic 
armed struggle.
Asante’s connection with the export of slaves in the 18th century led its 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (42 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 186 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
rulers to concentrate on expansionism of the type which would bring in 
captives through wars, raids, tribute, and as articles of trade from 
regions where they had been made prisoner. Besides, since the 15th 
century, Akan country was building up rather than exporting its human 
resources. Captives were incorporated locally into the society; and on 
the eve of colonialism a substantial proportion of Asante society was 
made up of Odonko-ba — the descendants of one-time captives, who 
were the labouring population on the land. Development had come not 
through exporting and losing labour but by increasing and maximising 
it.
(b) Dahomey
Asante’s eastern neighbour beyond the Volta river was Dahomey. Since 
Dahomey was more deeply involved in the European slave trade and for 
a much longer period, its experiences shall be cited at a greater length.
Throughout the 18th and 19th century, Dahomey had a stagnant if not 
declining population, and an economy that had virtually no props other 
than slave exports. What Dahomey succeeded in doing in spite of all 
that is a tribute to the achievements of man inside the African continent. 
It should be made clear that the groundwork far the socio-political 
development of the Aja or Fon people of Dahomey was laid down in 
the period preceding the influence of Europe on West Africa. By the 
15th century, the Aja states of Allada and Whydah were already in 
existence, having a loose connection with the Yoruba of Ife. Dahomey 
was an offshoot from Allada in the 16th century, and by the early 18th 
century it expanded to incorporate both Allada and Whydah.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (43 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 187 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
The kings of Allada and Whydah had made the mistake of either failing 
to protect their own citizens from enslavement or of actually conniving 
at their enslavement. Dahomey never followed such a policy, which 
was directly antagonistic to the very maintenance of the state. Instead, 
Dahomey eventually became the classic raiding state of West Africa, 
after failing to get Europeans to accept any products other than human 
beings. To achieve that, Dahomey had first to build up a tightly 
organised military state, whose monarch came much closer to an 
authoritarian or despot than did the Alafin of Oyo or the Asantehene of 
Asante. Secondly, Dahomey invested a great deal of time and ingenuity 
on its army, so as to protect its own citizens and wage war abroad.
Within European history, the state of Sparta stood out as one that was 
completely dedicated to the art of war. Europeans in Africa in the 18th 
and 19th centuries invariably referred to Dahomey as a Black Sparta. 
Throughout the 18th century, the cavalry of Oyo was more than a match 
for Dahomey’s foot soldiers, and Dahomey remained a tribute-paying 
portion of the Oyo empire. But with the fall of Oyo, Dahomey became 
the supreme military state in that region, and indeed wreaked vengeance 
on its former Yoruba overlords. Warfare was necessary for securing 
slaves outside of Dahomey and for obtaining firearms. It was in fact 
essential for survival.
Dahomey’s profound pre-occupation with militaristic activities can be 
illustrated in many ways. Their value system rewarded the brave and 
the victorious, while ruthlessly despising and even liquidating the 
cowardly and the unsuccessful on the battlefield. The two chief 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (44 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 188 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
ministers of the king were the commanders of the ‘Left’ and ‘Right’ 
armies, and other military officers held political appointments. Then, 
too, the artistic media constantly harped upon the theme of war. 
Beautiful mosaics and paintings appeared on the walls of the palaces of 
Dahomey — all dealing with military victories. Historical accounts, as 
rendered by professional reciters, reflected the same bias; and the cloth 
workers busied themselves making emblems, ‘colours’, and umbrellas 
for the generals and the regiments.
Two unique innovations set Dahomey off from its African neighbours 
and even gives it a special claim within the context of feudal or semi-
feudal military organisation. Firstly, Dahomey encouraged young boys 
to become apprentices of war. By the age of 11 or 12, a boy would be 
attached to a veteran soldier-helping to carry his supplies, and 
observing battle. The second innovation (and the one that was more 
widely commented upon) was Dahomey’s utilisation of its female 
population within the army. Apparently, the wives in the royal palace 
started off as a ceremonial guard in the 18th century, and then 
progressed to become an integral part of Dahomey’s fighting machine, 
on terms of complete equality of hardship and reward. Dahomey’s 
population in the 19th century was probably no more than 200,000; and 
the state consistently managed to send 12,000 to 15,000 actives on its 
annual campaigns. Of those, it was estimated in 1845 that some 5,000 
were women — the so-called ‘Amazons of Dahomey’, who were feared 
for their ferocity in battle.
In the long run, the trade in slaves cast a blight on Dahomey. Slaving 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (45 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 189 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
campaigns were costly and not always rewarding in terms of captives. 
European buyers failed to turn up during certain years, depending on 
European conditions. E.g., during the American War of Independence, 
the French Revolution and the subsequent revolutionary wars, there was 
a lull in Dahomian slave exports, because far fewer European ships 
could be spared for the trade in slaves. Without selling captives to get 
firearms to carry on more warfare for slaves, Dahomey felt its glory and 
military honour was slipping. Resort to human sacrifice was one 
attempt to compensate for the diminishing reputation of the state and its 
monarch as was the case with the Oba of Benin in the 19th century.
Even so, the story of the reputed savagery of Dahomey was exaggerated 
incredibly. The Dahomian state created such refinements as a 
population census; it conducted diplomacy far and wide, with all the 
niceties and the protocol that one usually hears of only in connection 
with ‘civilised’ European states; and it built up a system of espionage 
and intelligence as an essential ingredient in its own security. Above all, 
attention should be focussed at least briefly on the role of the artist in 
Dahomian society. Much of African art springs from elaboration of 
things functional, such as pottery and cloth. However, both religion and 
the state power also stimulated art. For instance, the brasses and 
bronzes of Ife were executed on behalf of the religious cults and were 
associated with the Oni of Ife and the royal family. Indeed, it is a most 
widespread phenomenon that the feudal ruling class gave its protection 
to artists, along with sustenance and recognition. This was true in 
Mandarin China with pottery makers and theatre artists; it was true of 
16th century Italy of the Renaissance; and it was true of Dahomey from 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (46 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 190 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
the 17th to the 19th centuries.
No one now knows which Dahomian is to be credited with any given 
artistic achievement of the independent pre-colonial period. However, 
in that time, particular individuals were being given the opportunity for 
self-discovery and self-development and of serving the society as a 
whole. Their task was to give pleasure and to capture the hopes and 
ambitions of the people in palace wall paintings, in wrought-iron 
sculptures, in the stamped patterns of hand-woven cloths designed for 
royalty, on the intricately carved heads of the safe-conduct staffs of the 
king’s ambassadors, and in the lively tales of how the founder of the 
Dahomian kingdom came out of the belly of a leopard. It was art that 
centred around royalty and noble families, but it was also a national 
product and a point of identification for the people as a whole. 
Subsequently, such artistic skills either disappeared or became debased 
to serve the curiosity of philistine colonialists.
It is still held in some quarters that Dahomey’s development in certain 
spheres must be credited to slave trading. To demonstrate conclusively 
that African political and military development through to the 19th 
century was an extension of groundwork already laid in an earlier 
epoch, it is best to turn to zones where foreign influence was non-
existent. The interlacustrine zone of East Africa is one such.
(c) The Eastern Inter-Lacustrine States
In an earlier discussion, attention was directed to Bunyoro-Kitara as the 
most advanced socio-political formation in East Africa up to the 15th 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (47 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 191 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
century. Its ruling dynasty, the Bachwezi, declined for reasons that are 
not clear, and they were overwhelmed by new immigrants from the 
north. While there is some doubt as to whether the Bachwezi had an 
Ethiopian origin, it is clearly established that the 16th century 
immigrants were Luo peoples from a section of the Nile that flows 
through the Sudan.
Following upon Luo migrations, a new line known as the Babito 
dynasty, was placed in power over Bunyoro proper. Other branches of 
the same dynasty were enthroned in several places, sometimes breaking 
off from the main line. As late as the 19th century, a separate Babito 
kingdom was carved out in Toro. Meanwhile, the Bachwezi or Bahima 
had staged a comeback in regions to the south, in the form of a clan 
known as the Bahinda. The Bahinda were one of the pastoralist clans of 
the old Bunyoro-Kitara state, and in the period from the 16th century 
onwards their stronghold was in Ankole and Karagwe.
Obviously, the new Babito ruling class immediately sought to take 
control of the land, but in accordance with settled African customs, they 
later tried to project themselves as the original owners of the land, 
rather than usurpers. In Busoga, where there were several small Babito 
kings, a researcher reported the following dialogue about land between 
a member of a royal clan and a commoner:
Royal clan member — ‘We found this place empty and made something 
of it. You fellows later came round begging for land, so we were generous 
and gave you some. Naturally you're now our slaves.’
Commoner — ‘Oho! What a lie! We were here long before you. You took 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (48 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 192 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
your power by trickery. You princes have always been scoundrels!’
At no stage in the independent history of these interlacustrine states did 
land become purely a personal possession, to be monopolised by a 
given class, as in the classic European feudal model. Scholars 
frequently demand this feature before they concede that feudalism has 
arrived; but they fail to take into account the reality of the distribution 
and usufruct (or produce) of the land being in the hands of a few, and 
they fail to realise that where cattle were a dominant form of wealth 
then private ownership of herds was also part of a process by which 
producers were separated from the means of production. To be specific, 
those who owned the herds were usually the Bahinda or other Bahima 
or the new Babito families, while those who tended them were clients 
and virtually serfs of the owners. As far as land was concerned, the 
peasant who farmed it paid a heavy tax in crops to the clan heads and 
ruling authorities, to allow the latter to live without resort to agricultural 
work.
It is necessary to recall that in the process of independent evolution on 
all continents, the increase in productive capacity was accompanied by 
increasing inequality at all stages except socialism. To say that the inter-
lacustrine zone continued developing uninterruptedly up to the eve of 
colonialism is to highlight the expanded productive capacity of the 
states and at the same time to recognise frankly that it was the result of 
increased exploitation not only of natural resources but also of the 
labour of the majority. The latter were disenfranchised and oppressed to 
get them to toil in the interests of a few who lived in palaces.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (49 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 193 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
The inter-lacustrine kingdoms fell mainly in what is now Uganda, 
Rwanda and Burundi. Only in the north-east of Tanzania are there 
representatives of the inter-lacustrine complex of states. North-east 
Tanzania was the most developed portion of the country in the pre-
colonial epoch, because the rest of mainland Tanzania comprised 
numerous small kingdoms that had not decisively left behind the 
communal stage. But north-east Tanzania was also the corner of the 
country in which problems arose when a new ideology of egalitarianism 
was being preached after the end of the colonial era, because there was 
already a regime of inequality in the distribution of land and produce 
and in the rights granted to individuals. In fact, in any meaningful 
political sense, the area was feudal.
There is some disagreement as to the origins of the important inter-
lacustrine state of Buganda. Some traditions give it the same Luo origin 
as Bunyoro, while others tend to hold that it was a Bachwezi survival. 
Its social structure certainly paralleled that of Babito Bunyoro closely. 
Unlike in Ankole, in Buganda the Bahima did not have the reins of 
political power. They were only associated with the cattle-owning 
ruling class, very often in the junior capacity of herdsmen. In any event, 
Buganda’s history was one of gradual expansion and consolidation at 
the expense of Bunyoro and other neighbours. By the 18th century, it 
had become the dominant power in the whole region.
The Buganda state had a sound agricultural base, with bananas as a 
staple and with cattle products being available. Their craftsmen 
manufactured bark-cloth for export, and local production of iron and 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (50 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 194 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
pots was supplemented by imports from neighbouring African 
communities. Their lack of salt was a big stimulus to the extending of 
their trade network to obtain the necessary supplies; and, as was true of 
the Western Sudan, such an extension of the network of commerce was 
in effect integrating the productive resources of a large area. Carl 
Peters, the advance agent of German colonialism in East Africa 
remarked that ‘in estimating the political and commercial affairs of East 
Africa too little stress is laid on this internal trade among the tribes. The 
barter trade of Buganda defies all direct calculation.’ In Buganda’s case, 
the absence of slave trading must have been important in expanding 
internal production and trade, and therefore providing a sound base for 
the political superstructure.
The kings of Buganda set up a small permanent armed force, which 
served as a bodyguard; and the rest of the national army was raised 
when necessary. The political administration was centralised under the 
Kabaka, and district rulers were appointed by the Kabaka and his 
council, rather than left to be provided by the clans on a hereditary 
family basis. Great ingenuity went into devising plans for administering 
this large kingdom through a network of local officials. Perhaps the best 
tributes to the political sophistication of Buganda came from the 
British, when they found Buganda and other East African feudalities in 
the 19th century. They were the best tributes because they were 
reluctantly extracted from white racists and culturally arrogant 
colonialists, who did not want to admit that Africans were capable of 
anything.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (51 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 195 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Actually, Europeans were so impressed with what they saw in the inter-
lacustrine zone that they invented the thesis that those political states 
could not possibly have been the work of Africans and must have been 
built at an earlier date by white ‘Hamites’ from Ethiopia. This myth 
seemed to get some support from the fact that the Bachwezi were said 
to have been light-skinned. However, in the first place, had the 
Bachwezi come from Ethiopia they would have been black or brown 
Africans. And secondly, as noted earlier, the cultures of East Africa 
were syntheses of local developments, plus African contributions from 
outside the specific localities. They were certainly not foreign imports.
Assuming that the Bachwezi or Bahima were from Ethiopia, then they 
lost their language and became Bantus-peaking like their subjects. The 
same thing happened to the Babito dynasty of Luo extraction, indicating 
that they had been absorbed by the local culture. Furthermore, the 
Babito and the Bahima/Bahinda also forged close connections from the 
16th to the 19th centuries. In effect, out of different ethnic groups, 
castes and classes, a number of ‘nationalities’ were emerging. The 
‘nationality’ group is held to be that social formation which 
immediately precedes the nation state, and the definition applies to the 
peoples of Buganda, Bunyoro, Ankole, Karagwe and Toro, as well as to 
those in Rwanda and Burundi.
(d) Rwanda
The western most portion of the inter-lacustrine zone comprised the 
kingdoms of Rwanda and Burundi. The two countries which today bear 
those names are centred around the old kingdoms. The experiences of 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (52 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 196 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Rwanda will be instanced here.
Like the old Bunyoro-Kitara kingdom and like its north-eastern 
neighbour state in Ankole, Rwanda was split into two major social 
groups. Though the great majority of the population were cultivators 
known as the Bahutu, political power was in the hands of Batutsi 
pastoralists, comprising about 10% of the population. An even smaller 
minority were the Batwa (about 1 %), who were at a very low level of 
pre-agricultural social organisation.
The relative physiques of the three social segments in Rwanda offers an 
interesting commentary on the development of human beings as a 
species. The Batutsi are one of the tallest human groups in the world; 
the Bahutu are short and stocky; and the Batwa are pygmies. The 
differences can be explained largely in terms of social occupation and 
diet. The Batwa were not living in settled agricultural communities : 
instead, they wandered around in small bands, hunting and digging 
roots, thereby failing to assure themselves of plentiful or rich food. At 
the other extreme, the Batutsi pastoralists were subsisting on a 
constantly accessible and rich diet of milk and meat. The Bahutu were 
more socially advanced than the Batwa; they ate more and more 
regularly than the latter because Bahutu agriculture meant that they did 
not live entirely on the whims of nature, following scarce game like the 
Batwa. However, the quality of their food fell short of the protein-rich 
Batutsi diet. Thus, the development of man, the physical being is also 
linked in a broad sense to the expansion of productive capacity and the 
distribution of food.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (53 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 197 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
In any event, it was their political and military achievements rather than 
their height which distinguished the Batutsi from a historical viewpoint. 
Their contribution to the kingdom of Rwanda goes back to the 14th 
century, to a period contemporaneous with the Bachwezi. There were 
indeed striking parallels and actual links between Rwanda and Ankole 
and between Karagwe and Burundi. But unlike Bunyoro-Kitara, 
Rwanda in the 14th and 15th centuries, was far from being a single 
political entity. There were several small chiefdoms, and it was the 
expansion of a central Rwanda Tutsi clan which gradually created a 
small compact state in the 17th century. Later still, that central Rwanda 
state extended its frontiers; and it was still doing so when the 
colonialists arrived. For instance, rulers in Mpororo (Ankole) were 
already paying tribute to Rwanda, which was growing at Ankole’s 
expense.
At the head of the Rwanda kingdom was the Mwami. Like so many 
other African rulers, his powers were sanctioned by religious beliefs 
and his person surrounded by religious ritual. Feudal kings in Europe 
often tried to get their subjects to believe that royal authority emanated 
from God and that the king therefore ruled by ‘divine right’. Subjects of 
African kings like those of the Mwami of Rwanda often accepted 
something quite close to that proposition. Of course, in addition, the 
authority of the king had to be based on real power, and the Mwami of 
Rwanda did not overlook that fact.
Rujugira was a famous Mwami of the 18th century, and the last of the 
independent line was Rwaabugiri (known also as Kigeri IV), who díed 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (54 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 198 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
in 1895. Gahindiro is another whose praises were sung by the court 
musicians and historians. Each of them was associated with one or more 
contributions to refining and elaborating the power structure of the 
state, which meant that they each embodied certain historical, class and 
national forces.
The Mwami Rujugira in the 18th century took the step of placing his 
frontier zones under the exclusive authority of a military commander, 
and stationing strong contingents of soldiers -there. The move was 
significant because in any young and growing state the most uncertain 
areas are those on the frontiers, known as the ‘marcher provinces’ in 
European feudal terminology. Rujugira was in effect placing the 
marcher provinces under military law, and he also put permanent 
military camps at strategic places.
Early in the 19th century, Mwami Gahindiro overhauled the civil 
administration. In each province, there was created both a land-chief 
and a cattle chief-one being responsible for farm rents and the other for 
cattle dues. Besides, there were smaller district authorities or ‘hill 
chiefs’ within all the provinces, all members of the Batutsi aristocracy. 
Whether by accident or design, it turned out that administrators 
responsible for different areas and different matters were jealous of 
each other, and that kept them from uniting to conspire against the 
Mwami. The ‘hill chiefs’ were for a long time hereditary within given 
Batsutsi clans or lineages; but under Rwaabugiri they became 
appointive-another move which strengthened central government. 
Meanwhile, the civil servants and councillors (collectively known as 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (55 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 199 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Biru) were given grants of land which were free from the intervention 
of the land- and cattle-chiefs, thereby cementing the loyalty of the Biru 
to the throne.
The system of social relations which emerged in Rwanda were more 
completely hierarchical and feudal than in most other parts of Africa. 
Hierarchy and socio-legal interdependence of classes and individuals 
were features found in the army, the civil administration and in the 
social fabric itself. The key to everything else was the control over 
cattle, through an institution known as ubuhake. This meant that the 
poor (in cattle) and those of low status (by birth) could approach anyone 
with more cattle and more respected status, and offer his physical 
labour services in return for cattle and protection. The cattle were never 
given as outright property, but only the usufruct was handed over to a 
client. Therefore, the client could have the use of the cattle for so long 
as he reciprocated by handing over milk and meat to his overlord, and 
for so long as he remained loyal. Of course, the peasant on the land also 
had to perform labour services and provide tribute in the form of food.
The Batutsi aristocracy fulfilled their function of offering ‘protection’ 
partly by making representations at the Mwami’s court or by defending 
their dependents in legal cases. Above all, however, the protection came 
through specialisation in the military art. Ever since the 15th century, 
there was compulsory military service for certain Batutsi lineages. Sons 
of the Batutsi aristocracy became royal pages, receiving all their 
educational training within a military context. Each new Mwami made 
a fresh recruitment to add to existing forces. Some Bahutu were 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (56 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 200 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
associated with particular regiments to provide supplies, and the Batwa 
were also incorporated as specialist archers (with poisoned arrows).
Of course, the ‘protection’ which the Batutsi gave the Bahutu was a 
myth, in the sense that what they were guarding was their exploitation 
of the Bahutu. They defended them from external enemies, so that the 
population became dense and plentiful. They conserved the Bahutu, so 
that the latter could exercise their highly developed agronomical 
knowledge to produce surplus. Furthermore, the top stratum of Batutsi 
were the cattle owners, and they left their cattle to the lesser Batutsi to 
tend, thereby exploiting the labour and profound empirical knowledge 
which the common cattle herders possessed. As in Europe and Asia, 
such was the socioeconomic base which supported a life of leisure and 
intrigue among the Batutsi aristocracy.
There was little inter-marriage between Batutsi and Bahutu, and hence 
they are regarded as castes. The Batwa, too, can be similarly 
categorised; but since the castes were hierarchically placed one over the 
other, it was also a situation of class, and there was upward and 
downward mobility from one class to another to a certain extent. At the 
same time, Batutsi, Bahutu and Batwa together evolved as the Rwanda 
nation, having common interests to defend against even the Batutsi, 
Bahutu and Batwa who comprised the kingdom of Burundi. The people 
of Rwanda were not unique in developing a state and a sense of national 
consciousness, while at the same time experiencing the rise of more 
sharply differentiated classes and castes in society. The important thing 
is that they were free to develop relatively unaffected by alien 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (57 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 201 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
influence, and certainly free from direct ravages of slave trading.
(e) Ama-Zulu
The same freedom from slave trading was operational in South Africa, 
for West African exports of capotes began in Angola and East African 
exports came from Mozambique and zones further north. The area 
south of the Limpopo was one that had some of the simpler social 
formations in Africa up to the 15th century. The eastern side was 
sparsely peopled up to a late date by the Khoi Khoi herdsmen, who 
were slowly edged out by Bantu speakers. When European ships 
touched on the Natal coast in the 16th century, it was still a region of 
widely-scattered homesteads; but in the years to come the population 
became denser and important politico-military development took place.
Anyone with a nodding acquaintance with the African past would have 
heard the name of Shaka, the Zulu leader who most embodied the social 
and political changes which took place in the eastern portion of South 
Africa. One biographer (a European) had this to say of Shaka:
‘Napoleon, Julius Caesar, Hannibal. Charlemagne . . . such men as these 
have arisen periodically throughout the history of the world to blaze a trail 
of glory that has raised them high above the common level. Such a man 
was Shaka, perhaps the greatest of them all.’
The above praise-song appeared on the back-cover of the biography in 
question; and, since capitalist publishers treat books just like boxes of 
soap-powder, one has admittedly to be suspicious of any advertisement 
designed to sell the book. Nevertheless, all commentators on Shaka 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (58 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 202 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
(both African and European) frequently compare him favourably with 
the ‘Great Men’ of European history. It is therefore appropriate to 
examine Ama-Zulu society up to the 19th century with a view to 
understanding the role of the leader in relationship to the development 
of society as a whole.
Shaka was born about the year 1787, and the impressive achievements 
attributed to him in his 40-year life span can only be briefly enumerated 
here. By 1816, he was head of a small Ama-Ngoni clan, the Ama-Zulu. 
Within a few years, he had re-organised it militarily — both in terms of 
weapons and the tactics and strategy of war — so that the Ama-Zulu 
clan became a feared fighting force. Through warfare and political 
manoeuvring , he united and commanded the Ama-Ngoni who had 
previously been divided into dozens of independent or semi-
independent clans. At one point, it seemed as though Shaka was about 
to unite under one rule the whole of the region that is now Natal, 
Lesotho and Swaziland. That task was not accomplished when he met 
his death in 1828, nor were his successors able to maintain Shaka’s 
sway. But the territory belonging to the Ama-Zulu nation in the late 
19th century was 100 times greater than the 100 sq. miles of the original 
patrimony of the Ama-Zulu clan as inherited by Shaka in 1816. It was a 
diminished and less powerful AmaZulu that was still capable in 1876 of 
inflicting upon the British one of the most crushing defeats in their 
history of overseas adventuring — at the battle of Isandlwana.
Shaka grew up at a time when the questions of unity and of effective 
armies were being posed seriously for the first time among the Ama-
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (59 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 203 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Ngoni. Previously, the clans (which generally coincided with 
chiefdoms) displayed a tendency to segment or break into smaller and 
smaller units. As the eldest son of a clan head grew to adulthood, he 
went off to settle his own kraal; and a new junior clan was born, for his 
father’s clan remained senior and its headship passed to the eldest son 
of the ‘great wife’. That pattern of segmentation was possible so long as 
population density was low and land was plentiful for farming and-
grazing. Under those circumstances, there was little competition for 
resources or political power; and wars were hardly any more dangerous 
than a game of football in Latin America. Usually a clan had traditional 
rivalry with another given clan. They knew each other well, and their 
champions fought in a spirit of festivity. One or two might have been 
killed, but then everyone went home until the rematch.
Early in the 19th century, the casual tempo of Ama-Zulu life and 
politics had changed considerably. A greater population meant less and 
less room for junior members to ‘hive off’ on their own. It meant less 
grazing land for cattle, and disputes over cattle and land. As the Ama-
Zulu began to fight more frequently, so they began to feel the necessity 
to fight more effectively. At the same time, senior clan heads began to 
recognise the need for a political structure to ensure unity, the 
maximisation of resources and the minimisation of internecine conflict.
Shaka addressed himself to both the military and political problems of 
Zululand, which he saw as two sides of the same coin. He thought that 
the centralising political nucleus should achieve military superiority and 
demonstrate it to other sectors. That would generally lead to peaceful 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (60 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 204 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
acceptance of the greater political state, or else the dissidents would be 
thoroughly crushed.
The era of conflict and warfare in Zululand in the early 19th century 
brought troops face to face much more often, but the pattern of military 
encounter still remained that of the long-distance hurling of light 
Umkhonto or spears. For close fighting, a weapon grasped in the hands 
is much more damaging-as feudal armies discovered in Europe and 
Asia, and therefore resorted to sword and pike. Shaka, while serving as 
a young soldier, came up with the solution of devising a heavy short 
assegai, which was used purely for stabbing rather than throwing. In 
addition, he discarded the loose sandals so as to achieve more speed in 
closing with the enemy and more dexterity at close quarters. Through 
experience, Shaka and his fellow youth then discovered the specific 
techniques of using their shields and assegais to best effect.
Of course, warfare comprises not just the encounter of individual 
soldiers, but (more importantly) a pattern of tactics and strategy in 
relationship to the opposing forces taken as a whole. This aspect of war 
also attracted Shaka’s attention, and his outstanding innovation came in 
the form of izimpi (regiments) deployed so as to allow for a reserve 
behind the fighting vanguard and for two wings or ‘horns’ capable of 
encircling the enemy’s flanks. Finally (and most importantly), an army 
has to be trained, disciplined and organised so that it is a meaningful 
unit in peace and in war. Shaka created new regiments to include men 
up to 40 years of age. He kept his izimpi on constant exercises and 
‘fatigues’, so that the individual soldier was fit and proficient, while the 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (61 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 205 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
army as a whole synchronised in accordance with the wishes of its 
commanders.
The Zulu army was more than a fighting force. It was an educational 
institution for the young, and an instrument for building loyalties that 
cut across clans and could be considered as national. Promotion came 
through merit, and not through clan or regional origin. The enforced use 
of the Zulu branch of the family of Ngoni languages also worked in the 
direction of national consciousness. Over an area of 12,000 sq. miles, 
citizens came to call themselves ‘Ama-Zulu’, and to relegate their clan 
names to second place. Over a much larger area still, Zulu influence 
was profoundly felt. Policies such as curbing the excesses of witchcraft 
diviners (izanusi) and the fact that Zululand became free of internal 
struggles led to an influx of population from outside its boundaries — a 
positive contribution to the resources of the Zulu state.
European travellers who have left written accounts of Zululand in 
Shaka’s time were impressed by the cleanliness (as they were in Benin 
in the 15th century) and they were equally struck by the social order, 
absence of theft, sense of security, etc. (just like the Arabs who 
travelled in the Western Sudan during its period of imperial greatness). 
In actual fact, both the cleanliness and the security of life and property 
were part of Zulu life from long before, and under Shaka what was 
impressive was the scale on which these things extended, owing to the 
protective umbrella of the state. The people being impressed were 
Europeans; and European evidence is the best evidence in that it can 
scarcely be said to have been pro-African propaganda. One white 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (62 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 206 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
visitor who saw a march-past of fifteen of Shaka’s regiments, wrote 
that:
‘it was a most exciting scene, surprising to us, who could not have 
imagined that a nation termed “savages” could be so disciplined and kept 
in order.’
A great deal more could be added concerning Ama-Zulu political 
institutions and its army. But what is relevant here is to understand why 
a Shaka was possible in Africa in the 19th century, before the coming of 
colonial rule.
Had Shaka been a slave to some cotton planter in Mississippi or some 
sugar planter in Jamaica, he might have had an ear or a hand chopped 
off for being a ‘recalcitrant nigger’, or at best he might have 
distinguished himself in leading a slave revolt. For the only great men 
among the unfree and the oppressed are those who struggle to destroy 
the oppressor. On a slave plantation, Shaka would not have built a Zulu 
army and a Zulu state — that much is certain. Nor could any African 
build anything during the colonial period, however much a genius he 
may have been. As it was, Shaka was a herdsman and a warrior. As a 
youth, he tended cattle on the open plains — free to develop his own 
potential and apply it to his environment.
Shaka was able to invest his talents and creative energies in a 
worthwhile endeavour of construction. He was not concerned with 
fighting for or against slave traders; he was not concerned with the 
problem of how to re-sell goods made in Sweden and France. He was 
concerned with how to develop the Zulu arca within the limits imposed 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (63 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 207 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
by his people’s resources.
It must be recognised that things such as military techniques were 
responses to real needs, that the work of the individual originates in and 
is backed by the action of society as a whole, and that whatever was 
achieved by any one leader must have been bounded by historical 
circumstances and the level of development, which determine the extent 
to which an individual can first discover, then augment and then display 
his potential.
To substantiate the above points, it can be noted that Shaka was 
challenged to create the heavy stabbing assegai, when he realised that 
the throwing spear broke when used as a stabbing weapon. More 
important still, what Shaka came up with depended upon the collective 
effort of the Ama-Zulu. Shaka could ask that a better assegai be forged, 
because the Ama-Ngoni had been working iron for a long time, and 
specialist blacksmiths had arisen within certain clans. It was a tribute to 
the organisational and agricultural capacity of the society as a whole 
that it could feed and maintain a standing army of 30,000 men, re-equip 
them with iron weapons, and issue each soldier with the full-length 
Zulu shield made from cattle hide.
Because the scientific basis and experimental pre-conditions were 
lacking in Zulu society, Shaka could not have devised a firearm — no 
matter how much genius he possessed. But, he could get his people to 
forge better weapons, as we explained above; and he found them 
receptive to better selective breeding practices when he set up special 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (64 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 208 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
royal herds, because the people already had a vast fund of empirical 
knowledge about cattle and a love of the cattle herding profession.
In the politico-military sphere, Shaka was following in the footsteps of 
his original protector, Dingizwayo, and to some extent in the footsteps 
of Zwide, who was a rival to both Dingizwayo and Shaka. Dingizwayo 
opened up trade with the Portuguese at Delagoa Bay in 1797 (mainly in 
ivory), and he stimulated arts and crafts. His most distinguished 
innovation was in the army, when he instituted a system of recruiting 
regiments according to age grades. Previously, each locality tended to 
dominate within a given regiment; and, in any event, people were 
accustomed to fighting side by side with members of their own kraal, 
locality and clan. However, when all men in a given age-grade were 
brought into the same regiment, this emphasised a greater national 
feeling and also increased Dingizwayo’s power vis-a-vis the smaller 
clan heads.
Dingizwayo was head of the important Ama-Mthethwa clan, and he 
succeeded in establishing his paramountcy in what later became the 
southern portion of Zululand. In the north, Zwide of the Ama-
Ndwandwe was also engaging in political consolidation. Shaka served 
in one of the junior age-grade regiments of Dingizwayo, and remained 
faithful to the latter’s centralising power, until Dingizwayo met his 
death at the hands of Zwide in 1818. Thereafter, Shaka took up many of 
the military and political techniques of Dingizwayo and greatly 
improved them. That is development: It is a matter of building upon 
what is inherited and advancing slowly, provided that no one comes to 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (65 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 209 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
‘civilise’ you.
Conclusion
The regions of Yorubaland, Dahomey, the inter-lacustrine kingdoms 
and Zululand, which have so far been discussed, are examples of 
leading forces in the political development which was taking place in 
Africa right up to the eve of colonisation. They were not the only 
leading forces, and even where the states were territorially much 
smaller, there were observable advances in political organisation.
Areas of Africa that were most advanced by the 15th century generally 
maintained their standards, with few exceptions such as Kongo. In 
North Africa and Ethiopia, for example, feudal structures remained 
intact, though there was a noticeable lack of continued growth. In the 
Western Sudan, the Hausa states were heirs to the political and 
commercial tradition of the great empires after the fall of Songhai in the 
17th century; and early in the 19th century there arose the Islamic 
Caliphate of Sokoto with its centre in Hausaland. The Sokoto empire 
was one of the largest political units ever established on the African 
continent, and it suffered from many internal schisms through lack of 
adequate mechanisms for integrating so vast a territory. Experiments to 
deal with the problem of unity were continued in the Western Sudan, 
with Islam as the hoped-for unifying factor. An Islamic theocratic state 
was established across the Niger bend by Ahmadu Ahmadu in the 
middle of the 19th century, while another was created by Al Haj Omar 
on the upper Niger. Most outstanding of all was the Mandinga state 
carved out under the leadership of Samori Toure by the 1880s. Samori 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (66 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 210 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Toure was not a scholar like the renowned Uthman dan Fodio and Al 
Haj Omar, who before him had been creators of Islamic states; but 
Samori Toure was a military genius and a political innovator, who went 
further than the others in setting up a political administration where a 
sense of loyalty could prevail over and above clans, localities and ethnic 
groups.
Zimbabwe, too, progressed, with only slight interference from 
Europeans. Locally, the centre of power shifted from Mutapa to 
Changamire; and eventually in the 19th century, Nguni groups (fleeing 
from the power of the Zulu) overran Zimbabwe. So long as the Nguni 
were warrior bands on the march, they obviously proved destructive; 
but by the middle of the 19th century the Nguni had already spread their 
own building techniques to Mozambique and to what is now Southern 
Rhodesia, and had joined with the local population to establish new and 
larger kingdoms — infused with a sense of nationality, as was the case 
in Zululand.
Meanwhile, across vast areas of Central Africa, striking political change 
was also taking place. Up to the 15th century, the level of social 
organisation was low in the area between Kongo and Zimbabwe. 
Precisely in that area, there arose the group of states known as the Luba-
Lunda complex. Their political structures rather than their territorial 
size made them , significant; and their achievements were registered in 
the face of constantly encroaching slaving activities.
On the large island of Madagascar, the several small states of an earlier 
epoch had by the late 18th century given way to the powerful feudal 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (67 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 211 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Merina kingdom. More often than not, Madagascar is ignored in general 
assessments of the African continent, although (both in the physical and 
cultural sense) Africa is writ large on the Malagasy people. They, too, 
suffered from loss of population through slave exports; but the Merina 
kingdom did better than most slaving states, because more intensive 
cultivation of high-yielding swamp rice and the breeding of cattle offset 
the loss of labour. This situation should serve as a reminder that 
development accompanied by slave trading must not be superficially 
and illogically attributed to the export of the population and the 
dislocation attendant upon slave raiding. The bases of the political 
development of the Merina kingdom and of all others (whether or not 
engaged in slaving) lay in their own environment — in the material 
resources, human resources, technology and social relations. So long as 
any African society could at least maintain its inherited advantages 
springing from many centuries of evolutionary change, then for so long 
could the superstructure continue to expand and give further 
opportunities to whole groups of people, to classes and to individuals.
At the beginning of this section, attention was drawn to the necessity 
for reconciling a recognition of African development up to 1885 with 
an awareness of the losses simultaneously incurred by the continent in 
that epoch, due to the nature of the contact with capitalist Europe. That 
issue must also be explicitly alluded to at this point. It is clearly 
ridiculous to assert that contacts with Europe built or benefitted Africa 
in the pre-colonial period. Nor does it represent reality to suggest (as 
President Leopold Senghor once did) that the slave trade swept Africa 
like a bush fire, leaving nothing standing. The truth is that a developing 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (68 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 212 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Africa went into slave trading and European commercial relations as 
into a gale-force wind, which shipwrecked a few societies, set many 
others off course, and generally slowed down the rate of advance. 
However (pursuing the metaphor further) it must be noted that African 
captains were still making decisions before 1885, though already forces 
were at work which caused European capitalists to insist on, and 
succeed in taking over, command.
4.4 The Coming of Imperialism and Colonialism
In the centuries before colonial rule, Europe increased its economic 
capacity by leaps and bounds, while Africa appeared to have been 
almost static. Africa in the late 19th century could still be described as 
part communal and part feudal, although Western Europe had moved 
completely from feudalism to capitalism. To elucidate the main thesis 
of this study, it is necessary to follow not only the development of 
Europe and the underdevelopment of Africa, but also to understand how 
those two combined in a single system — that of capitalist imperialism.
The European economy was producing far more goods by making use 
of their own resources and labour, as well as the resources and labour of 
the rest of the world. There were many qualitative changes in the 
European economy, which accompanied and made possible the increase 
in the quantity of goods. For example, machines and factories rather 
than and provided the main source of wealth; and labour had long since 
ceased to be organised on a restricted family basis. The peasantry had 
been brutally destroyed and the labour of men, women and children was 
ruthlessly exploited. Those were the great social evils of the capitalist 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (69 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 213 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
system, which must not be forgotten; but, on the issue of comparative 
economics, the relevant fact is that what was a slight difference when 
the Portuguese sailed to West Africa in 1444 was a huge gap by the 
time that European robber statesmen sat down in Berlin 440 years later 
to decide who should steal which parts of Africa. It was that gap which 
provided both the necessity and the opportunity for Europe to move into 
the imperialist epoch, and to colonise and further underdevelop Africa.
The growing technological and economic gap between Western Europe 
and Africa was part of the trend within capitalism to concentrate or 
polarise wealth and poverty at two opposite extremes.
Inside of Western Europe itself, some nations grew rich at the expense 
of others. Britain, France and Germany were the most prosperous 
nations. Poverty prevailed in Ireland, Portugal, Spain and Southern 
Italy. Inside of the British, French and German economies, the 
polarisation of wealth was between the capitalists on the one hand and 
the workers and a few peasants on the other. The big capitalists got 
bigger and the little ones were eliminated. In many important fields, 
such as iron and steel manufacture, textiles and particularly banking, it 
was noticeable that two or three firms monopolised most of the 
business. The banks were also in a commanding position within the 
economy as a whole, providing capital to the big monopoly industrial 
firms.
European monopoly firms operated by constantly fighting gain control 
over raw materials, markets and means of communications. They also 
fought to be the first to invest in new profitable undertakings related to 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (70 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 214 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
their line of business — whether it be inside or outside their countries. 
Indeed, after the scope for expansion became limited inside of their 
national economies, their main attention was turned to those countries 
whose economies were less developed and who would therefore offer 
little or no opposition to the penetration of foreign capitalism. That 
penetration of foreign capitalism on a world-wide scale from the late 
19th century onwards is what we call ‘imperialism’.
Imperialism meant capitalist expansion. It meant that European (and 
North American and Japanese) capitalists were forced by the internal 
logic of their competitive system to seek abroad in less developed 
countries opportunities to control raw material supplies, to find markets, 
and to find profitable fields of investment. The centuries of trade with 
Africa contributed greatly to that state of affairs where European 
capitalists were faced with the necessity to expand in a big way outside 
of their national economies.
There were certain areas of Africa in which European investment was 
meant to get immediate super-profits. The mines of South Africa, the 
loans to North African governments, and the building of the Suez Canal 
were in that category. The Suez Canal also ensured the greater 
profitability of European investment in and trade with India. However, 
Africa’s greatest value to Europe at the beginning of the imperialist era 
was as a source of raw materials such as palm products, groundnuts, 
cotton and rubber. The need for those materials arose out of Europe’s 
expanded economic capacity, its new and larger machines and its 
increasing wage-earning population in towns. All of those things had 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (71 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:23 AM]


--- PAGE 215 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
developed over the previous four centuries; and again it needs to be 
repeated that one of the important factors in that process was the 
unequal trade with Africa.
Imperialism is essentially an economic phenomena, and it does not 
necessarily lead to direct political control or colonisation. However, 
Africa was the victim of colonisation. In the period of the notorious 
Scramble for Africa’, Europeans made a grab for whatever they thought 
spelt profits in Africa, and they even consciously acquired many areas 
not for immediate exploitation but with an eye to the future. Each 
European nation that had these short-term and long-term economic 
interests ran up its own flag in different parts of Africa and established 
colonial rule. The gap that had arisen during the period of pre-colonial 
trade gave Europe the power to impose political domination on Africa.
Pre-colonial trade in slaves, ivory, gold, etc., was conducted from the 
coasts of Africa. On the coasts, European ships could dominate the 
scene, and if necessary forts could be built. Before the 19th century, 
Europe was incapable of penetrating the African continent, because the 
balance of force c their disposal was inadequate. But the same 
technological changes which created the need to penetrate Africa also 
created the power to conquer Africa. The firearms of the imperialist 
epoch marked a qualitative leap forward. Breech-loading rifles and 
machine guns were a far cry from the smooth-bored muzzle loaders and 
flintlocks of the previous era. European imperialists in Africa boasted 
that what counted was the fact that they had the Maxim machine gun 
and Africans did not.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (72 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:24 AM]


--- PAGE 216 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Curiously, Europeans often derived the moral justification for 
imperialism and colonialism from features of the international trade as 
conducted up to the eve of colonial rule in Africa. The British were the 
chief spokesmen for the view that the desire to colonise was largely 
based on their good intentions in wanting to put a stop to the slave 
trade. True enough, the British in the 19th century were as opposed to 
slave trading as they were once in favour of it. Many changes inside 
Britain had transformed the 17th century necessity for slaves into the 
19th century necessity to clear the remnants of slaving from Africa so 
as to organise the local exploitation of land and labour. Therefore, 
slaving was rejected in so far as it had become a fetter on further 
capitalist development; and it was particularly true of East Africa, 
where Arab slaving persisted until late in the 19th century. The British 
took special self-righteous delight in putting an end to Arab slave 
trading, and in deposing rulers on the grounds that they were slave 
traders. However, in those very years, the British were crushing 
political leaders in Nigeria, like Jaja and Nana who had by then ceased 
the export of slaves, and were concentrating instead on products like 
palm oil and rubber. Similarly, the Germans in East Africa made a 
pretence of being most opposed to rulers like Bushiri who were 
engaged in slave trading, but the Germans were equally hostile to 
African rulers with little interest in slaving. The common factor 
underlying the overthrow of African rulers in West, Central, North and 
South Africa was that they stood in the way of Europe’s imperial needs. 
It was the only factor that mattered, with anti-slaving sentiments being 
at best superfluous and at worst calculated hypocrisy.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (73 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:24 AM]


--- PAGE 217 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
King Leopold of Belgium also used the anti-slavery excuse to introduce 
into Congo forced labour and modern slavery. Besides, all Europeans 
had derived ideas of racial and cultural superiority between the 15th and 
19th centuries, while engaged in genocide and the enslavement of non-
white peoples. Even Portugal, an impoverished and backward European 
nation in the imperialist era, could still presume that it had a destiny to 
civilise the natives in Africa!
There is a curious interpretation of the Scramble and African partition 
which virtually amounts to saying that colonialism came about because 
of Africa’s needs rather than those of Europe. Africa, they say, required 
European colonisation if it were to advance beyond the stage it had 
reached the late 19th century. Clearly, they do not appreciate that such a 
line of reasoning was suggesting that Africa would develop if it were 
given bigger doses of the European concoction that had already started 
its underdevelopment — that it would develop if it lost the last 
remnants of its freedom of choice, which had clearly been seriously 
undermined by the pre-colonial trade — that it would develop if its 
economy became more integrated with Europe’s on terms that were 
entirely dictated by Europe. Those implications and their fallacies 
would be plain to anyone who tries to understand the development 
process before making pronouncements on any particular epoch of 
human development in Africa.
Throughout the 14th century, African rulers were displaying great 
initiative in pursuit of the broadest forms of cultural contact with 
Europe. In the case of West Africa, that meant seeking substitutes for 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (74 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:24 AM]


--- PAGE 218 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
trade in slaves. Dahomey, one of the most embroiled in slave trading, 
was among those states that used many of the last years of its 
independence to find a healthy basis for cultural exchange with 
Europeans.
In 1850, the reigning Dahomean king, Ghezo, proclaimed an edict 
whereby all-young oil-palms were to be freed from parasites 
surrounding them, and severe penalties were to be imposed for cutting 
palm trees. Ghezo who ruled from 1818 to 1857 was a reformer, and he 
made sincere efforts to meet criticisms of his policies by groups such as 
missionaries and anti-slavery campaigners; but it soon became clear 
that Europeans were not bent on seeing Dahomey re-emerge as a strong 
state, but were rather creating excuses and the subjective conditions to 
justify their proposed colonisation of the people of Dahomey. Under 
those circumstances, the last Dahomean monarch, Glele, fell back on 
his capital at Abomey, and pursued the policies which he considered 
most consistent with the dignity and independence of Dahomey. Glele 
raided Abeokuta, which contained converts who were already ‘British 
protected persons'; he told the French to get the hell out of Porto Novo; 
and he generally resisted until defeated militarily by the French in 1889.
African groups who had little or nothing to do with slave exports also 
intensified their efforts to integrate into a wider world in the 19th 
century. Gungunhana, the Nguni ruler of Gaza in Mozambique, asked 
for a Swiss missionary doctor and maintained him at his court for 
several years until the Portuguese conquered his kingdom in 1895. 
After the Portuguese imposed colonial rule, it was a long time before 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (75 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:24 AM]


--- PAGE 219 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Africans saw another doctor!
It is particularly instructive to turn to the example of Egypt under 
Muhammad Ali, who ruled from 1805 to 1849. Capitalist Europe had 
left feudal North Africa behind over the course of the 17th and 18th 
centuries. Muhammad Ali was aware of that, and consciously aimed at 
catching up with Europe. He instituted a series of reforms, the most 
important of which were of an economic nature. Egypt grew and 
manufactured its own cotton, and it made glass, paper, and other 
industrial goods. Egypt was not to be used as a dumping ground for 
European goods which would undermine local industry, so that 
protective tariff walls were set up around Egypt’s ‘infant industries’. 
That did not mean that Egypt became isolated from the rest of the 
world. On the contrary, Muhammad Ali borrowed experts from Europe, 
and he increased Egypt’s foreign trade.
The ideals of Muhammad Ali could be related in the idiom of modern 
social science as being the creation of a viable, self-propelling economy 
to provide the basis for national independence. Such ideals were 
diametrically opposed to the needs of European capitalism. British and 
French industrialists wanted to see Egypt not as a textile manufacturer 
but as a producer of raw cotton for export, and an importer
European manufactures. European financiers wanted Egypt to be a 
source of investment, and in the second half of the 18th century they 
turned the Sultan of Egypt into an international beggar, who mortgaged 
the whole of Egypt to international monopoly financiers. Finally, 
European statesmen wanted Egyptian soil to serve as a base for 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (76 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:24 AM]


--- PAGE 220 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
exploiting India and Arabia. Therefore, the Suez Canal was dug out of 
Egyptian soil by Egyptians, but it was owned by Britain and France, 
who then extended political domination over Egypt and Sudan.
Education is undeniably one of the facets of European life which had 
grown most appreciably during the capitalist epoch. Through education 
and extensive use of the written word, Europeans were in a position to 
pass on to the others the scientific principles of the material world 
which they had discovered, as well as a body of varied philosophical 
reflections on man and society. Africans were quick to appreciate 
advantages deriving from a literate education. In Madagascar, the 
Merina kingdom did a great deal to sponsor reading and writing. They 
used their own language and an Arabic script, and they welcomed the 
aid of European missionaries. That conscious borrowing from all 
relevant sources was only possible when they had the freedom to 
choose. Colonisation, far from springing from Malagasy needs, actually 
erected a barrier to the attainment of the ‘modernisation’ initiated by the 
Merina kings in the 1860s and 1870s. A similar example can be found 
in the history of Tunisia before the axe of Partition fell.
In many parts of the world, capitalism in its imperialist form accepted 
that some measure of political sovereignty should be left in the hands of 
the local population. This was so in Eastern Europe, in Latin America, 
and to a more limited extent in China. However, European capitalists 
came to the decision that Africa should be directly colonised. There is 
evidence to suggest that such a course of action was 
not entirely planned. Britain and France up to the 1850s and 1860s 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (77 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:24 AM]


--- PAGE 221 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
would have preferred to divide Africa into informal ‘spheres of 
influence’. That means that there would have been a gentlemen’s 
agreement that (say) Nigeria would be exploited by the British 
merchants while Senegal would be exploited by Frenchmen. At the 
same time both Englishmen and Frenchmen would trade in a minor way 
in each other’s informal empire. But, firstly, there was disagreement 
over who should suck which pieces of Africa (especially since Germany 
wanted to join the grabbing); and, secondly, the moment that one 
European power declared an area of Africa as a Protectorate or a 
colony, it put up tariffs against European traders of other nationalities, 
and in turn forced their rivals to have colonies and discriminatory 
tariffs. One thing led to another, and soon six European capitalist 
nations were falling over each other to establish direct political rule 
over particular sections of Africa. Make no mistake about it, gentlemen 
like Karl Peters, Livingstone, Stanley, Harry Johnston, de Brazza, 
General Gordon and their masters in Europe were literally scrambling 
for Africa. They barely avoided a major military conflagration.
In addition to the factors that caused the chain-reaction of the Scramble 
as described above, Europeans were also racially motivated to seek 
political domination over Africa. Thee 19th century was one in which 
white racism was most violently and openly expressed in capitalist 
societies, with the U.S.A. as a focal point, and with Britain taking the 
lead among the Western European capitalist nations. Britain accepted 
granting dominion status to its old colonies of white settlers in Canada, 
Australia and New Zealand; but it withdrew self-government from the 
West Indies when the white planters were ousted from the legislative 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (78 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:24 AM]


--- PAGE 222 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
assemblies by black (or brown) people. As far as Africa is concerned, 
Englishmen violently opposed black self-government such as the Fante 
Confederation on the Gold Coast in the 1860s. They also tried to erode 
the authority of black Creoles in Sierra Leone. In 1874, when Fourah 
Bay College sought and obtained affiliation with Durham University, 
the Times newspaper declared that Durham should next affiliate with 
the London Zoo! Pervasive and vicious racism was present in 
imperialism as a variant independent of the economic rationality that 
initially gave birth to racism. It was economics that determined that 
Europe should invest in Africa and control the continent’s raw materials 
and labour. It was racism which confirmed the decision that the form of 
control should be direct colonial rule.
Africans everywhere fought against alien political rule, and had to be 
subdued by superior force. But a sizeable minority did insist that their 
trade connections with Europe should remain unbroken, for that was a 
measure of the extent to which they were already dependent on Europe. 
The most dramatic illustration of that dependence was the 
determination with which some Africans fought the end of the 
European slave trade.
For most European capitalist states, the enslavement of Africans had 
served its purpose by the middle of the 19th century; but for those 
Africans who dealt in captives the abrupt termination of the trade at any 
given point was a crisis of the greatest magnitude. In many areas, major 
social changes had taken place to bring the particular regions effectively 
into the service of the European slave trade — one of the most 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (79 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:24 AM]


--- PAGE 223 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
significant being the rise of ‘domestic slavery’ and various forms of 
class and caste subjugation. African rulers and traders who found their 
social existence threatened by the earliest legal edicts such as the 1807 
British Act against the trade in slaves found ways of making contact 
with Europeans who still wanted slaves.
In sub-Saharan Africa and especially in West Africa, the export of 
slaves declined most rapidly where Europeans were prepared to buy 
other commodities. As soon as inhabitants of any region found that they 
had a product which Europeans were accepting in place of the former 
slave trade, those inhabitants put tremendous effort into organising the 
alternatives: namely, ivory, rubber, palm products, groundnuts, etc. 
Once more, those efforts demonstrated the determination of a small but 
decisive proportion of Africans. It was a determination based on the 
desire to obtain European trade goods, many of which had ceased to be 
mere curiosities or luxuries, and were regarded instead as necessities.
The first four centuries of Afro/European trade in a very real sense 
represent the roots of African underdevelopment. Colonialism 
flourished rapidly from a European viewpoint, because several of its 
features were already rooted in Africa in the preceding period. One of 
the most decisive features of the colonial system was the presence of 
Africans serving as economic, political and cultural agents of the 
European colonialists. Those agents or ‘compradors’ were already 
serving European interests in the pre-colonial period. The impact of 
trade with Europe had reduced many African rulers to the status of 
middlemen for European trade; it had raised ordinary Africans to that 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (80 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:24 AM]


--- PAGE 224 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
same middleman commercial role; and it had created a new trading 
group of mixed blood-the children of European or Arab fathers. Those 
types can all be referred to as ‘compradors’, and they played a key role 
in extending European activity from the coast into the hinterland, as 
soon as Europeans thought of taking over political power. One 
outstanding example of the above is the way that the French colonialists 
used Africans and mulattoes on the Senegalese coast as agents for the 
spread of French control for thousands of miles into areas now covered 
by Senegal, Mali, Chad, Upper Volta and Niger. Those particular blacks 
and mulattoes were living in the trading ports of Gorée, Dakar, St. 
Louis and Rufisque; and they had had long-standing links with Atlantic 
trade.
Africans conducting trade on behalf of Europeans were not merely 
commercial agents, but also cultural agents, since inevitably they were 
heavily influenced by European thought and values. The search for 
European education began in Africa before the colonial period. Coastal 
rulers and traders recognised the necessity to penetrate more deeply into 
the way of life of the white man who came across the sea. The mulatto 
sons of white traders and the sons of African rulers were the ones who 
made the greatest effort to learn the white ways. This helped them to 
conduct business more effectively. One Sierra Leone ruler in the 18th 
century explained that he wished ‘to learn book to be rogue as good as 
white man'; and there were many others who saw the practical 
advantages of literacy. However, the educational process also meant 
imbibing values which led to further African subjugation. One West 
African educated in this early period wrote a Ph.D. thesis in Latin 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (81 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:24 AM]


--- PAGE 225 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
justifying slavery. That was not surprising.: The Rev. Thomas 
Thompson was the first European educator on the ‘Gold Coast’, and he 
wrote in 1778 a pamphlet entitled, The African Trade for Negro Slaves 
Shown to be Consistent with the Principles of Humanity and the Laws 
of Revealed Religion.
One of the most striking features of 19th century West ‘African history 
is the manner in which Africans returned from slavery under European 
masters and helped in the establishment of colonial rule. This was 
especially true of Africans who returned from the West Indies and 
North America to Sierra Leone or who were released from slave ships 
and landed in Sierra Leone. To a lesser extent, it also applied to 
Africans who were once in Brazil. Such individuals had assimilated 
capitalist values, and like most European missionaries, promoted the 
kinds of activity that went along with colonial rule. In a rather different 
context, it can be argued that the Arabs of Zanzibar and the East 
African ere also transformed into agents of European colonialism. At 
first, they resisted because European colonialism affected their own 
expansionist ambitions on the East African but they soon came to an 
arrangement which gave Europeans the ultimate powers. The 
Europeans reduced the small Arab clique into political and economic 
instruments of imperialism.
European superiority over the Arabs in East and North : and in the 
Middle East demonstrates conclusively modern imperialism is 
inseparable from capitalism, and the role of slavery in the context of 
capitalism. The Arabs had acquired Africans as slaves for centuries, but 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (82 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:24 AM]


--- PAGE 226 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
they were exploited in a feudal context. African slaves in Arab hands 
became domestics, soldiers, and agricultural serfs. Whatever surplus 
they produced was not for reinvestment and multiplication of capital, as 
in the West Indian or North American slave systems but for’ 
consumption by the feudal elite. Indeed, slaves were often maintained 
more for social prestige than for economic benefit.
The major exceptions to that rule were 19th century Zanzibar and Egypt 
under Muhammed Ali. In both those instances, African labour was 
being exploited to produce profit on a plantation basis; and this may 
also have applied to date palm production in Arabia. But, Europe had 
already been exploiting African labour to maximise surplus for three 
centuries previously, and the contribution which the plantation system 
made to the European capitalist development was so great that Western 
Europe in the 19th century had engulfed the lesser exploitation of 
Zanzibar and Arabia, and it secured a firm grasp on Egypt’s economy 
after the death of Muhammed Ali in 1849. In other words, the cloves, 
cotton and dates produced in Zanzibar, Egypt and Arabia, respectively, 
previous to colonisation were already going to strengthen European 
trade and production. Eventually, it was no problem for the capitalist 
slave traders of Europe to extend political domination over the feudalist 
Arab slave traders and to use the latter as agents of colonialism in East 
Africa.
Returning to the question of indigenous African agents of European 
colonial rule in Africa, it should be recognised that Europeans recruited 
Africans to serve in the armies that actually conquered Africa in the 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (83 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:24 AM]


--- PAGE 227 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
bloody period from the 1880’s through to the first Great War started by 
Europeans in 1914. It is a widespread characteristic of colonialism to 
find agents of repression from among the colonial victims themselves. 
Yet, without the previous centuries of trade between Africa and Europe, 
it would have been impossible for Europeans to have so easily recruited 
the askaris, porters, etc., who made their colonial conquest possible.
African residents of the Senegalese ports already referred to were the 
ones who were put in French army uniform and fought to establish 
French rule in the interior and other parts of the coast such as Dahomey. 
When the British defeated Asante in 1874, they had in their forces 
African troops from the coastal towns around the ‘Gold Coast’ forts. 
Those Africans had been in contact with Europeans ‘for so long that 
ever since the 17th century they identified themselves as ‘Dutch’, 
‘Danish’, or ‘English’, depending upon whose fort gave them 
employment. They had fought battles for one European nation against 
another; and by the late 19th century it was an easy matter to get them 
to fight against fellow Africans on behalf of the conquering colonial 
power of Britain.
In the Portuguese territories, the origins of the black colonial police and 
army also went back into the ‘pre-colonial’ trade period. Around the 
forts of Luanda and Benguela in Angola and Lourenço Marques and 
Beira in Mozambique, there grew up communities of Africans, 
mulattoes and even Indians who helped ‘pacify’ large areas for the 
Portuguese after the Berlin Conference. Traders in Mozambique and in 
the rest of East, West and Central Africa who had experience with 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (84 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:24 AM]


--- PAGE 228 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Europeans previous to colonialism were the ones to provide porters to 
carry the heavy machine guns, cannons and the support equipment; they 
were the ones who provided the would-be European colonialist with the 
information and military intelligence that facilitated conquest; and they 
were the interpreters who were the voice of the Europeans on African 
soil.
Of course, it is true that many Africans who had little ‘ nothing to do 
with pre-colonial trade also allied themselves with European 
newcomers. In that respect, the gap in levels of political organisation 
between Europe and Africa was very crucial. The development of 
political unity in the form of large states was proceeding steadily in 
Africa. But even so, at the time of the Berlin Conference, Africa was 
still a continent of a large number of socio-political groupings who had 
not arrived at a common purpose. Therefore, it was easy for the 
European intruder to play the classic game of divide and conquer. In 
that way, certain Africans became unwitting allies of Europe.
Many African rulers sought a European ‘alliance’ to deal with their own 
African neighbour, with whom they were in conflict. Few of those 
rulers appreciated the implications of their actions. They could not 
know that Europeans had come to stay permanently; they could not 
know that Europeans were out to conquer not some but all Africans. 
This partial inadequate view of the world was itself a testimony of 
African underdevelopment relative to Europe, which in the late 19th 
century was self-confidently seeking dominion in part of the globe.
Political divisions in Africa were no evidence of innate inferiority or 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (85 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:24 AM]


--- PAGE 229 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
backwardness. That was the state in which the continent then found 
itself — a point along a long road that others had traversed and along 
which Africa was moving. Commercial impact of Europe slowed down 
the process of political amalgamation and expansion; in contrast to the 
way trade with Africa strengthened Europe’s nation states. When 
European capitalism took the form of imperialism and started to 
subjugate Africa politically, the normal political conflicts of the pre-
capitalist African situation were transformed into weakness which 
allowed the Europeans to set up their colonial domination.
Altogether, it is very clear that to understand the coming of colonialism 
into Africa, one has to consider the previous historical evolution of both 
Africa and Europe and in particular one has to consider ways in which 
their trade contacts influence the two continents mutually, so that what 
was called ‘pre-colonial’ trade proved to be a preparatory stage for the 
era of colonial rule.
It is widely accepted that Africa was colonised because of its weakness. 
The concept of weakness should be understood to embrace military 
weakness and inadequate economic capacity, as well as certain political 
weaknesses namely, the incompleteness of the establishment of nation 
states which left the continent divided and the low level of 
consciousness concerning the world at large which had already been 
transformed into a single system by the expansion of capitalist relations.
Brief Guide to Reading
Section 3 of this chapter dealing with African society is a continuation 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (86 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:24 AM]


--- PAGE 230 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
of Chapter 2; and general books cited there are also relevant in this 
context. More African writers are involved in this recent pre-colonial 
period, which is of course one aspect of a national struggle. There are 
also more and better monographs on given areas and subjects. But, the 
coming of imperialism has not yet been seriously pursued from an 
African viewpoint, and there is a marked absence of theory linking 
together the numerous facts that are now well established about events 
taking place in Africa between 1500 and 1885.
J. Webster and A. Boahen, The Revolutionary Years: West Africa since 
1800.
Davidson with J. E. Mhina, The Growth of African Civilisation: East 
and Central Africa lo the late nineteenth century.
These two should be added to the list of general texts which provide 
regional surveys over a long period of time. They have the advantage of 
being coherent interpretations and not just collected essays.
W. Rodney, West Africa and the Atlantic Slave Trade. 
E. Alpers, The East African Slave Trade.
I.A. Akinjogbin, Dahomey and its Neighbours.
The first two are short accounts of the impact of slave exports on the 
African regions concerned. The third is a detailed account by a Nigerian 
scholar of Dahomey’s involvement with Europeans.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (87 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:24 AM]


--- PAGE 231 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
J. Egharevba, A Short History of Benin.
B.A. Ogot, History of the Southern Luo.
I. Kimambo, A Political History of the Pare.
J. Vansina, Kingdoms of the Savannah.
The first three are good examples of scholarship by Africans concerning 
historical developments starting before contact with Europe. They are 
characterised by the use of African oral traditions as a basis for 
interpretation. The fourth (by a European) was a pioneering work which 
drew heavily on oral traditions in reconstructing Central African 
history.
J. Ajayi, Christian Missions in Nigeria, 1845-1891.
E.A. Ayandele, The Missionary Impact on Modern Nigeria.
One aspect of the imperialist epoch that has been probed by African 
historians (and many non-Africans) is that of the Christian missionaries, 
as evidenced by the above works.
 
Table of Contents 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch04.htm (88 of 88) [8/22/05 11:06:24 AM]


--- PAGE 232 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Chapter Five. Africa’s Contribution 
to the Capitalist Development of 
Europe – the Colonial Period
The colonies have been created for the metropole by the metropole
French saying.
‘Sales operations in the United States and management of the fourteen 
(Unilever) plants are directed from Lever House on New York’s 
fashionable Park Avenue. You look at this tall, striking, glass-and-steel 
structure and you wonder how many hours of underpaid black labour and 
how many thousands of tons of underpriced palm oil and peanuts and 
cocoa it cost to build it.’
W. Altheus Hunton
5. 1 Expatriation of African Surplus under Colonialism
(a) Capital and African wage labour
Colonial Africa fell within that part of the international capitalist 
economy from which surplus was drawn to feed the metropolitan 
sector. As seen earlier, exploitation of land and labour is essential for 
human social advance, but only on the assumption that the product is 
made available within the area where the exploitation takes place. 
Colonialism was not merely a system of exploitation, but one whose 
essential purpose was to repatriate the profits to the so-called ‘mother 
country’. From an African view-point, that amounted to consistent 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (1 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:04 AM]


--- PAGE 233 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
expatriation of surplus produced by African labour out of African 
resources. It meant the development of Europe as part of the same 
dialectical process in which Africa was underdeveloped.
By any standards, labour was cheap in Africa, and the amount of 
surplus extracted from the African labourer was great. The employer 
under colonialism paid an extremely small wage – a wage usually 
insufficient to keep the worker physically alive – and, therefore, he had 
to grow food to survive. This applied in particular to farm labour of the 
plantation type, to work in mines, and to certain forms of urban 
employment. At the time of the imposition of European colonial rule, 
Africans were able to gain a livelihood from the land. Many retained 
some contact with the land in the years ahead, and they worked away 
from their shambas in order to pay taxes or because they were forced to 
do so. After feudalism in Europe had ended, the worker had absolutely 
no means of sustenance other than through the sale of his labour to 
capitalists. Therefore, to some extent the employer was responsible for 
ensuring the physical survival of the worker by giving him a ‘living 
wage’. In Africa, this was not the case. Europeans offered the lowest 
possible wage and relied on legislation backed by force to do the rest.
There were several reasons why the African worker was more crudely 
exploited than his European counterpart in the present century. Firstly, 
the alien colonial state had a monopoly of political power, after 
crushing all opposition by armed force. Secondly, the African working 
class was small, very dispersed, and very unstable owing to migratory 
practices. Thirdly, while capitalism was willing to exploit all workers 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (2 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:04 AM]


--- PAGE 234 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
everywhere, European capitalists in Africa had additional racial 
justifications for dealing unjustly with the African worker. The racist 
theory that the black man was inferior led to the conclusion that he 
deserved lower wages; and, interestingly enough, the light-skinned 
Arab and Berber populations of North Africa were treated as ‘blacks’ 
by the white racist French. The combination of the above factors in turn 
made it extremely difficult for African workers to organise themselves. 
It is only the organisation and resoluteness of the working class which 
protects it from the natural tendency of the capitalist to exploit to the 
utmost. That is why in all colonial territories, when African workers 
realised the necessity for trade union solidarity, numerous obstacles 
were laid in their paths by the colonial regimes.
Wages paid to workers in Europe and North America were much higher 
than wages paid to African workers in comparable categories. The 
Nigerian coalminer at Enugu earned 1/- per day for working 
underground and 0/9d per day for jobs on the surface. Such a miserable 
wage would be beyond comprehension of a Scottish or German 
coalminer who could virtually earn in an hour what the Enugu miner 
was paid for a six-day week. The same disparity existed with port 
workers. The records of the large American shipping company, Farrell 
Lines, show that in 1955, of the total amount spent on loading and 
discharging cargo moving between Africa and America, five-sixths 
went to American workers and one-sixth to Africans. Yet, it was the 
same amount of cargo loaded and unloaded at both ends. The wages 
paid to the American stevedore and the European coalminers were still 
such as to ensure that the capitalists made a profit. The point here is 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (3 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:04 AM]


--- PAGE 235 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
merely to illustrate how much greater was the rate of exploitation of 
African workers.
When discrepancies such as the above were pointed out during the 
colonial period and subsequently, those who justified colonialism were 
quick to reply that the standard and cost of living was higher in 
capitalist countries. The fact is that the higher standard was made 
possible by the exploitation of colonies, and there was no justification 
for keeping African living standards so depressed in an age where better 
was possible and in a situation where a higher standard was possible 
because of the work output of Africans themselves. The kind of living 
standard supportable by African labour within the continent is readily 
illustrated by the salaries and the life-style of the whites inside Africa.
Colonial governments discriminated against the employment of 
Africans in senior categories; and, whenever it happened that a white 
and a black filled the same post, the white man was sure to be paid 
considerably more. This was true at all levels, ranging from civil 
service posts to mine workers. African salaried workers in the British 
colonies of Gold Coast and Nigeria were better off than their brothers in 
many other parts of the continent, but they were restricted to the ‘Junior 
staff’ level in the civil service. In the period before the last world war, 
European civil servants in the Gold Coast received an average of £40 
per month, with quarters and other privileges. Africans got an average 
salary of £4. There were instances where one European in an 
establishment earned as much as his twenty-five African assistants put 
together. Outside the civil service, Africans obtained work in building 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (4 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:04 AM]


--- PAGE 236 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
projects, in mines and as domestics – all low-paying jobs. It was 
exploitation without responsibility and without redress. In 1934, forty-
one Africans were killed in a gold mine disaster in the Gold Coast, and 
the capitalist company offered only £3 to the dependants of each of 
these men as compensation.
Where European settlers were found in considerable numbers, the wage 
differential was readily perceived. In North Africa, the wages of 
Moroccans and Algerians were from 16% to 25% those of Europeans. 
In East Africa, the position was much worse, notably in Kenya and 
Tanganyika. A comparison with white settler earnings and standards 
brings out by sharp contrast how incredibly low African wages were. 
While Lord Delamere controlled 100,000 acres of Kenya’s land, the 
Kenyan had to carry a kipande pass in his own country to beg for a 
wage of 15/- or 20/- per month. The absolute limit of brutal exploitation 
was found in the Southern parts of the continent; and in Southern 
Rhodesia, for example, agricultural labourers rarely received more than 
15/- per month. Workers in mines got a little more if they were semi-
skilled, but they also had more intolerable working conditions. 
Unskilled labourers in the mines of Northern Rhodesia often got as little 
as 7/- per month. A lorry-driver on the famous copper-belt was in a 
semi-skilled grade. In one mine, Europeans performed that job for £30 
per month, while in another, Africans did it for £3 per month.
In all colonial territories, wages were reduced during the period of crisis 
which shook the capitalist world during the 1930s, and they were not 
restored or increased until after the last capitalist world war. In 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (5 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:04 AM]


--- PAGE 237 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Southern Rhodesia in 1949, Africans employed in municipal areas were 
awarded minimum wages from 35/- to 75/- per month. That was a 
considerable improvement over previous years, but white workers (on 
the job for 8 hours per day compared to the Africans’ 10 or 14 hours) 
received a minimum wage of 20/- per day plus free quarters, etc.
The Rhodesians offered a miniature version of South Africa’s apartheid 
system, which oppressed the largest industrial working class on the 
continent. In the Union of South Africa, African labourers worked deep 
underground, under inhuman conditions which would not have been 
tolerated by miners in Europe. Consequently, black South African 
workers recovered gold from deposits which elsewhere would be 
regarded as non-commercial. And yet it is the white section of the 
working class which received whatever benefits were available in terms 
of wages and salaries. Officials have admitted that the mining 
companies could pay whites higher than miners in any other part of the 
world because of the super profits made by paying black workers a 
mere pittance.* [*As is well known, those conditions still operate. 
However, this chapter presents matters in the past tense to picture the 
colonial epoch.]
In the final analysis, the shareholders of the mining companies were the 
ones who benefited most of all. They remained in Europe and North 
America and collected fabulous dividends every year from the gold, 
diamonds, manganese, uranium, etc. which were brought out of the 
South African sub-soil by African labour. For years, the capitalist press 
itself praised Southern Africa as an investment outlet returning super 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (6 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:04 AM]


--- PAGE 238 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
profits on capital invested. From the very beginning of the Scramble for 
Africa, huge fortunes were made from gold and diamonds in Southern 
Africa by people like Cecil Rhodes. In the present century, both the 
investment and the outflow of surplus have increased. Investment was 
mainly concentrated in mining and finance where the profits were 
greatest. In the mid-1950s, British investments in South Africa were 
estimated at £860 million and yielded a stable profit of 15% or £129 
million every year. Most mining companies had returns well above that 
average. DeBeers Consolidated Mines made a profit that was both 
phenomenal and consistently high – between $26 million and $29 
million throughout the 1950s.
The complex of Southern African mining concerns operated not just in 
South Africa itself, but also in South West Africa, Angola, 
Mozambique, Northern Rhodesia, Southern Rhodesia and the Congo. 
Congo was consistently a source of immense wealth for Europe, 
because from the time of colonisation until 1906, King Leopold of 
Belgium made at least $20 million from rubber and ivory. The period of 
mineral exploitation started quite early, and then gained momentum 
after political control passed from King Leopold to the Belgium state in 
1908. Total foreign capital inflow into the Congo between 1887 and 
1953 was estimated by the Belgians to have been £5,700 million. The 
value of the outflow in the same period was said to have been £4,300 
million, exclusive of profits retained within the Congo. As was true 
everywhere else on the continent, the expatriation of surplus from 
Congo increased as the colonial period wore on. In the five years 
preceding independence the net outflow of capital from Congo to 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (7 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:04 AM]


--- PAGE 239 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Belgium reached massive proportions. Most of the expatriation of 
surplus was handled by a major European finance monopoly, the 
Societé Generale. The Societé Generale had as its most important 
subsidiary the Union Miniére de Haute Katanga, which has 
monopolised Congolese copper production since 1889 (when it was 
known as the Compagnie de Katanga). Union Miniére has been known 
to make a profit of £27 million in a single year.
It is no wonder that of the total wealth produced in Congo in any given 
year during the colonial period, more than one-third went out in the 
form of profits for big business and salaries for their expatriate staffs. 
But the comparable figure for Northern Rhodesia under the British was 
one half. In Katanga, Union Miniére at least had a reputation for leaving 
some of the profits behind in the form of things like housing and 
maternity services for African workers. The Rhodesian Copper Belt 
Companies expatriated profits without compunction.
It should not be forgotten that outside of Southern Africa, there were 
also significant mining operations during the colonial period. In North 
Africa, foreign capital exploited natural resources of phosphates, oil, 
lead, zinc, manganese and iron ore. In Guinea, Sierra Leone and 
Liberia, there were important workings of gold, diamonds, iron ore and 
bauxite. To all that should be added the tin of Nigeria, the gold and 
manganese of Ghana, the gold and diamonds of Tanganyika, and the 
copper of Uganda and Congo-Brazzaville. In each case, an 
understanding of the situation must begin with an enquiry into the 
degree of exploitation of African resources and labour, and then must 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (8 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:04 AM]


--- PAGE 240 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
proceed to follow the surplus to its destination outside of Africa – into 
the bank accounts of the capitalists who control the majority shares in 
the huge multi-national mining combines.
The African working class produced a less spectacular surplus for 
export with regard to companies engaged in agriculture. Agricultural 
plantations were widespread in North, East and South Africa; and they 
also appeared in West Africa to a lesser extent. Their profits depended 
on the incredibly low wages and harsh working conditions imposed on 
African agricultural labourers and on the fact that they invested very 
little capital in obtaining the land, which was robbed whole-sale from 
Africans by colonial powers and then sold to whites at nominal prices. 
For instance, after the Kenya highlands had been declared ‘Crown 
Land’, the British handed over to Lord Delamere 100,000 acres of the 
best land at a cost of penny per acre. Lord Francis Scott purchased 
350,000 acres, the East African Estates Ltd. got another 350,000 acres, 
and the East African Syndicate took 100,000 acres adjoining Lord 
Delamere’s estate – all at giveaway prices. Needless to say, such 
plantations made huge profits, even if the rate was lower than in a South 
African gold mine or an Angolan diamond mine.
During the colonial era, Liberia was supposedly independent; but to all 
intents and purposes, it was a colony of the U.S.A. In 1926, the 
Firestone Rubber Company of the U.S.A. was able to acquire one 
million acres of forest land in Liberia at a cost of 6 cents per acre and 
1% of the value of the exported rubber. Because of the demand for and 
the strategic importance of rubber, Firestone’s profits from Liberia’s 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (9 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:04 AM]


--- PAGE 241 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
land and labour carried them to 25th position among the giant 
companies of the U.S.A.
(b) European Trading Companies versus the African Peasant
So far, this section has been dealing with that part of the surplus 
produced by African wage earners in mines, plantations, etc. But the 
African working class under colonialism was extremely small and the 
vast majority of Africans engaged in the colonial money economy were 
independent peasants. How then can it be said that these self-employed 
peasants were contributing to the expatriation of African surplus? 
Apologists for colonialism argue that it was a positive benefit for such 
farmers to have been given the opportunity to create surplus by growing 
or collecting produce such as cocoa, coffee, palm oil, etc. It is essential 
that this misrepresentation be clarified.
A peasant growing a cash crop or collecting produce had his labour 
exploited by a long chain of individuals, starting with local 
businessmen. Sometimes, those local businessmen were Europeans. 
Very rarely were they Africans, and more usually they were a minority 
group brought in from outside and serving as intermediaries between 
the white colonialists and the exploited African peasant. In West Africa, 
the Lebanese and Syrians played this role; while in East Africa the 
Indians rose to this position. Arabs were also in the middleman category 
in Zanzibar and a few other places on the East African coast.
Cash crop peasants never had any capital of their own. They existed 
from one crop to another, depending on good harvests and good prices. 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (10 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:04 AM]


--- PAGE 242 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Any bad harvest or fall of prices caused the peasants to borrow in order 
to find money to pay taxes and buy certain necessities. As security, they 
mortgaged their future crops to moneylenders in the middleman 
category. Non-payment of debts could and did lead to their farms being 
taken away by the moneylenders. The rate of interest on the loans was 
always fantastically high, amounting to what is known as ‘usury’. In 
East Africa, things were so bad that even the British colonial 
government had to step in and enact a ‘Native Credit Ordinance’ to 
protect Africans from Asian businessmen.
However, in spite of some minor clashes between the colonialists and 
the middlemen, the two were part and parcel of the same apparatus of 
exploitation. On the whole, the Lebanese and Indians did the smaller 
jobs which Europeans could not be bothered with. They owned things 
such as cotton ginneries which separated the seed from the lint; while of 
course Europeans concentrated on the cotton mills in Europe. The 
middlemen also went out to the villages, while Europeans liked to stay 
in towns. In the villages, the Indians and Lebanese took over virtually 
all buying and selling; channelling most of the profits back to 
Europeans in the towns and those overseas.
The share of profits which went to middlemen was insignificant in 
comparison to those profits reaped by big European business interests 
and by the European governments themselves. The capitalist institution 
which came into most direct contact with African peasants was the 
colonial trading company: that is to say, a company specialising in 
moving goods to and from the colonies. The most notorious were the 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (11 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:04 AM]


--- PAGE 243 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
French concerns, Compagnie Française d’Afrique Occidentale (CFAO) 
and Societé Commerciale Ouest Africaine (SCOA) and the British 
controlled United Africa Company (UAC). These were responsible for 
expatriating a great proportion of Africa’s wealth produced by peasant 
toil.
Several of the colonial trading companies already had African blood on 
their hands from participation in the slave trade. Thus, after French 
merchants in Bordeaux made fortunes from the European slave trade, 
they transferred that capital to the trade in groundnuts from Senegal and 
Gambia in the middle of the 19th century. The firms concerned 
continued to operate in the colonial period, although they changed 
hands and there were a lot of mergers. In Senegal, Mauretania and Mali, 
the names of Maurel & Prom, Maurel Brothers, Buhan & Teyssere, 
Delmas & Clastre were all well known. Several of them were 
eventually incorporated into SCOA, which was dominated by a 
consortium of French and Swiss financiers. A parallel process in the 
French port of Marseilles led to the transfer of slave-trade capital into 
direct trade between Africa and France. After the end of the first World 
War, most of the small Marseilles firms were absorbed into the massive 
CFAO, which imported into French West Africa whatever European 
goods the market would take, and exported in turn the agricultural 
produce that was largely the consequence of peasant labour. CFAO also 
had British and Dutch capital, and its activities extended into Liberia 
and into British and Belgian colonies. It is said that SCOA and CFAO 
made a profit of up to 90% in good years and 25 % in bad years.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (12 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:04 AM]


--- PAGE 244 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
In Britain, the notorious slave-trading port of Liverpool was the first to 
switch to palm oil early in the 19th century when the trade in slaves 
became difficult or impossible. This meant that Liverpool firms were no 
longer exploiting Africa by removing its labour physically to another 
part of the world. Instead, they were exploiting the labour and raw 
materials of Africa inside Africa. Throughout the 19th century and right 
into the colonial era, Liverpool concentrated largely on importing 
African peasant produce. Backed by the industrial districts of 
Manchester and Cheshire, this British port was in control of a great 
proportion of Britain’s and Europe’s trade with Africa in the colonial 
period-just as it had done in the slave trade period. Glasgow also had a 
keen interest in the colonial trade, so did the merchants and big business 
interests of London. By 1929, London replaced Liverpool as chief port 
dealing with African import/export.
As indicated, the UAC was the British company which was best known 
among the commercial concerns. It was a subsidiary of the giant Anglo-
Dutch monopoly, Unilever; and its agencies were found in all the 
British colonies of West Africa and on a smaller scale in East Africa. 
Unilever also controlled the Compagnie du Niger Français, the 
Compagnie Française de la Cote d’Ivoire, SCKN in Chad, NOSOCO 
in Senegal, NSCA in Portuguese Guinea, and John Walken & Co. Ltd. 
in Dahomey. Certain other British and French firms were not found in 
every colony, but they did well in the particular area in which they were 
entrenched. For example, there was John Holt in Nigeria.
In East Africa, the import/export business tended to have smaller firms 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (13 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:04 AM]


--- PAGE 245 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
than in West Africa, but even so there were five or six which were 
much larger than the rest and appropriated the largest amounts. One of 
the oldest was Smith Mackenzie, which was an offshoot of the Scottish 
company of Mackinnon and Mackenzie which had spearheaded British 
colonisation in East Africa and which also had interests in India. Other 
notable commercial firms were those of A. Baumann, Wigglesworth 
and Company, Dalgetty, Leslie & Anderson, Ralli Bros., Michael Cotts, 
Jos Hansen, the African Mercantile and Twentsche Overseas Trading 
Co. Some of them amalgamated before colonial rule was over, and they 
all had several other subsidiaries, as well as themselves being related to 
bigger companies in the metropoles. The UAC also had a slice of the 
East African import trade, having bought up the firm of Gailey and 
Roberts which was started by white settlers in 1904.
The pattern of appropriation of surplus in East Africa was easy to 
follow, in that there was centralisation of the extractive mechanisms in 
Nairobi and the port of Mombasa. All the big firms operated from 
Nairobi, with important offices in Mombasa to deal with warehousing, 
shipping, insuring, etc. Uganda and Tanganyika were then brought into 
the picture via their capital cities of Kampala and Dar es Salaam, where 
the big firms had branches. Up to the start of the last war, the volume of 
trade from East Africa was fairly small, but it jumped rapidly after that. 
For instance, the value of Kenya imports rose from £4 million in 1938 
to £34 million in 1950 and to £70 million in 1960. The value of exports 
was of course rising at the same time, and the commercial firms were 
among the principal beneficiaries of the growth in foreign trade.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (14 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:04 AM]


--- PAGE 246 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Trading companies made huge fortunes on relatively small investments 
in those parts of Africa where peasant cash-crop farming was 
widespread. The companies did not have to spend a penny to grow the 
agricultural raw materials. The African peasant went in for cash-crop 
farming for many reasons. A minority eagerly took up the opportunity 
to continue to acquire European goods, which they had become 
accustomed to during the pre-colonial period. Many others in every 
section of the continent took to earning cash because they had to pay 
various taxes in money or because they were forced to work. Good 
examples of Africans literally being forced to grow cash crops by gun 
and whip were to be found in Tanganyika under German rule, in 
Portuguese colonies, and in French Equatorial Africa and the French 
Sudan in the 1930s. [These facts came most dramatically to the 
attention of the outside world when Africans resorted to violence. For 
example, forced cultivation of cotton was a major grievance behind the 
outbreak of Maji Maji wars in Tanganyika and behind the nationalist 
revolt in Angola as late as 1960.] In any event, there were very few 
cases where the peasant was wholly dependent on the cash for his actual 
sustenance. The trading companies took full advantage of that fact. 
Knowing that an African peasant and his family would keep alive by 
their own food shambas, the companies had no obligation to pay prices 
sufficient for the maintenance of a peasant and his family. In a way, the 
companies were simply receiving tribute from a conquered people, 
without even the necessity to trouble themselves as to how the tributary 
goods were produced.
Trading companies also had their own means of transport inside Africa, 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (15 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:04 AM]


--- PAGE 247 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
such as motor vessels and lorries. But, usually they transferred the 
burden of transport costs on to the peasant via the Lebanese or Indian 
middlemen. Those capitalist companies held the African farmer in a 
double squeeze, by controlling the price paid for the crop and by 
controlling the price of imported goods such as tools, clothing and 
bicycles to which peasants aspired. For example, prices of palm 
products were severely reduced by the UAC and other trading 
companies in Nigeria in 1929, while the cost of living was rising due to 
increased charges for imported goods. In 1924, the price for palm oil 
had been 14/- per gallon. This fell to 7/- in 1928 and to 1/2d in the 
following year. Although the trading companies received less for every 
ton of palm oil during the depression years, their profit margin 
increased – showing how brazenly surplus was being pounded out of 
the peasant. In the midst of the depression the UAC was showing a 
handsome profit. The profits in 1934 were £6,302,875 and a dividend of 
15% was paid on ordinary shares.
In every part of colonial Africa, the depression years followed the same 
pattern. In Sukumaland (Tanganyika) the price of cotton dropped in 
1930 from 50 cents (6d) to 10 cents per pound. The French colonies 
were hit a little later, because the depression did not make its impact on 
the French monetary zone until after 1931. Then, prices of Senegalese 
groundnuts were cut by more than half. Coffee and cocoa dropped even 
further, since they were relative luxuries to the European buyer. Again, 
it can be noted that French firms such as CFAO and SCOA faced lower 
prices when they sold the raw materials in Europe, but they never 
absorbed any losses. Instead, African peasants and workers bore the 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (16 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:04 AM]


--- PAGE 248 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
pressure, even if it meant forced labour. African peasants in French 
territories were forced to join so-called co-operative societies which 
made them grow certain crops like cotton and made them accept 
whatever price was offered.
Hardly had the depression ended, when Europe was at war. The 
Western powers dragged in the African people to fight for freedom! 
The trading firms stepped up the rate of plunder in the name of God and 
country. On the Gold Coast, they paid £10 per ton for cocoa beans as 
compared to £50 before the war. At the same time, the price of 
imported goods doubled or trebled. Many necessities passed beyond the 
reach of the ordinary man. On the Gold Coast, a piece of cotton print 
which had sold before the war for 12/6d was 90/- in 1945. In Nigeria, a 
yard of khaki which was 3/- in pre-war days went up to 16/- ; a bundle 
of iron sheets formerly costing 30/- went up to 100/-, etc.
Urban workers were hardest hit by rising prices, since they had to 
purchase everyday necessities with money, and part of their food was 
imported. Worker dissatisfaction highlighted this exploitative post-war 
situation. There were several strikes, and in the Gold Coast, the boycott 
of imported goods in 1948 is famous as the prelude to self-government 
under Nkrumah. However, peasants were also restless under low prices 
and expensive imports. In Uganda, the cotton-growing peasants could 
stand things no longer by 1947. They could not get their hands on the 
big British import/export firms, but they could at least deal with the 
Indian and African middlemen. So they marched against the Indian-
owned cotton ginneries and demonstrated outside the palace of the 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (17 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:04 AM]


--- PAGE 249 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Kabaka – the hereditary ruler who often functioned as a British agent in 
Uganda.
To ensure that at all times the profit margin was kept as high as 
possible, the trading firms found it convenient to form ‘pools’. The 
pools fixed the price to be paid to the African cultivator, and kept the 
price down to the minimum. In addition, the trading companies spread 
into several other aspects of the economic life of the colonies, in such a 
way as to introduce several straws for the sucking out of surplus. In 
Morocco, to give one example, the Compagnie General du Maroc 
owned large estates, livestock farms, timber workings, mines, fisheries, 
railways, ports and power stations The giants like CFAO and UAC also 
had their fingers in everything. CFAO’s interests ranged from 
groundnut plantations to shares in the Fabre & Frassinet shipping line. 
The people of Ghana and Nigeria met the UAC everywhere that they 
turned. It controlled wholesale and retail trade, owned butter factories, 
sawmills, soap factories, singlet factories, cold storage plants, 
engineering and motor repair shops, tugs, coastal boats, etc. Some of 
those businesses directly exploited African wage labour, while in one 
way or another all operations skimmed the cream produced by peasant 
efforts in the cash crop sector.
Sometimes, the firms which purchased agricultural products in Africa 
were the same concerns which manufactured goods based on those 
agricultural raw materials. For instance, Cadbury and Fry, the two 
foremost English manufacturers of cocoa and chocolate, were buyers on 
the West African coast, while in East Africa the tea manufacturing 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (18 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:04 AM]


--- PAGE 250 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
concern of Brooke Bond both grew and exported tea. Many of the 
Marseilles, Bordeaux and Liverpool trading companies were also 
engaged in manufacturing items such as soap and margarine in their 
home territories. This applied fully to the UAC, while the powerful 
Lesieur group processing oils and fats in France had commercial buyers 
in Africa. However, it is possible to separate the trading operations 
from the industrial ones. The latter represented the final stage in the 
long process of exploiting the labour of African peasants – in some 
ways the most damaging stage.
Peasants worked for large numbers of hours to produce a given cash 
crop, and the price of the product was the price of those long hours of 
labour. Since primary produce from Africa has always received low 
prices, it follows that the buyer and user of the raw material was 
engaging in massive exploitation of the peasants.
The above generalisation can be illustrated with reference to cotton, 
which is one of the most widely encountered cash crops in Africa. The 
Ugandan farmer grew cotton which ultimately made its way into an 
English factory in Lancashire or a British-owned factory in India. The 
Lancashire factory owner paid his workers as little as possible, but his 
exploitation of their labour was limited by several factors. His 
exploitation of the labour of the Ugandan peasant was unlimited 
because of his power in the colonial state, which ensured that Ugandans 
worked long hours for very little. Besides, the price of the finished 
cotton shirt was so high that when re-imported into Uganda, cotton in 
the form of a shirt was beyond the purchasing power of the peasant who 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (19 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:04 AM]


--- PAGE 251 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
grew the cotton.
The differences between the prices of African exports of raw materials 
and their importation of manufactured goods constituted a form of 
unequal exchange. Throughout the colonial period, this inequality in 
exchange got worse. Economists refer to the process as one of 
deteriorating terms of trade. In 1939, with the same quantity of primary 
goods colonies could buy only 60% of manufactured goods which they 
bought in the decade 1870-80 before colonial rule. By 1960, the amount 
of European manufactured goods purchasable by the same quantity of 
African raw materials had fallen still further. There was no objective 
economic law which determined that primary produce should be worth 
so little. Indeed, the developed countries sold certain raw materials like 
timber and wheat at much higher prices than a colony could command. 
The explanation is that the unequal exchange was forced upon Africa 
by the political and military supremacy of the colonisers, just as in the 
sphere of international relations unequal treaties were forced upon small 
states in the dependencies, like those in Latin America.
The unequal nature of the trade between the metropole and the colonies 
was emphasised by the concept of the ‘protected market’, which meant 
even an inefficient metropolitan producer could find a guaranteed 
market in the colony where his class had political control. Furthermore, 
as in the preceding era of pre-colonial trade, European manufacturers 
built up useful sidelines of goods which would have been sub-standard 
in their own markets, especially in textiles. The European farmer also 
gained in the same way by selling cheap butter, while the Scandinavian 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (20 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:04 AM]


--- PAGE 252 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
fisherman came into his own through the export of salted cod. Africa 
was not a large market for European products, compared to other 
continents, but both buying-prices and selling-prices were set by 
European capitalists. That certainly allowed their manufacturers and 
traders more easy access to the surplus of wealth produced in Africa 
than they would have had if Africans were in a position to raise the 
price of their own exports.
(c) Shipping and Banking Services
Channels for the exploitation of surplus were not exhausted by the 
trading companies and the industrial concerns. The shipping companies 
constituted an exploitative channel that cannot be overlooked. The 
largest shipping companies were those under the flags of the colonising 
nations, especially the British. The shippers were virtually a law unto 
themselves, being very favourably regarded by their home governments 
as earners of super profits, as stimulators of industry and trade, as 
carriers of mail, and as contributors to the navy when war came. 
African peasants had absolutely no control over the freight rates which 
were charged, and actually paid more than citizens in other lands. The 
rate for flour from Liverpool to West Africa was 35/- per ton as 
compared with only 7/6d from Liverpool to New York (a roughly 
equivalent distance). Freight rates normally varied with the volume of 
cargo carried, but the rate for cocoa was established at 50/- per ton 
when amounts exported were small at the beginning of this century, and 
the same high figure remained when exports increased. Coffee carried 
from Kenya to New York in the 1950s earned the shippers $40 (about 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (21 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:04 AM]


--- PAGE 253 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
280/-) per ton. Theoretically, it was the merchant who paid the shipper 
the freight charges, but in practical terms it meant that peasant 
production was bearing all the costs, since the merchants paid out of 
profits made by buying cheaply from the peasants. Alternatively, white 
settler planters paid the costs as in Kenya, and then regained their 
profits through exploitation of rural wage labour.
Shipping companies retained a high profit margin by a practice similar 
to the ‘pools’ of the commercial firms. They established what were 
known as ‘Conference Lines’ which allowed two or more shippers to 
share the freight loads between themselves on the most favourable basis 
possible. Their returns on investment were so high and their greed so 
uncontrollable that even the merchants of the colonising powers 
protested. From 1929 to 1931, the UAC (backed by Unilever) engaged 
in an economic war with the West African Lines Conference – 
comprising the British shipping firm of EIder Dempster, the Holland 
West Africa Line and a German West Africa Line. In that instance, the 
trading monopoly won a victory over the shipping monopoly; but it was 
a fight between two elephants, and the grass was trampled all the more. 
At the end of it all, the African peasant was the greatest loser, because 
both traders and shippers adjusted their differences by lowering prices 
of primary products as paid to Africans.
In the background of the colonial scene hovered the banks, insurance 
companies, maritime underwriters and other financial houses. One can 
say ‘in the background’ because the peasant never dealt directly with 
such institutions, and was generally ignorant of their exploiting 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (22 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:04 AM]


--- PAGE 254 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
functions. The peasant or worker had no access to bank loans because 
he had no ‘securities’ or ‘collateral’. Banks and finance houses dealt 
only with other capitalists who could prove to the bankers that whatever 
happened the bank would recover its money and make a profit. In the 
epoch of imperialism, the bankers became the aristocrats of the 
capitalist world, so in another sense, they were very much in the 
foreground. The amount of surplus produced by African workers and 
peasants and passing into the hands of metropolitan bankers is quite 
phenomenal. They registered a return on capital higher even than the 
mining companies, and each new direct investment that they made spelt 
further alienation of the fruits of African labour. Furthermore, all 
investment in the colonies was in effect the involvement of the big 
finance monopolies, since the smallest trading company was ultimately 
linked a big banker. The returns on colonial investment were 
consistently higher than those on investments in the metropoles, so the 
financiers stood to benefit from sponsoring colonial enterprise.
In the earliest years of colonialism, the banks in Africa were small and 
relatively independent. This applied to the Banque de Senegal, started 
as early as 1853, and to the Bank of British West Africa which began as 
an offshoot of the shipping firm of Elder Dempster. However, the great 
banking houses of Europe, which carried on remote control of 
developments ever since the 1880s, soon moved in directly on the 
colonial banking scene when the volume of capitalist transactions made 
this worthwhile. The Banque de Senegal merged into the Banque de 
L’Afrique Occidentale (BAO) in 1901, acquiring links with the 
powerful Bank of Indo-China, which in turn was a special creation of 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (23 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:04 AM]


--- PAGE 255 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
several powerful metropolitan French bankers. In 1924, the Banque 
Comerciale de 1’Afrique (BCA) emerged in the French territories, 
linked with the Credit Lyonais and the BNCI in France. By that time 
the Bank of British West Africa had its finance backed by Lloyds Bank, 
Westminster Bank, the Standard Bank and the National Provincial Bank 
– all in England. The other great English banking firm, Barclays, moved 
directly into Africa. It purchased the Colonial Bank and set it up as 
Barclays DCO (i.e., Dominion and Colonial).
The Bank of British West Africa (which became the Bank of West 
Africa in 1957) and Barclays held between them the lion’s share of the 
banking business of British West Africa, just as French West and 
Equatorial Africa were shared out between the BAO and the BCA. 
There was also a union of French and British banking capital in West 
Africa in 1949 with the formation of the British and French West Africa 
Bank. French and Belgian exploitation also overlapped in the financial 
sphere, since the Societé Generale had both Belgian and French capital. 
It supported banks in French Africa and the Congo. Other weaker 
colonial powers were served by the international banks such as 
Barclays, as well as using their colonial territories as grazing ground for 
their own national banks. In Libya, the Banco di Roma and the Banco di 
Napoli operated; while in Portuguese territories the most familiar name 
was that of the Banco Ultramarino.
In Southern Africa, the outstanding banking firm was the Standard 
Bank of South Africa Ltd., started in 1862 in the Cape Colony by the 
heads of business houses having close connections with London. Its 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (24 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:04 AM]


--- PAGE 256 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
headquarters were placed in London, and it made a fortune out of 
financing gold and diamond strikes, and through handling the loot of 
Cecil Rhodes and De Beers. By 1895, the Standard Bank spread into 
Bechuanaland, Rhodesia and Mozambique; and it was the second 
British bank to be established in British East Africa. The actual scale of 
profits was quite formidable. ln a book officially sponsored by the 
Standard Bank, the writer modestly concluded as follows:
Little attention has been paid in the text of this book to the financial 
outcome of the Standard Bank’s activities, yet their profitability was an 
inevitable outcome of survival and was therefore bound to be a primary 
objective from first to last.
In 1960, the Standard Bank produced a net profit of £1,1810000 and 
paid a 14% dividend to its shareholders. Most of the latter were in 
Europe or else were whites South Africa, while the profit was produced 
mainly by black people of South and East Africa. Furthermore, 
European banks transferred the reserves of their African branches to the 
London head office to be invested in London money market. This was 
the way in which most rapidly expatriated African surplus to the 
metropoles.
The first bank to be set up in East Africa in the 1890’s was an offshoot 
of a British bank operating in India. It later came to be called the 
National & Grindlays. In neighbouring Tanganyika the Germans 
established the German East African Bank in 1905, but after the first 
world war the British had a near monopoly of East African banking. 
Altogether nine foreign banks were in existence in East Africa during 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (25 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:04 AM]


--- PAGE 257 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
the colonial period, out of which the big three were National & 
Grindlays, the Standard Bank and Barclays.
East Africa provides an interesting example of how effectively foreign 
banks served to dispossess Africa of its wealth. Most of the banking and 
other financial services were rendered to white settlers whose 
conception of ‘home’ was Britain. Consequently when the white settlers 
felt threatened towards the end of the colonial period they rushed to 
send their money home to Britain, For example, when the decision to 
concede self-government to Kenya was taken by the British in 1960, a 
sum of Shs. 40 million was immediately transferred to ‘safety’ in 
London by whites in Tanganyika. That sum, like all other remittances 
by colonial banks represented the exploitation of African land resources 
labour.
(d) The Colonial Administration as Economic Exploiter 
In addition to private companies, the colonial state also engaged 
directly in the economic exploitation and impoverishment of Africa. 
The equivalent of the colonial office in each colonising country worked 
hand in hand with their governors in Africa to carry out a number of 
functions; the principal ones being as follows:
(a) To protect national interests against competition from 
other capitalists.
(b) To arbitrate the conflicts between their own capitalists.
(c) To guarantee optimum conditions under which private 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (26 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:04 AM]


--- PAGE 258 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
companies could exploit Africans.
The last mentioned objective was the most crucial. That is why colonial 
governments were repeatedly speaking about ‘the maintenance of law 
and order’, by which they meant the maintenance of conditions most 
favourable to the expansion of capitalism and the plunder of Africa. 
This led the colonial governments to impose taxes.
One of the main purposes of the colonial taxation system was to provide 
requisite funds for administering the colony as a field of exploitation. 
European colonisers ensured that Africans paid for the upkeep of the 
governors and police who oppressed them and served as watchdogs for 
private capitalists. Indeed, taxes and customs duties were levied in the 
19th century with the aim of allowing the colonial powers to recover the 
costs of the armed forces which they despatched to conquer Africa. In 
effect, therefore, the colonial governments never put a penny into the 
colonies. All expenses were met by exploiting the labour and natural 
resources of the continent; and for all practical purposes the expense of 
maintaining the colonial government machinery was a form of 
alienation of the products of African labour. The French colonies were 
especially victimised in this respect. Particularly since 1921, the local 
revenue raised from taxation had to meet all expenses as well as to 
build up a reserve.
Having set up the police, army, civil service and judiciary on African 
soil, the colonising powers were then in a position to intervene much 
more directly in the economic life of the people than had been the case 
previously. One major problem in Africa from a capitalist viewpoint 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (27 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:04 AM]


--- PAGE 259 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
was how to induce Africans to become labourers or cash-crop farmers. 
In some areas, such as West Africa, Africans had become so attached to 
European manufactures during the early period of trade that, on their 
own initiative, they were prepared to go to great lengths to participate in 
the colonial money economy. But that was not the universal response. 
In many instances, Africans did not consider the monetary incentives 
great enough to justify changing their way of life so as to become 
labourers or cash-crop farmers. In such cases, the colonial state 
intervened to use law, taxation and outright force to make Africans 
pursue a line favourable to capitalist profits.
When colonial governments seized African lands, they achieved two 
things simultaneously. They satisfied their own citizens (who wanted 
mining concessions or farming land) and they created the conditions 
whereby landless Africans had to work not just to pay taxes but also to 
survive. In settler areas such as Kenya and Rhodesia the colonial 
government also prevented Africans from growing cash-crops so that 
their labour would be available directly for the whites. One of the 
Kenya white settlers, Colonel Grogan, put it bluntly when he said of the 
Kikuyu: ‘We have stolen his land. Now we must steal his limbs. 
Compulsory labour is the corollary of our occupation of the country.’
In those parts of the continent where land was still in African hands, 
colonial governments forced Africans to produce cash-crops no matter 
how low the prices were. The favourite technique was taxation. Money 
taxes were introduced on numerous items – cattle, land, houses and the 
people themselves. Money to pay taxes was got by growing cash-crops 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (28 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:04 AM]


--- PAGE 260 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
or working on European farms or in their mines. An interesting example 
of what colonialism was all about was provided in French Equatorial 
Africa, where French officials banned the Mandja people (now in 
Congo Brazzaville) from hunting, so that they would engage solely in 
cotton cultivation. The French enforced the ban although there was little 
livestock in the area and hunting was the main source of meat in the 
people’s diet.
Finally, when all else failed, colonial powers resorted widely to the 
physical coercion of labour – backed up of course by legal sanctions, 
since anything which the colonial government chose to do was ‘legal’. 
The laws and by-laws which peasants in British East Africa were 
required to maintain minimum acreages of cash-crops like cotton and 
groundnuts were in effect forms of coercion by the colonial state, 
although they are not normally considered under the heading of ‘forced 
labour’.
The simplest form of forced labour was that which colonial 
governments exacted to carry out ‘public works’. Labour for a given 
number of days per year had to be given free for these ‘public works’ – 
building castles for governors, prisons for Africans, barracks for troops, 
and bungalows for colonial officials. A great deal of this forced labour 
went into the construction of roads, railways and ports to provide the 
infrastructure for private capitalist investment and to facilitate the 
export of cash-crops. Taking only one example from the British colony 
of Sierra Leone, one finds that the railway which started at the end of 
the 19th century required forced labour from thousands of peasants 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (29 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:04 AM]


--- PAGE 261 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
driven from the villages. The hard work and appalling conditions led to 
the death of a large number of those engaged in work on the railway. In 
the British territories, this kind of forced labour (including juvenile 
labour) was wide-spread enough to call forth in 1923 a ‘Native 
Authority Ordinance’ restricting the use of compulsory labour for 
porterage, railway and road building. More often than not, means were 
found of circumventing this legislation. An international Forced Labour 
Convention was signed by all colonial powers in 1930, but again it was 
flouted in practice.
The French government had a cunning way of getting free labour by 
first demanding that African males should enlist as French soldiers and 
then using them as unpaid labourers. This and other forced labour 
legislation known as ‘prestation’ was extensively applied in vast areas 
of French Sudan and French Equatorial Africa. Because cash-crops are 
not well established in those areas, the main method of extracting 
surplus was by taking the population and making it work in plantation 
or cash-crop regions nearer the coast. Present day Upper Volta, Chad 
and Congo Brazzaville were huge suppliers of forced labour under 
colonialism. The French got Africans to start building the Brazzaville to 
Pointe-Noire railway in 1921, and it was not completed until 1933. 
Every year of its construction, some 10,000 people were driven to the 
site – sometimes from more than 1,000 kilometres away. At least 25% 
of the labour force died annually from starvation and disease, the worst 
period being from 1922 to 1929.
Quite apart from the fact that the ‘public works’ were of direct value to 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (30 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:04 AM]


--- PAGE 262 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
the capitalists, the colonial government also aided private capitalists by 
providing them with labour recruited by force. This was particularly 
true in the early years of colonialism, but continued in varying degrees 
up to the second World War, and even to the end of colonialism in 
some places. In British territories, the practice was revived during the 
economic depression 1929-33 and during the subsequent war. In Kenya 
and Tanganyika, forced labour was re-introduced to keep settler 
plantations functioning during the war. In Nigeria, it was the tin 
companies which benefited from the forced-labour legislation, allowing 
them to get away with paying workers 5d per day plus rations. For most 
of the colonial period, the French government performed the same kind 
of service for the big timber companies who had great concessions of 
territory in Gabon and Ivory Coast.
The Portuguese and Belgian colonial regimes were the most brazen in 
directly rounding up Africans to go and work for private capitalists 
under conditions equivalent to slavery. In Congo, brutal and extensive 
forced labour started under King Leopold in the last century. So many 
Congolese were killed and maimed by Leopold’s officials and police 
that this earned European disapproval even in the midst of the general 
pattern of colonial outrages. When Leopold handed over to the Belgian 
government in 1908, he had already made a huge fortune; and the 
Belgian government hardly relaxed the intensity of exploitation in 
Congo.
The Portuguese have the worst record of engaging in slavery-like 
practices, and they too have been repeatedly condemned by 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (31 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:04 AM]


--- PAGE 263 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
international public opinion. One peculiar characteristic of Portuguese 
colonialism was the provision of forced labour not only for its own 
citizens but also for capitalists outside the boundaries of the colonies. 
Angolans and Mozambicans were exported to the South African mines 
to work for subsistence, while the capitalists in South Africa paid the 
Portuguese government a certain sum for each labourer supplied. [The 
export of Africans to South Africa is still continuing.]
In the above example, the Portuguese colonialists were co-operating 
with capitalists of other nationalities to maximise the exploitation of 
African labour. Throughout the colonial period, there were instances of 
such co-operation, as well as competition between metropolitan powers. 
Generally speaking, a European power was expected to intervene when 
the profits of its national bourgeoisie were threatened by the activities 
of other nations. After all, the whole purpose of establishing colonial 
governments in Africa was to provide protection to national monopoly 
economic interests. Thus, the Belgian government legislated to ensure 
that freight to and from the Congo would be mainly carried by Belgian 
shipping lines; and the French government placed high taxes on 
groundnuts brought into France by foreign ships, which was another 
way of ensuring that groundnuts from French Africa would be exported 
in French ships. In a sense, this meant that Africans were losing their 
surplus through one straw rather than another. But it also meant that the 
sum total of exploitation was also greater, because if competition 
among Europeans were allowed, it would have brought down the cost 
of services and raised the price paid for agricultural products.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (32 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:04 AM]


--- PAGE 264 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Africans suffered most from exclusive trade with the ‘mother country’ 
in cases where the ‘mother country’ was backward. African peasants in 
Portuguese colonies got lower prices for their crops and paid more for 
imported items. Yet, Britain, the biggest of the colonialists in Africa, 
was also faced with competition from the more vigorous capitalists of 
Germany, the U.S.A. and Japan. British merchants and industrialists 
lobbied their government to erect barriers against competition. For 
example, Japanese cloth exports to British East Africa rose from 25 
million yards in 1927 to 63 million yards in 1933; and this led Walter 
Runciman, President of the British Board of Trade, to get Parliament to 
impose heavy tariffs on Japanese goods entering British colonies in 
Africa. This meant that Africans had to pay higher prices for a staple 
import, since British cloth was more expensive. From the viewpoint of 
the African peasant, that amounted to further alienation of the fruits of 
his labour.
A perfect illustration of the identity of interests between the colonial 
governments and their bourgeois citizens was provided by the conduct 
of Produce Marketing Boards in Africa. The origins of the Boards go 
back to the Gold Coast ‘cocoa hold-up’ of 1937. For several months, 
cocoa farmers refused to sell their crop unless the price was raised. One 
apparently favourable result of the ‘hold-up’ was that the British 
government agreed to set up a Marketing Board to purchase cocoa from 
the peasants in place of the big business interests like the UAC and 
Cadbury which had up until then been the buyers. A West African 
Cocoa Control Board was set up in 1938, but the British government 
used this as a bush to hide the private capitalists and to allow them to 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (33 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:04 AM]


--- PAGE 265 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
continue making their exorbitant profits.
In theory, a Marketing Board was supposed to pay the peasant a 
reasonable price for his crop. The Board sold the crop overseas and kept 
a surplus for the improvement of agriculture and for paying the peasants 
a stable price if world market prices declined. In practice, the Boards 
paid peasants a low fixed rate during many years when world prices 
were rising. None of the benefits went to Africans, but rather to the 
British government itself and to the private companies, which were 
used as intermediaries in the buying and selling of the produce. Big 
companies like the UAC and John Holt were given quotas to fulfil on 
behalf of the Boards. As agents of the government, they were no longer 
exposed to direct attack, and their profits were secure.
The idea of the Marketing Boards gained support from top British 
policy makers because the War came just at that time, and the British 
government was anxious to take steps to secure certain colonial 
products in the necessary quantities and at the right times, given the 
limited number of ships available for commercial purposes during war. 
They were also anxious to save private capitalists who were adversely 
affected by events connected with the war. For example, East African 
sisal became of vital importance to Britain and her war allies after the 
Japanese cut off supplies of similar hard fibres from the Philippines and 
Dutch East Indies. Actually, even before fighting broke out, sisal was 
bought in bulk by the British government to help the non-African 
plantation owners in East Africa who had lost markets in Germany and 
other parts of Europe. Similarly, oil-seeds (such as palm produce and 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (34 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:05 AM]


--- PAGE 266 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
groundnuts) were bought by a Board from September 1939, in 
preparation for shortages of butter and marine oils.
With regard to all peasant cash-crops, the Produce Marketing Boards 
made purchases at figures that were way below world market prices. 
For instance, the West African Produce Board paid Nigerians £16.15s 
for a ton of palm oil in 1946 and sold that through the Ministry of Food 
for £95, which was nearer to the world market price. Groundnuts which 
received £15 per ton when bought by the Boards was sold in Britain at 
£110 per ton. Furthermore, export duties were levied on the Boards’ 
sales by the colonial administrators, and that was an indirect tax on the 
peasants. The situation reached a point where many peasants tried to 
escape from under the Boards. In Sierra Leone in 1952, the price for 
coffee was so low that growers smuggled their crop into nearby French 
territories. At about the same time, Nigerian peasants were running 
away from palm oil into collection or timber felling which did not come 
under the jurisdiction of the Produce Boards.
If one accepts that the government is always the servant of a particular 
class, it is perfectly understandable that the colonial governments 
should have been in collusion with capitalists to syphon off surplus 
from Africa to Europe. But even if one does not start from that 
(Marxist) premise, it would be impossible to ignore the evidence of how 
the colonial administrators worked as committees on behalf of the big 
capitalists. The governors in the colonies had to listen to the local 
representatives of the companies and to their principals. Indeed, there 
were company representatives who wielded influence in several 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (35 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:05 AM]


--- PAGE 267 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
colonies at the same time. Before the first World War, the single most 
important individual in the whole of British West Africa was Sir Alfred 
Jones – chairman of Elder Dempster Lines, chairman of the Bank of 
West Africa, President of the British Cotton-Growing Association. In 
French West Africa in the late 1940s, the French governor showed 
himself very anxious to please one Marc Rucart, a man with major 
interests in several of the French trading companies. Such examples 
could be cited for each colony throughout its history, although in some 
of them the influence of the white settlers was greater than that of 
individual metropolitan businessmen.
Company shareholders in Europe not only lobbied Parliament but 
actually controlled the administration itself. The Chairman of the Cocoa 
Board within the Ministry of Food was none other than John Cadbury, a 
director of Cadbury Brothers who were participant in the buying ‘pool’ 
which exploited West African cocoa farmers. Former employees of 
Unilever held key positions in the Oils and Fats Division of the 
Ministry of Food, and continued to receive cheques from Unilever! The 
Oils and Fats Division handed over the allocation of buying quotas for 
the Produce Boards to the Association of West African Merchants, 
which was dominated by Unilever’s subsidiary, the UAC.
It is no wonder that the Ministry of Food sent a prominent Lebanese 
business man a directive that he had to sign an agreement drawn up by 
the UAC. It is no wonder that the companies had government aid in 
keeping prices down in Africa and in securing forced labour where 
necessary. It is no wonder that Unilever then sold soap, margarine, etc. 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (36 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:05 AM]


--- PAGE 268 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
at profitable prices within a market assured by the British government.
Of course, the metropolitan governments also ensured that a certain 
proportion of the colonial surplus went directly into the coffers of the 
state. They all had some forms of direct investment in capitalist 
enterprises. The Belgian government was an investor in mining, and so 
too was the Portuguese government through its part-ownership of the 
Angolan Diamond Company. The French government was always 
willing to associate itself with the financial sector. When colonial banks 
were in trouble, they could count on rescue from the French 
government, and, indeed, a proportion of their shares passed into the 
hands of the French government. The British colonial government was 
perhaps the least anxious to become directly involved in everyday 
business enterprises, but it did run the Eastern Nigerian coal mines – 
apart from railways.
Marketing Boards helped the colonising power to get its hands on some 
immediate cash. One finds that the Cocoa Board sold to the British 
Ministry of Food at very low prices; and the Ministry in turn sold to 
British manufacturers, making a profit that was as high as £11 million 
in some years. More important still, the Board sold to the U.S.A., which 
was the largest market and one where prices were very high. None of 
the profits went back to the African farmer, but instead represented 
British foreign exchange in American dollars.
From 1943, Britain and the U.S.A. engaged in what was known as 
‘reverse lend lease’. This meant that wartime United States loans to 
Britain were repaid partly by raw materials shipped from British 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (37 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:05 AM]


--- PAGE 269 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
colonies to the U.S.A. Tin and rubber from Malaya were very important 
in that context, while Africa supplied a wide range of products, both 
mineral and agricultural. Cocoa was third as a dollar earner after tin and 
rubber. In 1947, West African cocoa brought over 100 million dollars 
(£38 million) to the British dollar balance. Besides, having a virtual 
monopoly of the production of diamonds, (South) Africa was also able 
to sell to the U.S.A. and earn dollars for Britain. In 1946, Harry F. 
Oppenheimer told his fellow directors of the De Beers Consolidated 
Mines that ‘sales of gem diamonds during the war secured about 300 
million American dollars for Great Britain’.
It was on this very issue of currency that the colonial government did 
the most manipulations to ensure that Africa’s wealth was stashed away 
in the coffers of the metropolitan state. In the British colonial sphere, 
coins and notes were first issued through private banks. Then this 
function was taken over by the West African Currency Board and the 
East African Currency Board established in 1912 and 1919, 
respectively. The currency issued by those Boards in the colonies had to 
be backed by ‘sterling reserves’, which was money earned by Africa. 
The manner in which the system worked was as follows. When a 
colony earned foreign exchange (mainly) through exports, these 
earnings were held in Britain in Pounds Sterling. An equivalent amount 
of local East or West African currency was issued for circulation in the 
respective colonies, while the Sterling was invested in British 
Government Stock thereby earning even more profit for Britain. The 
commercial banks worked hand in hand with the metropolitan 
government and the Currency Boards to make the system work. 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (38 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:05 AM]


--- PAGE 270 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Together they established an intricate financial network which served 
the common end of enriching Europe at Africa’s expense.
The contribution to sterling reserves by any colony was a gift to the 
British treasury, for which the colony received little interest. By the end 
of the 1950s, the sterling reserves of a small colony like Sierra Leone 
had reached £60 million; while in 1955 the British government was 
holding £210 million derived from the sale of cocoa and minerals from 
Gold Coast. Egypt and the Sudan were also heavy contributors to 
Britain. Africa’s total contribution to Britain’s sterling balances in 1945 
was £446 million, which went up to £1,446 million by 1955-more than 
half the total gold and dollar reserves of Britain and the 
Commonwealth, which then stood at £2,120 million. Men like Arthur 
Creech-Jones and Oliver Lyttleton, major figures in British colonial 
policy-making, admitted that in the early 1950s Britain was living on 
the dollar earnings of the colonies.
The British government was outdone by its Belgian counterpart in 
exacting tribute from its colonies, especially during and after the last 
War. After Belgium was overrun by the Germans, a government-in-
exile was set up in London. The Colonial Secretary of that exiled 
regime, Mr. Godding, admitted that,
During the war, the Congo was able to finance all the expenditure of the 
Belgian government in London, including the diplomatic service as well 
as the cost of our armed forces in Europe and Africa, a total of some £40 
million. In fact, thanks to the resources of the Congo, the Belgian 
government in London had not to borrow a shilling or a dollar, and the 
Belgian gold reserve could be left intact.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (39 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:05 AM]


--- PAGE 271 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Since the War, surplus of earnings by the Congo in currencies other 
than the Belgian franc have all accrued to the National Bank of 
Belgium. Therefore, quite apart from all that the private capitalists 
looted from Congo, the Belgian government was also a direct 
beneficiary to the tune of millions of francs per annum.
To discuss French colonialism in this context would be largely to repeat 
remarks made with reference to the British and Belgians. Guinea was 
supposedly a ‘poor’ colony, but in 1952 it earned France one billion 
(old) francs or about 5.6 million dollars in foreign exchange, based on 
the sale of bauxite, coffee and bananas. French financial techniques 
were slightly different from other colonial powers. France tended to use 
the commercial banks more, rather than set up separate currency boards. 
France also squeezed more out of Africans by imposing levies for 
military purposes. The French government dressed Africans in French 
army uniforms and used them to fight other Africans, to fight other 
colonised peoples like the Vietnamese, and to fight in European wars. 
The colonial budgets had to bear the cost of sending these African 
‘French’ soldiers to die, but if they returned alive they had to be paid 
pensions out of African funds.
To sum up briefly, colonialism meant a great intensification of 
exploitation within Africa – to a level much higher than that previously 
in existence under communalism or feudal-type African societies. 
Simultaneously, it meant the export of that surplus in massive 
proportions, for that was the central purpose of colonialism.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (40 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:05 AM]


--- PAGE 272 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
2.2 The Strengthening of the Technological and Military 
Aspects of Capitalism
(a) A Preliminary Examination of the Non-monetary Benefits 
of Colonialism to Europe
There are still some bourgeois propagandists who assert that 
colonialism was not a paying concern for Europeans, just as there are 
those who say that the slave trade was not profitable to Europeans. It is 
not worthwhile to engage in a direct refutation of such a viewpoint, 
since it consumes time which could otherwise be more usefully 
employed. The foregoing section was a statement on the level of actual 
monetary profits made by colonialist powers out of Africa. But, 
Africa’s contribution to European capitalism was far greater than mere 
monetary returns. The colonial system permitted the rapid development 
of technology and skills within the metropolitan sectors of imperialism. 
It also allowed for the elaboration of the modern organisational 
techniques of the capitalist firm and of imperialism as a whole. Indeed, 
colonialism gave capitalism an added lease of life and prolonged its 
existence in Western Europe, which had been the cradle of capitalism.
At the beginning of the colonial period, science and technology as 
applied to production already had a firm base inside Europe – a 
situation which was itself connected to overseas trade, as previously 
explained. Europe then was entering the age of electricity, of advanced 
ferrous and non-ferrous metallurgy, and of the proliferation of 
manufactured chemicals. All of these were carried to great heights 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (41 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:05 AM]


--- PAGE 273 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
during the colonial period. Electrical devices were raised to the 
qualitatively new level of electronics, incorporating miniaturisation of 
equipment, fantastic progress in telecommunications, and the creation 
of computers. Chemical industries were producing a wide range of 
synthetic substitutes for raw materials, and a whole new branch of petro-
chemicals had come into existence. The combination of metals by 
metallurgical innovations meant that products could be offered to meet 
far-reaching demands of heat resistance, lightness, tensile strength, etc. 
.At the end of colonialism (say 1960), Europe was on the verge of 
another epoch – that of nuclear power.
It is common knowledge that the gap between the output of the 
metropoles and that of the colonies increased by at least fifteen to 
twenty times during the epoch of colonialism. More than anything else, 
it was the advance of scientific technique in the metropoles which was 
the cause of the great gulf between African and Western European 
levels of productivity by the end of the colonial period. Therefore, it is 
essential to understand the role of colonialism itself in bringing about 
that scientific progress in the metropoles, and its application to industry.
It would be extremely simple-minded to say that colonialism in Africa 
or anywhere else caused Europe to develop its science and technology. 
The tendency towards technological innovation and renovation was 
inherent in capitalism itself, because of the drive for profits. However, it 
would be entirely accurate to say that the colonisation of Africa and 
other parts of the world formed an indispensable link in a chain of 
events which made possible the technological transformation of the 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (42 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:05 AM]


--- PAGE 274 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
base of European capitalism. Without that link, European capitalism 
would not have been producing goods and services at the level attained 
in 1960. In other words, our very yardsticks for measuring developed 
and underdeveloped nations would have been different.
Profits from African colonialism mingled with profits from every other 
source to finance scientific research. This was true in the general sense 
that the affluence of capitalist society in the present century allowed 
more money and leisure for research. It is also true because the 
development of capitalism in the imperialist epoch continued the 
division of labour inside the capitalist metropoles to the point where 
scientific research was a branch of the division of labour, and indeed 
one of its most important branches. European society moved away from 
scientific research as an ad hoc, personal, and even whimsical affair to a 
situation where research was given priority by governments, armies and 
private capitalists. It was funded and guided. Careful scrutiny reveals 
that the source of funding and the direction in which research was 
guided were heavily influenced by the colonial situation. Firstly, it 
should be recalled that profits made by Europe from Africa represented 
investible surpluses. The profit was not merely an end in itself. Thus, 
the East and West African Currency Boards invested in British 
Government Stock, while the commercial banks and insurance 
companies invested in government bonds, mortgages and industrial 
shares. These investment funds acquired from the colonies spread to 
many sectors in the metropoles and benefited industries that had 
nothing to do with processing of colonial products.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (43 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:05 AM]


--- PAGE 275 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
However, it is easier to trace the impact of colonial exploitation on 
industries directly connected with colonial imports. Such industries had 
to improvise that kind of machinery which most effectively utilised 
colonial raw materials. That led for example to machinery for crushing 
palm kernels and to a process for utilising the less delicately favoured 
coffee by turning it into a soluble powder, namely ‘instant coffee’. 
Merchants and industrialists also considered ways in which colonial 
raw materials could be modified to meet specifications of European 
factories in quality and quantity. An example of this type would be the 
care taken by the Dutch in Java and by the Americans in Liberia to 
breed and graft new varieties of rubber plants yielding more and being 
more resistant to disease. Ultimately, the search for better-quality raw 
materials merged with the search for sources of raw material which 
would make European capitalism less dependent on colonial areas – and 
that led to synthetics.
In the sphere of shipping, it can readily be appreciated that certain 
technological modifications and innovations would be connected with 
the fact that such a high proportion of shipping was used to tie together 
colonies and metropoles. Ships had to be refrigerated to carry 
perishable goods; they had to make special holds for bulky or liquid 
cargoes such as palm oil; and the transport of petroleum from the 
Middle East, North Africa and other parts of the world led to oil tankers 
as a special class of ships. The design of ships and the nature of their 
cargoes in turn affected the kind of port installations in the metropoles.
Where connections were remote or even apparently nonexistent, it can 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (44 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:05 AM]


--- PAGE 276 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
still be claimed that colonialism was a factor in the European 
technological revolution. As science blossomed in the present century, 
its interconnections became numerous and complex. It is impossible to 
trace the origin of every idea and every invention, but it is well 
understood by serious historians of science that the growth of the body 
of scientific knowledge and its application to everyday life is dependent 
upon a large number of forces operating within the society as a whole, 
and not just upon the ideas within given branches of science. With the 
rise of imperialism, one of the most potent forces within metropolitan 
capitalist societies was precisely that emanating from colonial or semi-
colonial areas.
The above considerations apply fully to any discussion of the military 
aspects of imperialism, the protection of empire being one of the crucial 
stimulants added lo the science of armaments in a society that was 
already militaristically inclined ever since the feudal era. The new 
colonial dimension to European military pre-occupation was 
particularly noticeable in the sharp naval rivalry between Britain, 
Germany, France and Japan before and during the first world war. That 
rivalry over colonies and for spheres of capitalist investment produced 
new types of armed naval vessels, such as destroyers and submarines. 
By the end of the second world war, military research had become the 
most highly organised branch of scientific research, and one that was 
subsidised by the capitalist states from the profits of international 
exploitation.
During the inter-war years, Africa’s foremost contribution to the 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (45 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:05 AM]


--- PAGE 277 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
evolution of organisational techniques in Europe was to the 
strengthening of monopoly capital. Before the war of 1914, the Pan-
Africanists Duse Muhammad Ali and W. E. B. du Bois recognised that 
monopoly capital was the leading element in imperialist expansion. The 
most thorough and the best-known analysis of this phenomenon was 
made by the Russian revolutionary leader, Lenin. Lenin was virtually 
prophetic, because as the colonial age advanced it became more and 
more obvious that those who stood to benefit most were the monopoly 
concerns, and especially those involved in finance.
Africa (plus Asia and Latin America) contributed to the elaboration of 
the strategies by which competition among small companies gave way 
to domination by a small handful of firms in various economic 
activities. It was on the India trade routes that shipping companies first 
started the ‘Conference Lines’ in 1875. This monopoly practice spread 
rapidly to the South African trade and reached a high pitch in West 
Africa in the early years of this century. On the commercial side, it was 
in West Africa that both the French and the English derived 
considerable experience in pooling and market-sharing; apart from the 
fact that little companies were steadily being gobbled up by bigger ones 
from the beginning to the end of colonialism.* [* See section 5.1 (a)]
It was in Southern Africa that there emerged the most carefully planned 
structures of interlocking directorates, holding companies and giant 
corporations which were multi-national both in their capital 
subscriptions and through the fact that their economic activities were 
dispersed in many lands. Individual entrepreneurs like Oppenheimer 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (46 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:05 AM]


--- PAGE 278 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
made huge fortunes from the Southern African soil, but Southern Africa 
was never really in the era of individual and family businesses, 
characteristic of Europe and America up to the early part of this 
century. The big mining companies were impersonal professional 
things. They were rationalised in terms of personnel, production, 
marketing, advertising, etc., and they could undertake long-term 
commitments. At all times, inner productive forces gave capitalism its 
drive towards expansion and domination. It was the system which 
expanded. But in addition, one can see in Africa and in Southern Africa 
in particular the rise of a capitalist super-structure manned by 
individuals capable of consciously planning the exploitation of 
resources right into the next century, and aiming at racist domination of 
the black people of Africa until the end of time.
Ever since the 15th century, Europe was in strategic command of world 
trade and of the legal and organisational aspects of the movement of 
goods between continents. Europe’s power increased with imperialism, 
because imperialism meant investments, and investments (with or 
without colonial rule) gave European capitalists control over production 
within each continent. The amount of benefits to capitalism increased 
accordingly, since Europe could determine the quantity and quality of 
different raw material inputs which would need to be brought together 
in the interests of capitalism as a whole, and of the bourgeois class in 
particular. For instance, sugar production in the West Indies was joined 
in the colonial period by cocoa production within Africa, so that both 
merged into the chocolate industry of Europe and North America. In the 
metallurgical field, iron ore from Sweden, Brazil or Sierra Leone could 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (47 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:05 AM]


--- PAGE 279 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
be turned into different types of steel with the addition of manganese 
from the Gold Coast or chrome from Southern Rhodesia. Such 
examples could be multiplied almost indefinitely to cover the whole 
range of capitalist production in the colonial period.
As John Stuart Mill said, the trade between England and the West 
Indies in the 18th century was like the trade between town and country. 
In the present century, the links are even closer and it is more marked 
that the town (Europe) is living off the countryside (Africa, Asia and 
Latin America). When it said that colonies should exist for the 
metropoles by producing raw materials and buying manufactured 
goods, the underlying theory was to introduce an international division 
of labour covering working people everywhere. That is to say, up to 
that point, each society had allocated to its own members particular 
functions in production-some hunted, some made clothes, some built 
houses, etc. But with colonialism, the capitalists determined what types 
of labour the workers should carry on in the world at large. Africans 
were to dig minerals out of the sub-soil, grow agricultural crops, collect 
natural products and perform a number of other odds and ends such as 
bicycle repairing. Inside of Europe, North America and Japan, workers 
would refine the minerals and the raw materials and make the bicycles.
The international division of labour brought about by imperialism and 
colonialism ensured that there would be the maximum increase in the 
level of skills in the capitalist nations. It took mainly physical strength 
to dig the minerals from and to farm the African soil, but the extraction 
of the metals from the ores and the subsequent manufacture of finished 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (48 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:05 AM]


--- PAGE 280 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
goods in Europe promoted more and more technology and skills there 
as time went on. Take the iron and steel industry as an example. 
Modern steel manufacture derives from the Siemens open hearth system 
and the Bessemer process, which were both already in existence in the 
second half of the last century. They both underwent major 
modifications, transforming steel manufacture from intermittent 
operations to something requiring huge continuous electrical furnaces. 
In more recent years, skilled workmen have been replaced by 
automation and computerisation, but altogether the gains in technology 
and skills were immense, as compared with the years before 
imperialism got under way.
Iron ore was not one of Africa’s major exports in the colonial days and 
it may therefore appear to be an irrelevant example. However, iron was 
very significant in the economy of Sierra Leone, Liberia and North 
Africa. It can be used to illustrate the trend by which the international 
division of labour allowed technology and skills to grow in the 
metropoles. Furthermore, it must be recalled that Africa was an 
important source of the minerals that went into making steel alloys, 
notably manganese and chrome. Manganese was essential in the 
Bessemer process. It was mined in several places in Africa, with the 
Nouta mine on the Gold Coast having the largest single manganese 
deposit in the world. American companies owned the Gold Coast and 
North African mines and used the product in the steel industry of the 
U.S.A. Chrome from South Africa and Southern Rhodesia also played a 
similar role in steel metallurgy, being essential for the manufacture of 
stainless steel.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (49 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:05 AM]


--- PAGE 281 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Columbite was another of the African minerals valuable for the creation 
of steel alloys. Being highly heat-resistant, one of its principal uses was 
in making steel for jet-engines. First of all, it was the rapid development 
of European industry and technology which caused columbite to 
assume value. It had been a discarded by-product of tin mining in 
Nigeria up to 1952. Then, once it was utilised, it gave further stimulus 
to European technology in the very sophisticated sphere of aero-
engines.
Obviously, according to the international division of labour prevailing 
under colonialism, it was the American, Canadian, British and French 
workers who had access to the skills involved in working with 
columbite, rather than the Nigerian worker who dug the ore out of the 
ground. For certain reasons, columbite fell off sharply in demand after a 
few years, but during that time it had contributed towards making the 
European metallurgist even more proficient and experienced. In that 
way, it was helping to promote self-sustained growth and to produce the 
gap which is evident in any comparison of the developed and 
underdeveloped countries.
Copper, too, fell neatly into the category under discussion. Unskilled 
production by Africans was required to get the ore for export, followed 
by refinement in a European capitalist plant. Copper was Africa’s chief 
mineral export. Being an excellent conductor of electricity, it became an 
indispensable part of the capitalist electrical industry. It is an essential 
component of generators, motors, electrical locomotives, telephones, 
telegraphs, light and power lines, motor cars, buildings, ammunition, 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (50 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:05 AM]


--- PAGE 282 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
radios, refrigerators and a host of other things. A technological era 
tends to be defined by the principal source of power. Today, we speak 
of a Nuclear Age, since the potential of nuclear power is shown to be 
immense. The Industrial Revolution in Europe during the 18th and 19th 
centuries was the Age of Steam. In a parallel manner, the colonial 
epoch was the Age of Electricity. Therefore, the vital copper exports 
from Congo, Northern Rhodesia and other parts of Africa were 
contributing to the leading sector of European technology. From that 
strategic position, its multiplier effects were innumerable and were of 
incalculable benefit to capitalist development.
In the context of a discussion of raw materials, special reference must 
again be made to the military. African minerals played a decisive role 
both with regard to conventional weapons and with regard to the 
breakthrough to atomic and nuclear weapons. It was from the Belgian 
Congo during the second world war that the U.S.A. began getting the 
uranium, which was a pre-requisite to the making of the first atomic 
bomb. In any case, by the end of the colonial period, industry and the 
war-machine in the colonising nations had become so intertwined and 
inseparable that any contribution to one was a contribution to the other. 
Therefore, Africa’s massive contribution to what initially appears as 
peaceful pursuits such as the making of copper wire and steel alloys 
ultimately took the shape of explosive devices, aircraft-carriers, and so 
on.
It was only after European firearms reached a certain stage of 
effectiveness in the 19th century that it became possible for whites to 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (51 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:05 AM]


--- PAGE 283 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
colonise and dominate the whole world. Similarly, the invention of a 
massive array of new instruments of destruction in the metropoles was 
both a psychological and a practical disincentive to colonised peoples 
seeking to regain power and independence. It will readily be recalled 
that a basic prop to colonialism in Africa and elsewhere was the ‘gun-
boat policy’, which was resorted to every time that the local police and 
armed forces seemed incapable of maintaining the metropolitan law and 
the colonial order of affairs. From the viewpoint of the colonised, the 
strengthening of the military apparatus of the European powers through 
colonial exploitation was doubly detrimental. Not only did it increase 
the overall technological gap between metropole and colony, but it 
immeasurably widened the gap in the most sensitive area, which had to 
do with concepts such as power and independence.
The international division of labour of the colonial period also ensured 
that there would be growth of employment opportunities in Europe, 
apart from the millions of white settlers and expatriates who earned a 
livelihood in and from Africa. Agricultural raw materials were 
processed in such a way as to form by-products, constituting industries 
in their own right. The number of jobs created in Europe and North 
America by the import of mineral ores from Africa, Asia and Latin 
America can be seen from the massive employment roll of institutions 
such as steel works, motor-car factories, alumina and aluminium plants, 
copper wire firms, etc. Furthermore, those in turn stimulated the 
building industry, the transport industry, the munitions industry, and so 
on. The mining that went on in Africa left holes in the ground, and the 
pattern of agricultural production left African soils impoverished; but, 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (52 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:05 AM]


--- PAGE 284 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
in Europe, agricultural and mineral imports built a massive industrial 
complex.
In the earliest phases of human organization, production was scattered 
and atomised. That is to say, families preserved a separate identity 
while working for their upkeep. Over time, production became more 
social and inter-related in character. The making of a pair of shoes in a 
mature feudal trading economy involved the cattle rearer, a tanner of 
the leather, and a shoemaker – instead of one peasant killing an animal 
and making himself a pair of shoes, as under self-sufficient 
communalism. The extent to which a society-achieves this social inter-
dependence in making commodities is an index of its development, 
through specialisation and co-ordination.
Undoubtedly, European capitalism achieved more and more a social 
character in its production. It integrated the whole world; and with 
colonial experience as an important stimulus, it integrated very closely 
every aspect of its own economy – from agriculture to banking. But 
distribution was not social in character. The fruits of human labour 
went to a given minority class, which was of the white race and resident 
in Europe and North America. This is the crux of the dialectical process 
of development and underdevelopment, as it evolved over the colonial 
period.
(b) The example of Unilever as a major beneficiary of African 
exploitation
Just as it was necessary to follow African surplus through the channels 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (53 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:05 AM]


--- PAGE 285 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
of exploitation such as banks and mining companies, so the non-
monetary contribution which Africa made to European capitalism can 
also be accurately traced by following the careers of the said 
companies. We offer below a brief outline of the relevant features of the 
development of a single firm – that of Unilever – in relationship to its 
exploitation of African resources and people.
In 1885, while Africa was being carved up at the Conference table, one 
William H. Lever started making soap on the Merseyside near 
Liverpool in England. He called his soap ‘Sunlight’ and in the swamps 
where his factory stood, the township of Port Sunlight grew up. Within 
ten years, the firm of Lever was selling 40,000 tons of soap per year in 
England alone and was building an export business and factories in 
other parts of Europe, America and the British colonies. Then came 
‘Lifebuoy’, ‘Lux’, ‘Vim’, and within another ten years, Lever was 
selling 60,000 tons of soap in Britain, and in addition had factories 
producing and selling in Canada, the U.S.A., South Africa, Switzerland, 
Germany and Belgium. However, soap did not grow in any of those 
countries. The basic item in its manufacture was stearin, obtained from 
oils and fats. Apart from animal tallow and whale oil, the desirable raw 
materials all came from the tropics: namely palm oil, palm-kernel oil, 
groundnut oil, and copra. West Africa happened to be the world’s great 
palm produce zone and was also a major grower of groundnuts.
In 1887, the Austrian firm of Schicht, which was later to be 
incorporated in the Unilever combine, built the first palm kernel 
crushing mill in Austria, supplied with raw materials by a Liverpool 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (54 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:05 AM]


--- PAGE 286 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
firm of oil merchants. That was not simply coincidence, but part of the 
logic of imperialism and the opening up of Africa as the raw material 
reservoir for Europe. As early as 1902, Lever sent out his own 
‘explorers’ to Africa, and they came to the decision that the Congo 
would be the most likely place to get palm produce, because the 
Belgian government was willing to offer huge concessions of land with 
innumerable palm trees. Lever obtained the necessary concessions in 
Congo and brought in machinery to extract oil from palm kernels.
But the main palm oil experts came from areas on the coast to the north 
of the Congo. Therefore, in 1910, Lever purchased W. B. McIver, a 
small Liverpool firm in Nigeria. That was followed by acquisitions of 
two small companies in Sierra Leone and Liberia. Indeed, Lever (at that 
time called Lever Bros) got a foothold in every colony in West Africa. 
The first major breakthrough occurred when Lever bought the Niger 
Company in 1920 for £8 million. Then in 1929, the African and 
Eastern, the last big rival trading concern, was brought into partnership; 
and the result of the merger was called the United Africa Company 
(UAC).
During the 1914-18 war, Lever had begun making margarine, which 
required the same raw materials as soap: namely, oils and fats. The 
subsequent years were ones in which such enterprises in Europe were 
constantly getting bigger through takeovers and mergers. The big names 
in soap and margarine manufacture on the European continent were two 
Dutch firms, Jurgens and Van der Bergh, and the Austrian firms of 
Schicht and Centra. The Dutch companies fírst achieved a dominant 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (55 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:05 AM]


--- PAGE 287 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
position; and then in 1929 there was a grand merger between their 
combine and Lever’s, who in the meantime had been busy buying off 
virtually all other competitors. The 1929 merger created Unilever as a 
single monopoly, divided for the sake of convenience into Unilever Ltd 
(registered in Britain) and Unilever N.V. (registered in Holland).
For its massive input of oils and fats, Unilever depended largely on its 
UAC subsidiary which was formed that very year. The UAC itself 
never stopped growing. In 1933, it took over the important trading firm 
of G. B. Ollivant, and in 1936 it bought the Swiss Trading Company on 
the Gold Coast. By that time, it was not relying simply on wild palms in 
the Congo, but had organised plantations. The Lever faces in the U.S.A. 
drew their oil supplies mainly from the Congo, and in 1925 (even 
before Unilever and the UAC emerged as such) the Lever works in 
Boston showed a profit of £250.000.
Unilever flourished in war and in peace. Only in Eastern Europe did the 
advent of Socialism lead to the loss of factories through nationalisation. 
By the end of the colonial period, Unilever was a world force, selling 
traditional soaps, detergents, margarine, lard, ghee, cooking oil, canned 
foods, candles, glycerine, oil cake, and toilet preparations such as tooth 
paste. From where did this giant octopus suck most of its sustenance? 
Let the answer be provided by the Information Division of Unilever 
House, London.
Most striking of all in the post-war development of Unilever, had been the 
progress of the United Africa Company. In the worst of the depression, the 
management of Unilever had never ceased lo put money into UAC, 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (56 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:05 AM]


--- PAGE 288 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
justifying their action more by general faith in the future of Africa than by 
particular consideration of UAC’s immediate prospects. Their reward has 
come with the post-war prosperity of the primary producer, which has 
made Africa a market for all kinds of goods, from frozen peas lo motor 
cars. Unilever’s centre of gravity lies in Europe, but far and away its 
largest member (the UAC) is almost wholly dependent for its livelihood 
(represented by a turnover of £300 million) on the well-being of West 
Africa.
In some instances, Lever’s African enterprises made losses in the strict 
cost-accounting sense. It took years before the Congo plantations paid 
for themselves and made a profit. It also took some time before the 
purchase of the Niger Company in 1920 was financially justified; while 
the SCKN in Chad never showed worthwhile monetary profits. But, 
even in the worst financial years, the subsidiaries comprising the UAC 
were invaluable assets, in that they allowed the manufacturing side of 
Unilever to have control over a guaranteed source of essential raw 
materials. Of course, the UAC itself also provided handsome monetary 
dividends, but it is the purpose here to draw attention not to the 
financial gains of UAC and Unilever but to the way that the exploitation 
of Africa led to multiple technical and organisational developments in 
Europe.
Both the soap industry and the margarine industry had their own 
scientific and technical problems which had to be solved. Scientific 
advance is most generally a response to real need. Oils for margarine 
and for cooking purposes had to be deodorised; substitutes had to be 
sought for natural lard; and, when margarine was faced with 
competition from cheap butter, the necessity arose to find means of 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (57 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:05 AM]


--- PAGE 289 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
producing new high-grade margarine with added vitamins. In 1916, two 
Lever experts published in a British scientific journal the results of tests 
showing the growth of animals fed with vitamin concentrates inside 
margarine. They kept in touch with Cambridge University scientists 
who pursued the problem, and by 1927 the vitamin-rich margarine was 
ready for human consumption.
With regard to soap (and to a lesser extent margarine), it was essential 
to devise a process for hardening oils into fats – notably whale oil, but 
also vegetable oils. This process, referred to as ‘hydrogenation’, 
attracted the attention of scientists in the early years of this century. 
They were paid and urged on by rival soap companies, including Lever 
and the other European firms which later merged to form Unilever.
One of the most striking illustrations of the technological ramifications 
of the processing of colonial raw materials is in the field of detergents. 
Soap itself is a detergent or ‘washing agent’, but ordinary soaps suffer 
from several limitations, such as the tendency to decompose in hard 
water and in acids. Those limitations could only be overcome by 
‘soapless detergents’, without the kind of fatty base of previous soaps. 
When Germany was cut off from colonial supplies of oils and fats in the 
first imperialist war, German scientists were spurred on to the first 
experiments in producing detergents out of coal tar. Later on in the 
1930s, chemical companies began making similar detergents on a larger 
scale, especially in the U.S.A. Two of the firms which immediately 
stepped into detergent research were Unilever and Procter & Gamble, :a 
soap combine with its headquarters in Cincinnati, U.S.A. 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (58 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:05 AM]


--- PAGE 290 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
It may at first appear strange that though detergents were competitors to 
ordinary soap, they were nevertheless promoted by soap firms. 
However, it is the practice of monopoly concerns to move into new 
fields which supplement or even replace their old businesses. That is 
necessary to avoid their entire capital from being tied up in products 
that go out of fashion. The soap firms could not leave detergents to 
chemical firms, or else their own hard soap, soap flakes and soap 
powders would have suffered, and they would not have been the ones 
with the new brands on the markets. So great effort was put into the 
chemistry of detergents by Unilever, retaining to a considerable extent 
the vegetable oils, but modifying them chemically. That kind of 
research was not left to chance or to private individuals. By 1960, 
Unilever had four main laboratories – two in England, one in Holland, 
and one in the U.S.A. These four, together with other smaller research 
units, employed over 3,000 people, of whom about one-third were 
qualified scientists and technologists.
The multiplier effects radiating from Unilever and its colonial 
exploitation can be traced with some accuracy. When palm kernels 
were crushed, the residue formed a cake which was excellent for 
livestock. One by-product of the soap industry was glycerine, which 
was utilised in the making of explosives. Europeans killed themselves 
with some of the explosives, but some went into peaceful purposes, 
such as mining, quarrying and construction. Several other products 
were linked to soap through the common base in oils and fats-notably 
cosmetics, shampoos, perfumes, shaving creams, toothpaste and dyes. 
As one writer put it, those by-products ‘served to broaden the 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (59 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:05 AM]


--- PAGE 291 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
commercial base on which Unilever rested, while making further use of 
the fund of knowledge already possessed by the oils and fats 
technologist’. Besides, these operations were creating hundreds of 
thousands of additional jobs for European workers.
The manufacturing of soap and margarine required raw material inputs 
other than oils and fats. Soap making consumed large quantities of 
caustic soda, so that in 1911 Lever bought land in Cheshire suitable for 
the manufacture of that alkali. Capitalist giants nourished by 
colonialism and imperialism could afford to do things in a big way. 
When Lever needed abrasives, the company bought a limestone mine in 
Bohemia; and when Unilever wanted to assure themselves of supplies 
of wrapping paper, they bought a paper mill.
Transport was another key problem which stimulated growth at the 
European end. Within a month of buying the Niger Company in 1920, 
Lever was engaged in a project for constructing facilities on the Mersey 
to receive ocean-going ships bringing cargoes from West Africa. The 
UAC was a pioneer in getting ships constructed to carry palm oil in 
bulk tanks, and Van der Bergh considered buying a shipyard to build 
ships for his company some years before the merger. This did not 
materialise, but Unilever did acquire several ships of their own, 
including vessels fresh from the shipyards and made to their 
specifications.
Another linkage of the Unilever industries was that with retail 
distribution. Their products had to be sold to the housewife, and the 
Dutch firms that went into Unilever decided that they should own 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (60 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:05 AM]


--- PAGE 292 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
grocery stores to guarantee sales. By 1922, Jurgens had control of a 
chain of grocery stores in England, appropriately named the ‘Home and 
Colonial’. Van der Bergh (at that time a rival) was not to be left behind, 
so he secured majority shares in the chain store owned by Lipton of 
Lipton’s Tea fame. All of these shops passed to Unilever. The grocery 
store business soon ceased being considered merely as an outlet for 
soap and margarine, and became an end in itself.
Sometimes, the multiplier effects do not seem connected. On the 
surface, there was no apparent reason why Lever should set up a huge 
retail chain called Mac Fisheries to shell fish! There is little in common 
between soap, sausages and ice cream – but Lever bought Walls as a 
sausage firm and later Walls opened an ice cream manufacturing plant. 
The underlying connection is that capital seeks domination. It grows 
and spreads and seeks to get hold of everything in sight. The 
exploitation of Africa gave European monopoly capital full 
opportunities to indulge in its tendencies for expansion and domination.
Before leaving Unilever, it should be noted in conclusion how a 
company such as that pointed the way towards change in the capitalist 
system. The device of the dual structure of Unilever Ltd and Unilever 
NV was an innovation first utilised when Schicht and Centra of Central 
Europe merged with the Dutch margarine firms of Jurgens and Van der 
Bergh, and it was designed to cut down taxation. Unilever comprised 
two holding -companies with the same governing boards and with 
arrangements to transfer and equalise profits. It was a professional 
company from its inception. All of the firms involved in the merger had 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (61 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:05 AM]


--- PAGE 293 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
years of experience in rationalising staff, production plants, and 
marketing procedures. Schicht was one of the earliest to work out a 
system of cost-accounting and financial control. Lever had himself been 
a pioneer of mass advertising in Europe and in the competitive field of 
the U.S.A. The firm of Unilever inherited and perfected the techniques 
of mass production and advertising so as to achieve mass consumption.
The significance of the organisational changes are best seen on a long 
term basis, by comparing Unilever’s sophisticated international 
organisation with the chartered companies of the 16th and 17th 
centuries which had difficulties managing accounts. The efficient 
accounting and business methods which are supposed to characterise 
capitalist firms did not drop from the sky. They are the result of 
historical evolution, and in that evolution the exploitation of Africa 
played a key role-from the era of the chartered companies right through 
the colonial period,
(c) Contributions of colonialism to individual colonising 
powers
Analysis of the non-monetary benefits of colonialism to the colonisers 
can of course be carried out most readily within the framework of 
relations between each colony and its ‘mother country’, apart from the 
framework of the individual firm, which has just been discussed in 
some detail. Using the conventional approach of European metropole in 
relationship to its own colonies, one finds a wide range of positive 
effects, although the benefits varied in extent from colony to colony. 
Portugal was the lowliest of the colonising powers in Africa, and it was 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (62 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:05 AM]


--- PAGE 294 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
nothing in Europe without its colonies: so much so that it came to insist 
that Angola, Mozambique and Guinea were integral parts of Portugal, 
just like any province of the European country named Portugal. France 
sometimes propounded the same doctrine by which Algeria, Martinique 
and Vietnam were all supposedly ‘overseas France’.
Neither Britain nor Belgium put forward any theories of a greater 
Britain or overseas Belgium; but in practice they were as determined as 
other colonial powers to ensure that sustenance should flow from 
colony to metropole without hindrance. Few areas of the national life of 
those Western European countries failed to benefit from the decades of 
parasitic exploitation of the colonies. One Nigerian after visiting 
Brussels in 1960, wrote,
I saw for myself the massive palaces, museums and other public buildings 
paid for by Congo ivory and rubber.
In recent times, African writers and researchers have also been amazed 
to find the amount of looted African treasure stacked away in the 
British Museum; and there are comparable if somewhat smaller 
collections of African art in Paris, Berlin and New York. Those are 
some of the things which, in addition to monetary wealth, help to define 
the metropoles as developed and ‘civilised’.
Sustenance given by colonies to the colonisers was most obvious and 
very decisive in the case of contributions by soldiers from among the 
colonised. Without colonial troops, there would have been no ‘British 
forces’ fighting on the Asian front in the 1939-45 war, because the 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (63 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:05 AM]


--- PAGE 295 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
ranks of the ‘British forces’ were filled with Indians and other colonials, 
including Africans and West Indians. It is a general characteristic of 
colonialism that the metropole utilised the manpower of the colonies. 
The Romans had used soldiers of one conquered nationality to conquer 
other nationalities, as well as to defend Rome against enemies. Britain 
applied this to Africa ever since the early 19th century, when the West 
Indian Regiment was sent across the Atlantic to protect British interests 
on the West African coast. The West Indian Regiment had black men in 
the ranks, Irish (colonials) as NCOs, and Englishmen as officers. By the 
end of the 19th century, the West Indian Regiment also included lots of 
Sierra Leoneans.
The most important force in the conquest of West African colonies by 
the British was the West African Frontier Force – the soldiers being 
Africans and the officers English. In 1894, it was joined by the West 
African Regiment, formed to help suppress the so-called ‘Hut tax war’ 
in Sierra Leone, which was the expression of widespread resistance 
against the imposition of colonial rule. In East and Central Africa, the 
King’s African Rifles was the unit which tapped African fighting power 
on behalf of Britain. The African regiments supplemented the 
metropolitan military apparatus in several ways. Firstly, they were used 
as emergency forces to put down nationalist uprisings in the various 
colonies. Secondly, they were used to fight other Europeans inside 
Africa, notably during the first and second world wars. And thirdly, 
they were carried to European battlefields or to theatres of war outside 
Africa.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (64 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:05 AM]


--- PAGE 296 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
African roles in European military operations were vividly displayed by 
the East African campaign during the first World War, when Britain 
and Germany fought for possession of East Africa. At the beginning of 
the war, the Germans had in Tanganyika a regular force of 216 
Europeans and 2,540 African askari. During the war, 3,000 Europeans 
and 11,000 askari were enrolled. On the British side, the main force 
was the K.A.R., comprising mainly East Africans and soldiers from 
Nyasaland. The battalions of the K.A.R. had by November 1918 over 
35,000 men, of whom nine out of ten were Africans.
Quite early in the East African campaign, the British brought in an 
expeditionary force of Punjabis and Sikhs, as well as regiments of West 
Africans. Some Sudanese and West Indians were also there. At first, a 
few white settlers joined the war, because they thought it was a picnic; 
but within a year the white residents of British East Africa were 
showing extreme reluctance to join local fighting forces. In effect, 
therefore, Africans were fighting Africans to see which European power 
should rule over them. The German and the British had only to provide 
the officers. According to the history books, the ‘British’ won the 
campaign in East Africa.
France was the colonial power that secured the greatest number of 
soldiers from Africa. In 1912, conscription of African soldiers into the 
French army was pursued on a large scale. During the 1914-18 war, 
200,000 soldiers were recruited in French West Africa, through the use 
of methods reminiscent of slave hunting. These ‘French’ soldiers served 
against the Germans in Togo and Cameroon, as well as in Europe itself. 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (65 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:05 AM]


--- PAGE 297 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
On the European battlefields, an estimated 25,000 ‘French’ Africans 
lost their lives, and many more returned mutilated, for they were used 
as cannon fodder in the European capitalist war.
France was so impressed by the military advantages to be gained from 
colonial rule that when a part of Cameroon was mandated to France by 
the League of Nations, France insisted on the privilege of using 
Cameroon African troops for purposes unconnected with the defence of 
Cameroon. Naturally, France also made the maximum use of African 
troops in the last World War. Indeed, Africans saved France after the 
initial losses when France and most of French Africa fell under the 
Germans and the fascist (Vichy) French. In French Equatorial Africa, it 
was a black man. Felix Eboué, who proved loyal to the forces led by 
General de Gaulle, and who mobilised manpower against the French 
and German fascists. Africa provided the base and much of the 
manpower for launching the counterattack which helped General de 
Gaulle and the ‘Free French’ to return to power in France.
French use of African troops did not end with the last war. West 
Africans were sent to Madagascar in 1948, and put down nationalist 
forces in a most bloody manner. African troops were also employed to 
fight the people of Indochina up to 1954; and, later still, black African 
troops and Senegalese in particular were used against the Algerian 
liberation movement.
No comprehensive studies have as yet been devoted to the role of 
Africans in the armies of the colonial powers in a variety of contexts. 
However, the indications are that such studies would reveal a pattern 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (66 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:05 AM]


--- PAGE 298 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
very similar to that discovered by historians who have looked at the role 
of black soldiers in the white-controlled armies of the U.S.A.: namely, 
that there was tremendous discrimination against black fighting men, 
even though black soldiers made great and unacknowledged 
contributions to important victories won by the white officered armies 
of the U.S.A. and the colonial powers. Hints regarding the 
discrimination are to be seen from regulations such as that barring 
African soldiers in the West African Regiment from wearing shoes and 
from the fact that there were actually race riots in the European 
campaigns, just as black troops fighting for the U.S.A. continued to riot 
right up to the Vietnam campaign.
A number of Africans served as colonial soldiers because they 
mistakenly hoped that the army would be an avenue for displaying the 
courage and dignity of Africa, and, perhaps, in the process, even 
earning the freedom of the continent, by making Europeans pleased and 
grateful. That hope was without foundation from the outset, because the 
colonialists were viciously using African soldiers as pawns to preserve 
colonialism and capitalism in general. A very striking instance of the 
above fact was provided when John Chilembwe led an African 
nationalist uprising in Nyasaland (now Malawi) in 1915. Nyasaland was 
then a British colony, and although the British were fighting the 
Germans in East Africa at that time, they immediately dispatched a 
column of the K.A.R. to contend against Chilembwe. Furthermore, 
before the K.A.R. arrived, it was a German lieutenant who organised 
the resistance of Nyasaland white settlers against Chilembwe’s bid for 
freedom. In the light of that evidence, one writer commented:
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (67 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:05 AM]


--- PAGE 299 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
While their countrymen in Europe fought the bloodiest war known, in 
Africa Europeans were instinctively white men first – and German and 
British second, (for) John Chilembwe was part of something that in the 
end would swamp all their colonial dreams.
The African continent and the African people were used by the 
colonialists in some curious ways to advance their military strengths 
and techniques. By chance, North Africa and the Sahara became 
available as a laboratory for the evolution of techniques of armoured 
warfare, in the period when Rommel and Montgomery battled for 
superiority. And, by design, Ethiopians were used as guinea-pigs, upon 
whom the Italian fascists experimented with poison gas. This followed 
their brazen invasion in 1935 of that small portion of Africa which still 
clung to some form of political independence. At that time, the Italians 
argued that it was absolutely essential that the fruits of colonialism be 
opened to Italy if it were to take ‘its place in the sun’. Significantly 
enough, both Britain and France had already seen so much of the sun 
and products of Africa that they found it difficult to refute Italy’s 
claims.
Britain and France ruled over the greater part of colonial Africa and 
they also had the largest empires in other parts of the world. The whole 
existence and development of capitalism in Britain and France between 
1885 and 1960 was bound up with colonisation, and Africa played a 
major role. African colonies meant surplus appropriated on a grand 
scale; they led to innovations and forward leaps in technology and the 
organisation of capitalist enterprise; and they buttressed the capitalist 
system at home and abroad with fighting men. Sometimes, it appeared 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (68 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:05 AM]


--- PAGE 300 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
that these two principal colonial powers reaped so many colonial 
benefits that they suffered from ‘too much of a good thing’.
Certainly, in Britain’s case, it can be argued that colonialism allowed 
British industry to lead a soft life, and that, in some decisive spheres of 
production and marketing, Britain grew lazy. Industrial plant installed 
in the 19th century was not renovated or replaced, and little dynamism 
was put into selling new lines of goods. In contrast, when deprived of 
colonies after 1918, Germany was forced to live off its own resources 
and ingenuity. Nevertheless, while that is an interesting detail of the 
whole colonial picture, it must be borne in mind that colonialism was 
one aspect of imperialism. Colonialism was based on alien political rule 
and was restricted to some parts of the world. Imperialism, however, 
underlay all colonies, extended all over the world (except where 
replaced by Socialist revolutions), and it allowed the participation of all 
capitalist nations. Therefore, lack of colonies on the part of any 
capitalist nation was not a barrier to enjoying the fruits of exploiting the 
colonial and semi-colonial world, which was the backyard of 
metropolitan capitalism.
(d) Colonialism as a prop to metropolitan economies and 
capitalism as a system
The composition of Unilever should serve as a warning that colonialism 
was not simply a matter of ties between a given colony and its mother 
country, but between colonies on the one hand and metropoles on the 
other. The German capital in Unilever joined the British in exploiting 
Africa and the Dutch in exploiting the East Indies. The rewards spread 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (69 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:05 AM]


--- PAGE 301 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
through the capitalist system in such a way that even those capitalist 
nations who were not colonial powers were also beneficiaries of the 
spoils. Unilever factories established in Switzerland, New Zealand, 
Canada and the U.S.A. were participants in the expropriation of 
Africa’s surplus and in using that surplus for their own development.
Germany always had a stake in colonial Africa, even after 1918 when 
the other capitalist powers deprived Germany of its colonies. German 
shipping revived in the 1920s and played an active role in East, West 
and South Africa. German financial houses also had contacts with 
Africa, the most direct being the Twentsche Bank in East Africa. Dutch 
shipping companies were involved with the German and British in the 
West African Conference Line, while the Scandinavian shippers were 
noted for the hiring out of ‘tramp’ ships which freighted cargo between 
Africa and Europe outside of the scheduled lines. The old East African 
Trading Company was supported by Danish capital. The Swiss had no 
colonies in Africa, but they had substantial capital in SCOA, they 
played a key role in imperialist banking, and they kept out of the wars 
fought by other capitalists so that they could still continue to trade with 
both sides and thereby acquire colonial produce. Then there was Japan 
– a capitalist/imperialist power with colonies in Asia and with a keen 
interest in trade with Africa. Japanese capitalists tried to undersell their 
European counterparts, but the trade they conducted with Africa was 
still unequal and disadvantageous Africans.
To fully understand the colonial period, it is necessary to think terms of 
‘the economic partition of Africa’. Unlike the political partition of the 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (70 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:05 AM]


--- PAGE 302 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
19th century, the economic partition had no fixed or visible boundaries. 
It consisted of the proportions in which capitalist powers divided up 
among themselves the monetary and non-monetary gains from Africa. 
For instance, Portugal had two large political colonies in Southern 
Africa, but economically Mozambique and Angola were divided among 
several capitalist powers, which were invited by the Portuguese 
government, because Portuguese capitalists were too weak to handle 
those vast territories.
Congo and South Africa had their own special arrangements of 
economic partition, both of them being valuable territories. At first, 
Congo was designated ‘the Congo Free State’ under King Leopold of 
Belgium. That meant that it was to have been a free trade zone and an 
area open to investment by capitalists of all nationalities. In practice, 
Leopold used administrative devices to monopolise the wealth of the 
Congo, and that was one of the principal reasons why the international 
capitalist community moved against Leopold in 1908. When Belgium 
took over the administration of the Congo, it also ensured that most of 
the surplus and other benefits should accrue to Belgium. However, non-
Belgian capitalist interests were able to penetrate via investment in 
mining; and, as the colonial period advanced, the British, French and 
Americans cut bigger pieces of the Congo cake.
For a long while, South Africa was the most important raw material 
reservoir for the whole of imperialism. Britain was the European power 
which had already been entrenched in South Africa for many years, by 
the time that gold and diamonds were discovered in the 19th century, on 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (71 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:05 AM]


--- PAGE 303 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
the eve of the Scramble. Britain had to come to terms with the Boer 
settlers, whose livelihood then came primarily from the land and whose 
main interest was to see to the exploitation and domination of the 
African population and other groups of non-white immigrants. 
Therefore, the economic and political partition of Africa gave Britain 
the lion’s share of the mineral wealth, while the Boers retained the 
political power necessary to institutionalise white racism. As capitalists 
of other nationalities entered into relations with South Africa through 
investment and trade, those capitalists agreed to and strengthened the 
racist/fascist social relations of South Africa.
Economic partition and repartition of Africa was going on all the time, 
because the proportions of the spoils that went to different capitalist 
countries kept changing. Special mention must be made of the U.S.A., 
because its share of the benefits from Africa were constantly increasing 
throughout the colonial period.
As time went on, the U.S.A. got an ever bigger slice of the unequal 
trade between the metropoles and colonial Africa. The share of the 
U.S.A. in Africa’s trade rose from just over 28 million dollars in 1913 
to 150 million dollars in 1932 to 1,200 million dollars in 1948, at which 
figure it represented nearly 15% of Africa’s foreign trade. The share of 
the U.S.A. in West Africa’s trade rose from 38 million dollars in 1938 
to 163 million dollars in 1946 and to 517 million dollars by 1954.
However, it was South Africa which was America’s best trading partner 
in Africa, supplying the U.S.A. with gold, diamonds, manganese and 
other minerals and buying heavy machinery in turn. Apart from direct 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (72 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:05 AM]


--- PAGE 304 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
U.S.A./South African trade, most of South Africa’s gold was resold in 
London to American buyers, just as most Gold Coast and Nigerian 
cocoa was resold to the U.S.A.
Inter-continental trade brought out the need for shipping services and 
America did not leave those in the hands of capitalists of other nations. 
James Farrell, President of the United States Steel Export Company, 
acquired a shipping line to Africa because of his ‘belief in the future of 
the Dark Continent’. Officials of the UAC had said exactly the same 
thing, and it is obvious that, like them, Farrell meant the bright future of 
metropolitan capitalism in exploiting Africa. It is always best when 
these individuals speak for themselves. Vice-Admiral Cochrane of the 
United States Navy was a great admirer of Farrell shipping lines. In 
1959, he wrote an introduction to a study of Farrell’s operations in 
Africa, in which he said,
We read of stiff international competition to assure the supply of strategic 
materials for our current industrial-military economy. Farrell Lines is 
making American maritime history. It is demonstrating clearly and 
emphatically that ships wearing the flag of a nation do in fact stimulate the 
commerce of that nation . . . demonstrating the value of American-flag 
ocean commerce to the health and wealth of the United States.
U.S. capitalists did not confine themselves to mere trade with Africa, 
but they also acquired considerable assets within colonies. It is common 
knowledge that Liberia was an American colony in everything but 
name. The U.S.A. supposedly aided the Liberian government with 
loans, but used the opportunity to take over Liberian customs revenue, 
to plunder thousands of square miles of Liberian land, and generally to 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (73 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:05 AM]


--- PAGE 305 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
dictate to the weak government of Liberia. The main investment in 
Liberia was undertaken by Firestone Rubber Company. Firestone made 
such huge profits from Liberian rubber that it was the subject of a book 
sponsored by American capitalists to show how well American business 
flourished overseas. Between 1940 and 1965, Firestone took 160 
million dollars worth of rubber out of Liberia; while in return the 
Liberian government received 8 million dollars. In earlier years, the 
percentage of the value that went to the Liberian government was much 
smaller, but, at the best of times, the average net profit made by 
Firestone was three times the Liberian revenue.
And yet the non-monetary benefits to the U.S. capitalist economy were 
worth far more than the money returns. Vice-Admiral Cochrane, in the 
quotation above, went to the heart of the matter when he mentioned 
strategic raw materials for the functioning of the industrial and military 
machine of the U.S. imperialists. Firestone acquired its Liberian 
plantations precisely because Britain and Holland had been raising the 
price of the rubber which came from their Asian colonies of Malaya and 
the Dutch East Indies, respectively. In Liberia, the U.S. rubber industry 
obtained a source that was reliable in peace and in war – one that was 
cheap and entirely under American control. One of rubber’s most 
immediate connections was with the motor-car industry, and so it is not 
surprising that Henry Firestone was a great friend and business 
colleague of John Ford. Liberian rubber turned the town of Akron 
(Ohio) into a powerful rubber tyre manufacturing centre, and the tyres 
then went over to the even bigger motor-car works of Ford in Detroit.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (74 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:06 AM]


--- PAGE 306 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
American investment in Africa during the last 15 years of colonialism 
was in some ways at the expense of the actual colonising powers and 
yet ultimately it was in the interests of Western European capitalism. 
This paradox is explained by noting that the U.S.A. had become the 
world’s leading capitalist/imperialist power by the outbreak of the 
second World War. It possessed the colonies of Puerto Rico and the 
Philippines, but much more important were its imperialistic investments 
throughout Latin America and to a lesser extent in Asia and Africa. 
America’s foreign investments in the 1930s drew slightly ahead of 
those of Britain, which were a long way ahead of the imperialist outlay 
of France, Germany and Japan. The 1939-45 war tremendously 
accelerated the changeover in America’s favour.
Europe suffered staggering losses, but no battles were fought on 
American soil, and so its productive capacity expanded. Therefore, after 
1945, U.S. capital moved into Africa, Asia and Europe itself with new 
aggressiveness and confidence, due to the fact that other capitalist 
competitors were still lying on the ground. In 1949, both British and 
French bankers had no choice but to invite American financiers into the 
African continent, for the French and British had insufficient capital of 
their own. The U.S.-controlled International Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development became an important vehicle for American influence 
in Africa and one of the tools for the economic re-partition of the 
continent.
Research by Dr. Kwame Nkrumah revealed that direct private 
investment by Americans in Africa increased between 1945 and 1958 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (75 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:06 AM]


--- PAGE 307 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
from 110 million dollars to 789 million dollars, most of it drawn from 
profits. Official estimates profits made by U.S. companies from 1946 to 
1959 in Africa are put at 1,234 million dollars. In considering the 
question of economic partition, what is relevant is the rate of growth of 
U.S. investments and profits compared to those Britain, France, 
Belgium, etc. For instance, the American investment in 1951 was 313 
million dollars, which was nearly three times what it was five years 
earlier, and in the subsequent five years the investment went up two and 
a half times. Meanwhile, British and French investment increased much 
more slowly.
However, while the U.S.A. was edging out the other colonialists, they 
all stood to gain from the advances made within the North American 
capitalist economy in terms of science, technology, organisation and 
military power. As pointed out earlier, when an African colony 
contributed to European metallurgical industries or to its electrical 
industry, that contribution passed into other aspects of the society, 
because the sectors concerned were playing leading roles within the 
capitalist economy. Similarly, the U.S.A. was a geographical area that 
was in the forefront of capitalist development. For instance, its 
technological know-how passed into Western European hands by way 
of a series of legal devices such as patents.
Furthermore, because the U.S.A. was by then the world’s leading 
capitalist state, it also had to assume active responsibility for 
maintaining the capitalist imperialist structure in all economic, political 
and military aspects. After the war, the U.S.A. moved into Western 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (76 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:06 AM]


--- PAGE 308 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Europe and Japan both to establish its own stranglehold and at the same 
time to give a blood transfusion to capitalism in those areas. A lot of the 
blood was definitely African. It is not just that America made 
(relatively) small profits out of Africa in the 19th century and in the 
early 20th century, but above all it must be recalled that North America 
was that part of the European capitalist system which had been the most 
direct beneficiary of the massacre of the (’Red’) Indians and the 
enslavement of Africans. The continued exploitation of African peoples 
within its own boundaries and in the Caribbean and Latin America must 
also be cited as evidence against U.S. monster imperialism. The U.S.A. 
was a worthy successor to Britain as the leading force and policeman of 
the imperialist/ colonialist world from 1945 onwards.
Under the Marshall Plan, by which U.S. capitalism aided Western 
European capitalism after the last war, it was announced that American 
experts were exploring Africa from end to end for agricultural and 
mineral wealth – especially the latter. Marshall Plan money (though the 
Economic Commission for Africa) went to firms like the Mines de 
Zellidja, which mined lead and zinc in North Africa; and, at the same 
time, the money allowed Americans to buy controlling shares in the 
company. Thus in 1954, Morgan of the U.S.A. shared with Rothschilds 
of Europe most of the net profit of 1,250 million old francs (8.16 
million dollars) made by the Mines de Zellidja in that year. Similarly, 
the Belgian government received substantial aid from the U.S.A. to 
implement a ten-year economic programme in Congo from 1950 to 
1959; and. as the price of the aid, U.S. monopolies established control 
over some companies in Congo. The U.S.A. took second place after 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (77 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:06 AM]


--- PAGE 309 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Belgium in Congo’s foreign trade, and U.S. capitalists had to be granted 
a range of privileges.
So the paradox continued, whereby the U.S. capitalists intruded and 
elbowed out French, British and Belgian capitalists in colonial Africa, 
while providing the funds without which the Western European nations 
could not have revived and could not have increased their exploitation 
of Africa – which is what they did in the period 1945-1960.
Over the last few decades of colonialism, colonial possessions served 
capitalism as a safety-valve in time of crisis. The first major occasion 
when this was displayed was during the great economic depression of 
1929-34. During that period, forced labour was increased in Africa and 
the prices paid to Africans for their crops were reduced. Workers were 
paid less and imported goods cost a great deal more. That was a time 
when workers in the metropolitan countries also suffered terribly; but 
the colonialists did the best they could to transfer the burdens of the 
depression away from Europe and on to the colonies.
The great economic depression did not affect the Soviet Union, where 
Socialism caused great development; but the slump spread from one 
end of the capitalist system to the other. It was a product of the 
irrationality of the capitalist mode of production. The search for profits 
caused production to run ahead of people’s capacity to purchase, and 
ultimately both production and employment had to be drastically 
reduced. Africans had nothing to do with the inherent shortcomings of 
capitalism; but, when Europeans were in a mess, they had no scruples 
about intensifying the exploitation of Africa. The economic depression 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (78 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:06 AM]


--- PAGE 310 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
was not a situation from which Britain could benefit at the expense of 
Sweden or where Belgium could gain at the expense of the U.S.A. They 
were all drowning, and that was why the benefits of the colonies saved 
not only the colonising powers but all capitalist nations.
The second major occasion on which the colonies had to bail out the 
metropoles was during the last World War. As noted earlier, the African 
people were required to make huge sacrifices and to supply vital raw 
materials at little cost to the metropoles. Africa’s military importance 
was also decisive. Not only did Africans fight and die on various 
battlefields of the war, but the continent held a key strategic position. In 
November, 1942, a third front was opened in Africa (following the 
European and Asian fronts), and that front was the means to final 
victory.
Accidents of geography meant that Africa controlled communications 
in the Mediterranean and in the South Atlantic, and it commanded the 
two western entrances into the Indian Ocean. As one military analyst 
put it, ‘The side that held Africa was on the way to final victory’. With 
the aid of African fighting men and resources, the major colonial 
powers maintained control of the continent in the face of attacks, by the 
Italians, who had only Libya, Somaliland and (briefly) Ethiopia. The 
Germans of course by then had no colonies in Africa, and they had to 
use what was offered by the Italians and fascist Vichy Frenchmen.
Unlike the first World War, the second World War was not simply one 
between capitalist powers. The aggressor states of Italy, Germany and 
Japan were fascist. The governments of Portugal, Spain and South 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (79 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:06 AM]


--- PAGE 311 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Africa also subscribed to that ideology, although for opportunist reasons 
both the Portuguese and the South African Boers found it more 
convenient to be allied with Britain, France, the U.S.A. and the other 
bourgeois democracies.
Fascism is a deformity of capitalism. It heightens the imperialist 
tendency towards domination which is inherent in capitalism, and it 
safeguards the principle of private property. At the same time, fascism 
immeasurably strengthens the institutional racism already bred by 
capitalism, whether it be against Jews (as in Hitler’s case) or against 
African peoples (as in the ideology of Portugal’s Salazar and the leaders 
of South Africa). Fascism reverses the political gains of the bourgeois 
democratic system such as free elections, equality before the law, 
parliaments, etc., and it also extolls authoritarianism and the reactionary 
union of the church with the state. In Portugal and Spain, it was the 
Catholic Church – in South Africa, it was the Dutch Reformed Church.
Like its progenitor, capitalism, fascism is totally opposed to Socialism. 
Fascist Germany and Italy attacked both the other capitalist states and 
the Soviet Union, which was still the only Socialist state in the world by 
1939. The defeat of fascism was therefore a victory for Socialism, and 
at the same time it preserved the other capitalist nations from having to 
take the historically retrograde step of fascism.
When the last World War ended, Africa’s further role was to help 
Europe reconstruct. In that crisis, the U.S.A. played a major part, as has 
just been mentioned; but the colonising nations also had direct recourse 
to their colonies, in spite of shortage of capital. It is noteworthy that 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (80 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:06 AM]


--- PAGE 312 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
European capitalism from the late 1940s onwards recognised Afríca’s 
potential as a saviour of their own war-torn economies, and they openly 
made statements to that effect.
It was in 1946 that the Ministry of Colonies in the French cabinet was 
renamed the Ministry of Overseas France and colonised Africans were 
euphemistically called ‘Overseas Frenchmen’. About that time, a 
statement from the French Ministry of Education frankly admitted that,
France would be only a little state of Europe without the seventy-five 
million overseas Frenchmen whose young force has revealed itself to the 
world in such a remarkable manner. (Referring to Africa’s role in the war.)
Shortly afterwards, when France prepared its Four Year Plan for 1949-
52, statements such as the following were to be encountered:
Morocco will take an active part in the recovery of France by supplying 
manganese, cobalt and lead ore, canned goods and agricultural produce.
At the end of the last war, both Britain and France set up agencies for 
the ‘development’ of their colonies. In the British sphere, this was 
known as the Colonial Development and Welfare (C.D. & W.), while 
the French fund was known as FIDES. Their principal function was to 
provide loans, the purpose of which was to help the colonies to help the 
metropoles. In other words, the crisis of post-war reconstruction 
required that even greater effort should be made to maximise the 
resources of colonies.
It was no ordinary post-war crisis which Western Europe faced in the 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (81 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:06 AM]


--- PAGE 313 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
1940s and 1950s. The bourgeoisie had to rebuild capitalist states at a 
time when Socialism had already proved itself in the Soviet Union, and 
in a period when the Red Army of the Soviets had aided groups of 
Socialists to come to power in Eastern Europe. This was the greatest 
challenge ever be faced by the bourgeoisie because (unlike fascism) 
Socialism threatened the basic capitalist principle of private ownership 
of the means of production. Furthermore, Socialist principles were 
making their presence felt even in remote corners of the colonies, and 
the capitalists realised the necessity for cutting the colonies off from 
Socialist thought, as well as using colonial resources to stave off what 
they termed ‘the threat of Communism’.
In the capitalist struggle to keep off the challenge of Socialism as a 
competing mode of production and way of life, Africa played at least 
two key roles – one being to provide for the capitalist militarists, and 
the other being to provide a wide range of raw materials essential for 
modern armament industries. The most vital of these raw materials 
were uranium and other radioactive substances for atomic and later 
nuclear weapons, including the hydrogen bomb. Almost rivalling 
uranium in importance were certain rare minerals (like lithium from 
Rhodesia) needed for the special steels that went into new aircraft 
rockets, tanks, guns, bombs, etc.
Colonial powers already had small military establishments in each 
colony, and right up to the end of the colonial era, it was considered 
necessary to strengthen those. For instance, in the 1955 French budget 
there was a special vote of six billion francs (16.8 million dollars) for 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (82 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:06 AM]


--- PAGE 314 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
the improvement of military installations in the colonies, and notably 
for strategic bases in Dakar and Djibouti. Some time previously, the 
Belgians had completed a huge air base near Kamina in the Congo.
Added to the regular bases in long-established colonies, the imperialist 
powers were able to set up military installations in African territories 
which fell into their hands during the war. In this context, the U.S.A. 
was particularly important, because it was already the principal buttress 
of the capitalist defence system in the form of the North Atlantic Treaty 
Organisation (NATO). Thus, after helping to recapture North Africa 
from the fascists, the United States was able to build major air-force 
bases in Morocco and Libya. In Italian Eritrea, the Americans stepped 
in with modern radar stations; and Ethiopia conceded military bases.
Though nominally independent, Liberia had little option but to accept a 
massive military presence of Americans, as a logical consequence of 
America’s economic exploitation and domination of Liberia. When the 
U.S.A. agreed to a port at Monrovia in 1943, they also obtained the 
concession that the U.S.A. was to have ‘the right to establish, maintain 
and control such naval, air and military facilities and installations at the 
site of the port, and in the general vicinity thereof, as may be desired for 
the protection of strategic interests of the U.S.A. in the South Atlantic’. 
Throughout the war, Liberia’s Robertsfield airfield had of considerable 
value to the U.S.A. and later on it continued to have a military utility. 
To tie matters up further, the U.S.A. entered into what it called a 
military assistance pact with Liberia in 1951.
Needless to say, in the 1950s when most Africans were still colonial 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (83 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:06 AM]


--- PAGE 315 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
subjects, they had absolutely no control over the utilisation of their soil 
for militaristic ends. Virtually the whole of North Africa was turned 
into a sphere of operations for NATO, with bases aimed at the Soviet 
Union. They could easily have become involved in nuclear war without 
African peoples having any knowledge of the matter. The colonial 
powers actually held military conferences in African cities like Dakar 
and Nairobi in the early 1950s, inviting the whites of South Africa and 
Rhodesia and the government of the U.S.A. Time and time again, the 
evidence points to this cynical use of Africa to buttress capitalism 
economically and militarily, and therefore in effect forcing Africa to 
contribute to its own exploitation.
Apart from saving capitalism in times of crisis, the dependencies had 
always been prolonging the life of capitalism by taking the edge off the 
internal contradictions and conflicts which were a part of the capitalist 
system. The principal contradiction within capitalism from the outset 
was between the capitalists and the workers. To keep their system 
going, the capitalists had constantly to step up the rate of exploitation of 
their workers. At the same time, European workers were gaining 
increasing mastery over the means of production in the factories and 
mines, and they were learning to work collectively in big enterprises 
and within their own trade union structures. If the bourgeoisie 
continued to deprive them of the major part of the fruits of their own 
labour and to oppress them socially and politically, then those two 
classes were set on a collision path. Ever since the mid-19th century, 
Marx had predicted class collision would come in the form of 
Revolution in which workers would emerge victorious. The capitalists 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (84 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:06 AM]


--- PAGE 316 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
were terribly afraid of that possibility, knowing full well that they 
themselves had seized power from the feudal landlord class by means 
of Revolution. However, imperialism introduced a new factor into this 
situation – one that deferred the confrontation between workers and 
capitalists in the metropoles.
Only in Russia was there a workers’ Revolution, and Russia was on the 
fringe of Europe rather than being one of its metropolitan capitalist 
centres. That very fact highlighted how much capitalism in places like 
Britain, France and Germany had been stabilised by exploiting the 
colonies and other semi-colonies such as Latin America, where states 
were independent in name only.
Surplus from Africa was partly used to offer a few more benefits to 
European workers and served as a bribe to make the latter less 
revolutionary. The bribe came in the form of increased wages, better 
working conditions, and expanded social services. The benefits of 
colonialism were diffused throughout European society in many ways. 
Most capitalist enterprises offered consumer goods which were mass-
produced at low prices, and therefore the European housewife got some 
relief. For instance, instant coffee brought that beverage within the 
reach of the ordinary worker. Meanwhile, the capitalist still made his 
fortune by ensuring that the Ivory Coast or Colombian grower got no 
price increases. In that way, colonialism was serving all classes and 
sectors of Western Europe and other capitalist metropoles.
European workers have paid a great price for the few material benefits 
which accrued to them as crumbs from the colonial table. The class in 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (85 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:06 AM]


--- PAGE 317 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
power controls the dissemination of information. The capitalists 
misinformed and miseducated workers in the metropoles to the point 
where they became allies in colonial exploitation. In accepting to be led 
like sheep, European workers were perpetuating their own enslavement 
to the capitalists. They ceased to seek political power and contented 
themselves with bargaining for small wage increases, which were 
usually counterbalanced by increased costs of living. They ceased to be 
creative and allowed bourgeois cultural decadence to overtake them all. 
They failed to exercise any independent judgement on the great issues 
of war and peace, and therefore ended up by slaughtering not only 
colonial peoples but also themselves.
Fascism was a monster born of capitalist parents. Fascism came as the 
end-product of centuries of capitalist bestiality, exploitation, 
domination and racism-mainly exercised outside of Europe. It is highly 
significant that many settlers and colonial officials displayed a leaning 
towards fascism. Apartheid in South Africa is nothing but fascism. It 
was gaining roots ever since the early period of white colonisation in 
the 17th century, and particularly after the mining industry brought 
South Africa fully into the capitalist orbit in the 19th century. Another 
example of the fascist potential of colonialism was seen when France 
was overrun by Nazi Germany in 1940. The French fascists 
collaborated with Hitler to establish what was called the Vichy regime 
in France, and the French white settlers in Africa supported the Vichy 
regime. A more striking instance to the same effect was the fascist 
ideology developed by the white settlers in Algeria, who not only 
opposed independence for Algeria under Algerian rule, but they also 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (86 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:06 AM]


--- PAGE 318 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
strove to bring down the more progressive or liberal governments of 
metropolitan France.
Inside Europe itself, some specific and highly revealing connections can 
be found between colonialist behaviour and the destruction of the few 
contributions made by capitalism to human development. For instance, 
when Colonel Von Lettow returned from leading the German forces in 
East Africa in World War I, he was promoted to a general in the 
German army, and Von Lettow was in command of the massacre of 
German communists in Hamburg in 1918. That was a decisive turning 
point in German history, for once the most progressive workers had 
been crushed, the path was clear for the fascist deformation of the 
future. In brutally suppressing the Maji Maji War in Tanganyika and in 
attempting genocide against the Herero people of Namibia (South West 
Africa), the German ruling class were getting the experience which they 
later applied against the Jews and against German workers and 
progressives.
When the fascist dictatorship was inaugurated in Portugal in 1926, it 
drew inspiration from Portugal’s colonial past. After Salazar became 
the dictator in 1932, he stated that his ‘New State’ in Portugal would be 
based on the labour the ‘inferior peoples’, meaning of course Africans. 
In addition, Portuguese peasants and workers had to submit to police 
terror, poverty and dehumanisation, so they paid (and are still paying) a 
high price for fascism at home and colonialism abroad.
Colonialism strengthened the Western European ruling class and 
capitalism as a whole. Particularly in its later it was evidently giving a 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (87 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:06 AM]


--- PAGE 319 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
new lease of life to a mode of production that was otherwise dying. 
From every view-point other than that of the minority class of 
capitalists, colonialism was a monstrous institution holding back the 
liberation of man.
Brief Guide to Reading
Here again, few scholars have treated capitalism and imperialism as an 
integral system involving the transfer of funds and other benefits from 
colonies to metropoles. And, where there is an awareness of the unity of 
the system, no detailed analysis necessarily follows. In effect, one is 
faced with the limitations of a metropolitan viewpoint. Thus, European 
or white American Marxists who expose the rapacious nature of modern 
capitalism within their own countries, have not generally integrated this 
with the exploitation of Africa, Asia and Latin America – except for the 
very recent neo-colonial period.
G. Padmore, Africa. How Britain rules Africa, 
K. Nkrumah, Africa must Unite. Neo-colonialism, the Highest Stage of 
Imperialism. 
W. A. Hunton, Decision in Africa.
The most vociferous remarks about Africa’s contribution to Europe 
have been made by politically involved Pan-African intellectuals, such 
as these three.
Grover Clark, The Balance Sheets of Colonialism.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (88 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:06 AM]


--- PAGE 320 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
D. K. Fieldhouse, The Colonial Empires.
These two texts proclaim that colonialism was not essentially economic, 
and that the colonisers did not gain. The second book is recent, and the 
view is still very much alive.
U.S.S.R. Institute of History, A History of Africa 1918-1967.
P. Jalée, The Pillage of the Third World.
These (Marxist) texts specifically about Africa and the exploited sector 
of the capitalist world do make the point that the metropoles were 
extracting huge colonial surpluses.
 
Table of Contents 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch05.htm (89 of 89) [8/22/05 11:07:06 AM]


--- PAGE 321 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Chapter Six. Colonialism as a 
System for Underdeveloping Africa
‘The black man certainly has to pay dear for carrying the white man’s 
burden.’
George Padmore,
(West Indian) Pan-Africanist, 1936.
‘In the colonial society, education is such that it serves the colonialist.. In 
a regime of slavery, education was but one institution for forming slaves.’
Statement of FRELIMO (Mozambique Liberation Front) 
Department of Education and Culture 1968.
6.1 The Supposed Benefits of Colonialism to Africa
(a) Socio-Economic Services
Faced with the evidence of European exploitation of Africa, many 
bourgeois writers would concede at least partially that colonialism was 
a system which functioned well in the interests of the metropoles. 
However, they would then urge that another issue to be resolved is how 
much Europeans did for Africans, and that it is necessary to draw up a 
‘balance sheet of colonialism’. On that balance sheet, they place both 
the ‘credits’ and the ‘debits’, and quite often conclude that the good 
outweighed the bad. That particular conclusion can quite easily be 
challenged, but attention should also be drawn to the fact that the 
process of reasoning, is itself misleading. The reasoning has some 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (1 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:30 AM]


--- PAGE 322 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
sentimental persuasiveness. It appeals to the common sentiment that 
‘after all there must be two sides to a thing’. The argument suggests 
that, on the one hand, there was exploitation and oppression, but, on the 
other hand, colonial governments did much for the benefit of Africans 
and they developed Africa. It is our contention that this is completely 
false. Colonialism had only one hand — it was a one-armed bandit.
What did colonial governments do in the interest of Africans? 
Supposedly, they built railroads, schools, hospitals and the like. The 
sum total of these services was amazingly small.
For the first three decades of colonialism, hardly anything was done that 
could remotely be termed a service to the African people. It was in fact 
only after the last war that social services were built as a matter of 
policy. How little they amounted to does not really need illustrating. 
After all, the statistics which show that Africa today is underdeveloped 
are the statistics representing the state of affairs at the end of 
colonialism. For that matter, the figures at the end of the first decade of 
African independence in spheres such as health, housing and education 
are often several times higher than the figures inherited by the newly 
independent governments. It would be an act of the most brazen fraud 
to weigh the paltry social amenities provided during the colonial epoch 
against the exploitation, and to arrive at the conclusion that the good 
outweighed the bad.
Capitalism did bring social services to European workers — firstly, as a 
by-product of providing such services for the bourgeoisie and the 
middle class, and later as a deliberate act of policy. Nothing remotely 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (2 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 323 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
comparable occurred in Africa. In 1934, long before the coming of the 
welfare state to Britain, expenditure for social services in the British 
Isles amounted to £6 15s per person. In Ghana, the figure was 7/4d per 
person, and that was high by colonial standards. In Nigeria and 
Nyasaland, it was less than 1/9d per head. None of the other colonising 
powers were doing any batter, and some much worse.
The Portuguese stand out because they boasted the most and did the 
least. Portugal boasted that Angola, Guinea and Mozambique have been 
their possessions for 500 years, during which time a ‘civilizing mission’ 
has been going on. At the end of 500 years of shouldering the white 
man’s burden of civilising ‘African natives’, the Portuguese had not 
managed to train a single African doctor in Mozambique, and the life 
expectancy in Eastern Angola was less than 30 years. As for Guinea-
Bissau, some insight into the situation there is provided by the 
admission of the Portuguese themselves that Guinea-Bissau was more 
neglected than Angola and Mozambique!
Furthermore, the limited social services within Africa during colonial 
times were distributed in a manner that reflected the pattern of 
domination and exploitation. First of all, white settlers and expatriates 
wanted the standards of the bourgeoisie or professional classes of the 
metropoles. They were all the more determined to have luxuries in 
Africa, because so many of them came from poverty in Europe and 
could not expect good services in their own homelands. In colonies like 
Algeria, Kenya and South Africa, it is well known that whites created 
an infrastructure to afford themselves leisured and enjoyable lives. It 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (3 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 324 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
means, therefore, that the total amenities provided in any of those 
colonies is no guide to what Africans got out of colonialism.
In Algeria, the figure for infant mortality was 39 per 1.000 live births 
among white settlers; but it jumped to 170 per 1,000 live births in the 
case of Algerians living in the :owns. In practical terms, that meant that 
the medical, maternity and sanitation services were all geared towards 
the well-being of the settlers. Similarly, in South Africa, all social 
statistics have to be broken down into at least two groups — white and 
black — if they are to be interpreted correctly. In British East Africa 
there were three groups: firstly, the Europeans who got the most, then 
the Indians who took most of what was left, and thirdly the Africans, 
who came last in their own country.
In predominantly black countries, it was also true that the hulk of the 
social services went to whites. The southern part of Nigeria was one of 
the colonial areas that was supposed to have received the most from a 
benevolent ‘mother country’. Ibadan, one of the most heavily populated 
cities in Africa, had only about 50 Europeans before the last war. For 
those chosen few, the British colonial government maintained a 
segregated hospital service of 11 beds in well-furnished surroundings. 
There were 34 beds for the half-a-million blacks. The situation was 
repeated in other areas, so that altogether the 4,000 Europeans in the 
country in the 1930s had 12 modern hospitals, while the African 
population of at least 40 million had 52 hospitals.
The viciousness of the colonial system with respect to the provision of 
social services was most dramatically brought out in the case of 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (4 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 325 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
economic activities which made huge profits, and notably in the mining 
industry. Mining takes serious toll of the health of workers, and it was 
only recently in the metropoles that miners have had access to the kind 
of medical and insurance services which could safeguard their lives and 
health. [n colonial Africa, the exploitation of miners was entirely 
without responsibility. In 1930, scurvy and other epidemics broke out in 
the Lupa goldfields of Tanganyika. Hundreds of workers died. One 
should not wonder that they had no facilities which would have saved 
some lives, because in the first place they were not being paid enough 
to eat properly.
South Africa’s large working class African population was in a sad 
state. The Tuberculosis Commission of 1912 reported that in the shanty 
towns
Scarcely a single family exists in which at least one member is not 
suffering or dying from tuberculosis. Hospital services are so inadequate 
that incurable tuberculosis and other cases are simply sent home to die and 
spread the infection. In some areas, a single doctor has to attend to the 
needs of 40,000 people. The natives must pay for medical treatment. There 
is no provision for pauper patients. About 65% of the native children die 
before reaching two years.
That was as early as 1912, when the basis of the South African gold and 
diamond empire was already laid. Since then, the shanty towns 
increased, the slum conditions grew worse, and the government 
committed itself to pursuing the odious policy of apartheid, which 
meant separation of the races so as better to exploit the African people.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (5 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 326 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Many Africans trekked to towns, because (bad as they were) they 
offered a little more than the countryside. Modern sanitation, electricity, 
piped water, paved roads, medical services and schools were as foreign 
at the end of the colonial period as they were in the beginning — as far 
as mast of rural Africa was concerned. Yet, it was the countryside that 
grew the cash-crops and provided the labour that kept the system going. 
The peasants there knew very little of the supposed ‘credits’ on the 
colonial balance sheet.
Because even the scanty social services were meant only to facilitate 
exploitation, they were not given to any Africans whose labour was not 
directly producing surplus for export to the metropoles. That is to say, 
none of the wealth of exploited Africans could be deployed for the 
assistance of their brothers outside the money economy.
Multiple examples exist to substantiate the above proposition. The most 
‘wealthy’ colonies received greater social services under colonialism. 
Thus, the Rand in South Africa and Katanga in Congo had to provide 
for their relatively large working class. For many years, they 
approached the whole matter indifferently, but, in the final analysis, 
enlightened self-interest made the colonialists realise that more could be 
gained out of the African worker who maintained basic health and who 
had some degree of literacy in industrial contexts. This was the same 
line of reasoning which had previously led the capitalist class in Europe 
to be somewhat freer in allowing part of the workers’ production to go 
back to keeping the worker alive and well.
In the cash-crop producing countries of Africa, a similar situation 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (6 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 327 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
existed whereby the tendency was for socio-economic services to 
decrease in colonies or areas which produced few goods to be shipped 
abroad. That accounts for the fact that Africans in Gold Coast, Uganda 
and Nigeria could be considered as having been ‘better off’ than those 
in Dahomey, Tanganyika and Chad.
Within individual countries, considerable regional variations existed, 
depending on the degree to which different parts of a country were 
integrated into the capitalist money economy. Thus, the northern part of 
Kenya or the South of Sudan had little to offer the colonialists, and such 
a zone was simply ignored by the colonising power with regard to 
roads, schools, hospitals and so on. Often, at the level of the district of a 
given colony, there would be discrimination in providing social 
amenities, on the basis of contribution to exportable surplus. For 
instance, plantations and companies might build hospitals for their 
workers, because some minimum maintenance of the workers’ health 
was an economic investment. Usually, such a hospital was exclusively 
for workers of that particular capitalist concern, and those Africans 
living in the vicinity under ‘subsistence’ conditions outside the money 
economy were ignored altogether.
The Arusha Declaration powerfully and simply expressed, one of the 
deepest truths of the colonial experience in Africa, when it stated that:
We have been oppressed a great deal, we have been exploited a great deal, 
and we have been disregarded a great deal.
The combination of being oppressed, being exploited, and being 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (7 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 328 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
disregarded is best illustrated by the pattern of the economic 
infrastructure of African colonies: notably, their roads and railways. 
These had a clear geographical distribution according to the extent to 
which particular regions needed to be opened up to import/export 
activities. Where exports were not available, roads and railways had no 
place. The only slight exception is that certain roads and railways were 
built to move troops and make conquest and oppression easier.
Means of communication were not constructed in the colonial period so 
that Africans could visit their friends. More important still, there were 
not laid down to facilitate internal trade in African commodities. There 
were no roads connecting different colonies and different parts of the 
same colony in a manner that made sense with regard to Africa’s needs 
and development. All roads and railways led down to the sea. They 
were built to extract gold or manganese or coffee or cotton. They were 
built to make business possible for the timber companies, trading 
companies and agricultural concession firms, and for white settlers. 
Any catering to African interests was purely coincidental. Yet in Africa, 
labour rather than capital, took the lion’s share in getting things done. 
With the minimum investment of capital, the colonial powers could 
mobilise thousands upon thousands of workers. Salaries were paid to 
the police officers and officials, and labour came into existence because 
of the colonial laws, the threat of force and the use of force. Take, for 
instance, the building of railways. In Europe and America, railway 
building required huge inputs of capital. Great wage bills were incurred 
during construction, and added bonus payments were made to workers 
to get the job done as quickly as possible. In most parts of Africa, the 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (8 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 329 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Europeans who wanted to see a railroad built offered lashes as the 
ordinary wage and more (ashes for extra effort.
Reference was earlier made to the great cost in African life of the 
(French) Congo railroad from Brazzaville to Pointe Noire. Most of the 
intolerable conditions are explained by the non-availability of capital in 
the form of equipment. Therefore, sheer manpower had to take the 
place of earth-moving machinery, cranes, etc. A comparable situation 
was provided by the construction of the Embakasi airport of Nairobi. 
Because it was built during the colonial era (starting in 1953) and with 
U.S. loans, it is customary to credit the imperialists for its existence. 
But it would be much more accurate to say that the people of Kenya 
built it with their own hands under European supervision.
Embakasi, which initially covered seven square miles and had four 
runways, was described as ‘the world’s first handmade international 
airport.’ Mau Mau suspects numbering several thousand were to be 
found there ‘labouring under armed guard at a million-ton excavation 
job, filling in craters, laying a half million tons of stone with nothing 
but shovels, stone hammers and their bare hands.’
The financial institutions of colonial Africa were even more 
scandalously neglectful of indigenous African interests than was the 
case with the European-oriented communications system. The banks 
did very little lending locally. In British East Africa, credit to Africans 
was specifically discouraged by the Credit to Natives (Restriction) 
Ordinance of 1931. Insurance Companies catered almost exclusively to 
the interests of white settlers and capitalist firms. The policy of colonial 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (9 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 330 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
reserves in metropolitan currencies can also be cited as a ‘service’ 
inimical to Africans. The Currency Boards and central banks which 
performed such services denied Africa access to its own funds created 
by exports. Instead, the colonial reserves in Britain, France and 
Belgium represented African loans to and capital investment in Europe.
It is necessary to re-evaluate the much glorified notion of ‘European 
capital’ having been invested in colonial Africa and Asia. The money 
available for investment in the capitalist system was itself the 
consequence of the previous robbery of workers and peasants in Europe 
and the world at large. In Africa’s case, the capital that was invested in 
19th century commerce was part of the capital that had been derived 
from the trade in slaves. The Portuguese government was the first in 
Europe to ship captives from Africa and the last to let go of slave 
trading. Much of the profit slipped out of Portuguese hands, and went 
instead to Britain and Germany; but the Portuguese slave trade 
nevertheless helped the Portuguese themselves to finance later colonial 
ventures, such as joint capitalist participation in agricultural and mining 
companies in Angola and Mozambique.
As indicated earlier, many of the entrepreneurs from the big European 
port towns who turned to importing African agricultural produce into 
Europe were formerly carrying on the trade in slaves. The same can be 
said of many New England firms in the U.S.A. Some of the biggest 
‘names’ in the colonial epoch were capitalist concerns whose original 
capital came from the trade in slaves or from slavery itself. Lloyd’s, the 
great insurance underwriting and banking house, falls into this category, 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (10 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 331 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
having been nourished by profits from the slave territories of the West 
Indies in the 17th and 18th centuries ; and the ubiquitous Barclay’s 
Bank had its antecedents in slave trading. Worms et Compagnie is a 
French example of the same phenomenon. Back in the 18th century, 
Worms had strong links with the French slave trade, and it grew to 
become one of the most powerful financial houses dealing with the 
French empire in Africa and Asia, with particular concentration on 
Madagascar and the Indian Ocean.
The example of Unilever and the UAC which was highlighted in the 
previous chapter also reinforces the point that Africa was being 
exploited by capital produced out of African labour. When Lever 
Brothers took over the Niger Company in 1929, they became heirs to 
one of the most notorious exploiters of 19th-century Africa. The Niger 
Company was a chartered company with full governmental and police 
powers during the years 1885-1897. In that period, the company 
exploited Nigerians ruthlessly. Furthermore, the Niger Company was 
itself a monopoly that had bought up smaller firms tracing their capital 
directly to slave trading. Similarly, when the UAC was born out of the 
merger with the Eastern and African Trading Company, it was 
associated with some more capital that grew from a family tree rooted 
in the European slave trade. The capital at the disposal of the big French 
trading firms, CFAO and SCOA can also be traced in the same way.
The process of capital accumulation and reproduction in East Africa 
lacks the continuity of West Africa. Firstly, Arabs as well as Europeans 
were participants in the slave trade from East Africa. Secondly, the 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (11 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 332 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Germans intervened in 1885, although they had not been previously 
involved; while the French (who had led the European stave trade in 
East Africa during the 18th and 19th centuries) concentrated on 
colonising the Indian Ocean islands rather than the East African 
mainland. Thirdly, German colonialism did not last beyond the — 1914-
18 war. Even so, on the British side, the capital and profits of the 
colonising East Africa Company reappeared in the trading firm of 
Smith McKenzie.
The capital that was invested in colonial Africa in later years was a 
continuation of the colonial capital of the 19th century, along with new 
influxes from the metropoles. If one enquired closely into the origins of 
the supposedly new sources, quite a few would have been connected 
very closely to previous exploitation of non-European peoples. 
However, it is not necessary to prove that every firm trading in Africa 
had a first-hand or second-hand connection with the European slave 
trade and with earlier exploitation of the continent. It is enough to 
remember that Europe’s greatest source of primary capital accumulation 
was overseas, and that the profits from African ventures continually 
outran the capital invested in the colonies.
A conservative bourgeois writer on colonial Africa made the following 
remarks about the South African gold and diamond industries:
Apart from the original capital subscribed (in the diamond industry), all 
capital expenditure was provided for out of profits. The industry also 
yielded large profits to the international firms which dealt in diamonds. 
These had a peculiar importance, because a considerable portion of the 
wealth accumulated by diamond firms was later used in the development 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (12 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 333 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
of the (gold industry) of the Rand.
Similarly, in Angola the Diamang diamond company was an 
investment that quickly paid for itself, and was then producing capital. 
The combined profits of that company for the years 1954 and 1955 
alone cam to the total of invested capital plus 40%. The excess over 
investment and maintenance costs was of course expatriated to 
Portugal, Belgium, and the U.S.A., where the shareholders of Diamang 
were resident; and Angola was thereby investing in those countries.
In this sense, the colonies were the generators of the capital rather than 
the countries into which foreign capital was ploughed.
Capital was constantly in motion from metropole to some part of the 
dependencies, from colonies to other colonies (via the metropoles), 
from one metropole to another, and from colony to metropole. But 
because of the super-profits created by non-European peoples ever 
since slavery, the net flow was from colony to metropole. What was 
called ‘profits’ in one year came back as ‘capital’ the next. Even 
progressive writers have created a wrong impression by speaking about 
capital ‘exports’ from Europe to Africa and about the role of ‘foreign’ 
capital. What was foreign about the capital in colonial Africa was its 
ownership and not its initial source. Apologists for colonialism are 
quick to say that the money for schools, hospitals, etc., in Africa was 
provided by the British, the French or Belgian taxpayer, as the case may 
have been. It defies logic to admit that profits from a given colony in a 
given year totalled several million dollars and to affirm nevertheless 
that the few thousand dollars allocated to social services in that colony 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (13 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 334 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
was the money of European taxpayers! The true situation can accurately 
be presented in the following terms: African workers and peasants 
produced for European capitalism goods and services of a certain 
value. A small proportion of the fruits of their efforts were retained by 
them in the form of wages, cash payments and extremely limited social 
services, such as were essential to the maintenance of colonialism. The 
rest went to the various beneficiaries of the colonial system.
There can be little dispute over the credibility of the data which is 
available to amply demonstrate that colonialism for the most part aimed 
at developing the metropoles, and only allowed certain crumbs to the 
colonies as incidental by-products of exploitation. British colonial 
records are full of reports of Royal Commissions investigating this and 
that, the reports (upon which action was seldom taken) provide the best 
evidence of the appalling indifference of the colonial regimes to the 
needs of Africans. In the 1930s, there were riots throughout the West 
Indies because of the insupportable suffering of the African descendants 
who were left stranded in those parts after slavery. The Royal 
Commission investigating the grievances found them so shocking that 
the full findings were not published during the war, lest they reveal that 
colonialism was hardly any better than the fascism against which 
Britain was fighting. It was out of that investigation that the idea of 
establishing Colonial Development and Welfare (CD & W) was 
advanced. An act to that effect was passed in 1940, although it was not 
until 1944 that funds became available for CD & W loans to colonial 
administrations.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (14 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 335 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
The French also had their counterpart to CD & W in the form of 
FIDES, set up in 1946. From the earliest days, of colonial expansion, 
there were two kinds of explanations of motives coming out of the 
metropoles. One was very frank, and appealed to the various Chambers 
of Commerce in European towns. It said simply that Europeans were in 
the colonial game because it was damn profitable, and that was that. 
However, there were other elements who thought it necessary to peddle 
a line about the welfare of the ‘uncivilised natives’. This was a 
continuation of earlier justifications of slavery on the grounds that it 
carried the heathen Africans to Christian lands. As colonialism came 
under heavy criticism during the last decades, more deliberate efforts 
were made to whitewash it. Both CD & W and FIDES were part of the 
public relations propaganda of colonialism, striving to mask and deny 
its viciousness.
Above all, both FIDES and CD & W were born of post-war conditions 
in Europe, at the time when Western European capitalist nations were 
desperately falling back on colonies to save them vis-à-vis Socialism 
and even from the competition of the U.S.A. Mr. Bevin, a noted labour 
leader turned traitor to his class and spokesman for British capitalism, 
made the observation that ‘The other two world Powers, the United 
States and Soviet Russia, have tremendous resources. If Western 
Europe is to achieve its balance of payments and to get a world 
equilibrium, it is essential that (African) resources should be developed, 
and made available.’ Any close study of the operations of CD & W and 
FIDES reveals clearly that they had nothing to do with African 
development but a great deal to do with the welfare of capitalist Europe.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (15 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 336 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
The so-called development funds for Africa went almost exclusively 
into the building of economic infrastructure and into the provision of 
certain social services. Of the CD & W grants between 1946 and 1956, 
less than 1 %, was allocated to industries In the case of FIDES from 
1949 to 1953, the corresponding figure was less than 0.50%. 
Agriculture fared very little better, although that was of course the 
principal activity in which Africans were engaged. The colonial 
administration of Nigeria set up a Ten Year Plan, with hopes of 
borrowing heavily from CD & W funds. In that Plan, the sum of 
£1,824,000 was voted for agriculture out of a total of £53,000,000. 
Most of that agricultural grant was to be consumed by constructing an 
agricultural school and for providing salaries for British ‘experts’.
Other British colonies drew up Ten Year Plans, which had the same 
deficiencies as the Nigerian one, and indeed they were. all apologies for 
true economic plans, being nothing else but a series of disjointed 
projects drawn up by different government departments as extensions to 
their then existing activities. Thus, the plans could not be expected to 
break any new ground; and they completely ignored developmental 
features such as stimulating internal and intra-African trade. 
The high proportion of the ‘development’ funds went into the colonies 
in the form of loans for ports, railways, electric power plants, water 
works, engineering workshops, warehouses, etc, which were necessary 
for more efficient exploitation in the long run. In the short run, such 
construction works provided outlets for European steel, concrete, 
electrical machinery and railroad rolling-stock. One-fifth of FIDES 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (16 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 337 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
funds were spent on prestigious public works in Dakar, which suited 
French industry and employed large numbers of expatriates. Even the 
schools built under FIDES funds were of unnecessary high cost per 
unit, because they had to be of the requisite standard to provide job 
outlets for white expatriates. Incidentally, loans were ‘tied’ in such a 
way that the money had to be spent on buying materials manufactured 
in the relevant metropole.
The ‘development’ funds were raised on the European money market 
by the governments concerned, and in effect the national metropolitan 
governments were providing their own bankers and financiers with 
guaranteed profitable outlets for their capital. In 1956, the French 
government started a scheme which was a blatant form of promoting 
their own private capitalists while paying lip-service to African 
development and welfare. The scheme involved the creation of an 
institution called SDOM — (Financial Societies for the Development of 
Overseas Territories). SDOM was nothing but an association of private 
capitalists interested primarily in the oil of North Africa, and having 
large government subventions to achieve their goals.
There were many tell-tale signs which unmasked the CD & W hoax in 
the eyes of careful and concerned observers. The Colonial Secretary set 
up a council to help him in allocation of grants, and it was dominated 
by really powerful members of the British bourgeoisie, including 
directors of Barclays Bank. Since the CD & W funds were inadequate 
even for the hopeless Ten Year Plans of the Colonies, the British’ 
government then encouraged the colonial administrations to borrow the 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (17 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 338 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
rest of their finances on the open money market. That was another way 
of ensuring that African labour and resources dispatched surplus to 
greedy European money-changers.
Barclays Bank was one of the first to seize the opportunity of lending to 
colonial regimes to supplement the CD & W grants. That bank set up a 
special Overseas Development Corporation to ‘assist’ Africa, the 
chairman of the bank assuring all that ‘the development of the colonial 
empire and the well being of its inhabitants is a matter that concerns 
every citizen of (Britain).’ That was the language of public relations, 
which fitted in very well with the sordid hypocrisy practised by white 
men ever since they started killing and enslaving in the name of 
civilisation and Christianity.
As part of the hypocrisy of colonialism, it became fashionable to speak 
of how Europe brought Africa into the 20th century. This assertion has 
implications in the socio-economic and political spheres; and it can be 
shown to be false not in some but in all respects.
So often it is said that colonialism modernised Africa by introducing the 
dynamic features of capitalism, such as Private property in land, private 
ownership of the other means of production, and money relations. Here 
it is essential to distinguish between capitalist elements and capitalism 
as a total social system. Colonialism introduced some elements of 
capitalism into Africa. In general terms, where communalism came into 
contact with the money economy, the latter imposed itself. Cash-crop 
farming and wage labour led away from the extended family as the 
basis of production and distribution.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (18 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 339 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
One South African saying put forward that ‘the white man has no kin, 
his kin is money’. That is a profound revelation of the difference 
between capitalist and pre-capitalist societies; and when capitalism 
came into contact with the still largely communal African societies, it 
introduced money relations at the expense of kinship ties. However, 
colonialism did not transform Africa into a capitalist society 
comparable to the metropoles. Had it done that, one might have 
complained of the brutalities and inequalities of capitalism, but could 
not then have been said that colonialism failed to advance Africa along 
the path of human historical development.
Capitalism as a system within the metropoles or epicentres had two 
dominant classes: firstly, the capitalists or bourgeoisie who owned the 
factories and banks (the major means for producing and distributing 
wealth); and secondly, the workers or proletariat who worked in the 
factories of the said bourgeoisie. Colonialism did not create a capital-
owning and factory-owning class among Africans or even inside Africa; 
nor did it create an urbanised proletariat of any significance 
(particularly outside of South Africa). In other words, capitalism in the 
form of colonialism failed to perform in Africa the tasks which it had 
performed in Europe in changing social relations and liberating the 
forces of production.
It is fairly obvious that capitalists do not set out to create other 
capitalists, who would be rivals. On the contrary, the tendency of 
capitalism in Europe from the very beginning was one of competition, 
elimination and monopoly. Therefore, when the imperialist stage was 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (19 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 340 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
reached, the metropolitan capitalists had no intention of allowing rivals 
to arise in the dependencies. However, in spite of what the metropoles 
wanted, some local capitalists did emerge in Asia and Latin America. 
Africa is a significant exception in the sense that, compared with other 
colonised peoples, far fewer Africans had access even to the middle 
rungs of the bourgeois ladder in terms of capital for investment.
Part of the explanation for the lack of African capitalists in Africa lies 
in the arrival of minority groups who had no local family ties which 
could stand in the way of the ruthless primary accumulation which 
capitalism requires. Lebanese, Syrian, Greek and Indian businessmen 
rose from the ranks of petty traders to become minor and sometimes 
substantial capitalists. Names like Raccah and Leventis were well-
known in West Africa, just as names like Madhvani and Visram became 
well known as capitalists in East Africa.
There were clashes between the middlemen and the European 
colonialists, but the latter much preferred to encourage the minorities 
rather than see Africans build themselves up. For instance, in West 
Africa the businessmen from Sierra Leone were discouraged both in 
their own colony and in other British possessions where they chose to 
settle. In East Africa, there was hope among Ugandans in particular that 
they might acquire ginneries and perform some capitalist functions 
connected with cotton-growing and other activities. However, when in 
1920 a Development Commission was appointed to promote commerce 
and industry, it favoured firstly Europeans and then Indians. Africans 
were prohibited by legislation from owning ginneries.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (20 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 341 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Taking Africa as a whole, the few African businessmen who were 
allowed to emerge were at the bottom of the ladder and cannot be 
considered as ‘capitalists’ in the true sense. They did not own sufficient 
capital to invest in large-scale farming, trading, mining or industry. 
They were dependent both on European-owned capital and on the local 
capital of minority groups.
That European capitalism should have failed to create African 
capitalists is perhaps not as striking as its inability to create a working 
class and to diffuse industrial skills throughout Africa. By its very 
nature, colonialism was prejudiced against the establishment of 
industries in Africa, outside of agriculture and the extractive spheres of 
mining and timber felling. Whenever internal forces seemed to push in 
the direction of African industrialisation, they were deliberately blocked 
by the colonial governments acting on behalf of the metropolitan 
industrialists. Groundnut-oil mills were set up in Senegal in 1927 and 
began exports to France. They were soon placed under restrictions 
because of protests of oil-millers in France. Similarly in Nigeria, the oil 
mills set up by Lebanese were discouraged. The oil was still sent to 
Europe as a raw material for industry, but European industrialists did 
not then welcome even the simple stage of processing groundnuts into 
oil on African soil.
Many irrational contradictions arose throughout colonial Africa as a 
result of the non-industrialisation policy: Sudanese and Ugandans grew 
cotton but imported manufactured cotton goods, Ivory Coast grew 
cocoa and imported tinned cocoa and chocolate, etc.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (21 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 342 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
The tiny working class of colonial Africa covered jobs such as 
agricultural labour and domestic service. Most of it was unskilled, in 
contrast to the accumulating skills of capitalism proper. When it came 
to projects requiring technical expertise, Europeans did the supervision 
— standing around in their helmets and white shorts. Of course, in 1885 
Africans did not have the technical know-how which had evolved in 
Europe during the 18th and 19th centuries. That difference was itself 
partly due to the kind of relations between Africa and Europe in the pre-
colonial period. What is more significant, however, is the incredibly 
small number of Africans who were able to acquire ‘modern’ skills 
during the colonial period. In a few places, such as South Africa and the 
Rhodesias, this was due to specific racial discrimination in 
employment, so as to keep the best jobs for whites. Yet, even in the 
absence of whites, lack of skills among Africans was an integral part of 
the capitalist impact on the continent.
It has already been illustrated how the presence of industry in Europe 
fostered and multiplied scientific techniques. The reserve side of the 
coin was presented in Africa: no industry meant no generation of skills. 
Even in the mining industry, it was arranged that the most valuable 
labour should be done outside Africa. It is sometimes forgotten that it is 
labour which adds value to commodities through the transformation of 
natural products. For instance, although gem diamonds have a value far 
above their practical usefulness, the value is not simply a question of 
their being rare. Work had to be done to locate the diamonds. That is 
the skilled task of a geologist, and the geologists were of course 
Europeans. Work had to be done to dig the diamonds out, which 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (22 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 343 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
involves mainly physical labour. Only in that phase were Africans from 
South Africa, Namibia, Angola, Tanganyika and Sierra Leone brought 
into the picture. Subsequently, work had to be done in cutting and 
polishing the diamonds. A small portion of this was performed by 
whites in South Africa, and most of it by whites in Brussels and 
London. It was on the desk of the skilled cutter that the rough diamond 
became a gem and soared in value. No Africans were allowed to come 
near that kind of technique in the colonial period.
Much of the dynamism of capitalism ¡ay in the way that growth created 
more opportunities for further growth. Major industries had by-
products, they stimulated local raw material usage, they expanded 
transport and the building industry, etc-as was seen in the case of 
Unilever. In the words of the professional economists, those were the 
beneficial ‘backward and forward linkages’. Given that the industries 
using African raw materials were located outside of Africa, then there 
could be no beneficial backward and forward linkages inside Africa. 
After the second world war, Guinea began to export bauxite. In the 
hands of French and American capitalists, the bauxite became 
aluminium. In the metropoles, it went into the making of refractory 
material, electrical conductors, cigarette foil, kitchen utensils, glass, 
jewel bearings, abrasives, light-weight structures and aircraft. Guinean 
bauxite stimulated European shipping and North American 
hydroelectric power. In Guinea, the colonial bauxite mining left holes in 
the ground.
With regard to gold, the financial implications in Europe were 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (23 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 344 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
enormous, and African gold played its part in the development of the 
monetary system and of industry and agriculture in the metropoles. But, 
like bauxite and other minerals, gold is an exhaustible resource. Once it 
is taken out of a country’s soil, that is an absolute loss that cannot be 
replaced. That simple fact is often obscured so long as production 
continues, as in South Africa; but it is dramatically brought to attention 
when the minerals actually disappeared during the colonial epoch. For 
instance, in the south of Tanganyika, the British mined gold as fast as 
they could from 1933 onwards at a place called Chunya. By 1953, they 
had gobbled it all up and exported it abroad. By the end of the colonial 
period, Chunya was one of the most backward spots in the whole of 
Tanganyika, which was itself known as the poor Cinderella of East 
Africa. If that was modernisation, and given the price paid in 
exploitation and oppression, then Africans would have been better off 
in the bush.
Industrialisation does not only mean factories. Agriculture itself has 
been industrialised in capitalist and socialist countries by the intensive 
application of scientific principles to irrigation, fertilizers, tools, crop 
selection, stock breeding, etc. The most decisive failure of colonialism 
in Africa was as failure to change the technology of agricultural 
production. The most convincing evidence as to the superficiality of the 
talk about colonialism having ‘modernised’ Africa is the fact that the 
vast majority of Africans went into colonialism with a hoe and carne 
out with a hoe. Some capitalist plantations introduced agricultural 
machinery, and the odd tractor round its way into the hands of African 
farmers; but the hoe remained the overwhelmingly dominant 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (24 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 345 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
agricultural implement. Capitalism could revolutionise agriculture in 
Europe, but it could not do the same for Africa.
In some districts, capitalism brought about technological backwardness 
in agriculture. On the reserves of Southern Africa, far too many 
Africans were crowded on to inadequate land, and were forced to 
engage in intensive farming, using techniques that were suitable only to 
shifting cultivation. In practice, that was a form of technical 
retrogression, because the land yielded less and less and became 
destroyed in the process. Wherever Africans were hampered in their use 
of their ancestral lands on a wide-ranging shifting basis, the same 
negative effect was to be found. Besides, some of the new cash-crops 
like groundnuts and cotton were very demanding on the soil. In 
countries like Senegal, Niger and Chad, which were already on the edge 
of the desert, the steady cultivation led to soil impoverishment and 
encroachment of the desert.
White racist notions are so deep-rooted within capitalist society that the 
failure of African agriculture to advance was put down to the inherent 
inferiority of the African. It would be much truer to say that it was due 
to the white intruders, although the basic explanation is to be found not 
in the personal ill-will of the colonialists or in their racial origin, but 
rather in the organised viciousness of the capitalist/ colonialist system.
Failure to improve agricultural tools and methods on behalf of African 
peasants was not a matter of a bad decision by colonial policy makers. 
It was an inescapable feature of colonialism as a whole, based on the 
understanding that the international division of labour aimed at skills in 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (25 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 346 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
the metropoles and low-level manpower in the dependencies. It was 
also a result of the considerable use of force (including taxation) in 
African labour relations. People can be forced to perform simple 
manual labour, but very little else. This was proven when Africans were 
used as slaves in the West Indies and America. Slaves damaged tools 
and carried out sabotage, which could only be controlled by extra 
supervision and by keeping tools and productive processes very 
elementary. Slave labour was unsuitable for carrying out industrial 
activity, so that in the U.S.A. the North went to war in 1861 to end 
slavery in the South, so as to spread true capitalist relations throughout 
the land. Following the same line of argument, it becomes clear why the 
various forms of forced agricultural labour in Africa had to be kept 
quite simple, and that in turn meant small earnings.
Capitalists under colonialism did not pay for an African to maintain 
himself and family. This can readily be realised by reflecting on the 
amounts of money earned by African peasants from cash-crops. The 
sale of produce by an African cash-crop farmer rarely brought in 200/- 
per year and often it was less than half that amount. Out of that, a 
peasant had to pay for tools, seeds and transport and he had to repay the 
loan to the middleman before he could call the remainder his own. 
Peasants producing coffee and cocoa and collecting palm produce 
tended to earn more than those dealing with cotton and groundnuts, but 
even the ordinary Akwapim cocoa farmer or Chagga coffee farmer 
never handled money in quantities sufficient to feed, clothe and shelter 
his family. Instead, subsistence farming of yams or bananas continued 
as a supplement. That was how the peasant managed to eat, and the few 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (26 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 347 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
shillings earned went to pay taxes and to buy the increasing number of 
things which could not be obtained without money in the middlemen’s 
shops — salt, cloth, paraffin, etc. If they were extremely lucky, they 
would have access to zinc sheets, bicycles, radios, and sewing 
machines, and would be able to pay school fees. It must be made quite 
clear that those in the last category were extremely few.
One reason why the African peasant got so little for his agricultural 
crops was that his labour was unskilled. That was not the whole 
explanation, but it is true that a product such as cotton jumped in value 
from the time that it went through the sophisticated processes of 
manufacture in Europe. Karl Marx, in clarifying how capitalists 
appropriated part of the surplus of each worker, used the example of 
cotton. He explained that the value of the manufactured cotton included 
the value of the labour that went into growing the raw cotton, plus part 
of the value of the labour that made the spindles, plus the labour that 
went into the actual manufacture. From an African viewpoint, the first 
conclusion to be drawn is that the peasant working on African soil was 
being exploited by the industrialist who used African raw material in 
Europe or America. Secondly, it is necessary to realise that the African 
contribution of unskilled labour was valued far less than the European 
contribution of skilled labour.
It has been observed that one hour of work of a cotton peasant in Chad 
was equivalent to less than one centimetre of cotton cloth, and he 
needed to work 50 days to earn what needed to buy three metres of the 
cloth made from his own cotton in France. Yet, the French textile 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (27 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 348 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
worker (using modern spindles) ran off three metres of cloth in a matter 
of minutes! Assuming that the Frenchman was not closer to God (who 
made the whole world in only six days and rested on the seventh), then 
there must be factors in the capitalist/colonialist system which 
permitted the great disparity in the relative value of labour in Chad and 
France. In the first the Chad peasant was defrauded through trade so 
that he sold cheap and bought dear, and therefore received a minute 
proportion of the value that he created with his labour. This was 
possible not because of mysterious ‘market forces’ as bourgeois 
economists would like us to believe, but because of political power 
being vested entirely in the hands of the colonialists. It was a 
consequence of monopolistic domination, both economically and 
politically. Secondly, the quantity of time spent by the Chad peasant 
was longer because colonialism did not permit him to acquire the tools 
to shorten the hours required to produce a given quantity of raw cotton.
To a certain extent, it would have been in the interests of the colonial 
powers to have had better agricultural techniques in Africa, leading to 
increased volume and quality oí production. All colonial regimes 
sponsored some scientific research into tropical agriculture. However, 
the research was almost entirely devoted to cash-crops, it was limited in 
scope, and it was more easily adaptable by plantations rather than 
African peasants who had no capital. The pitiable amount devoted to 
agricultural improvement in Africa during the colonial period contrasts 
sharply with the increasingly huge sums that were devoted to research 
in Europe over the same period — with enormous benefits to both 
industry and agriculture in the metropoles.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (28 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 349 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Side by side with the ill-founded claims about socio-economic 
modernisation went the claims by colonial apologists that European rule 
brought political upliftment and emancipation. One of the long-standing 
arguments in this connection is that Africa was in chaos in the 19th 
century, and that ‘tribes’ like the Ngoni and the Yao and Samori’s sofas 
were killing left, right and centre. Consequently, Africa was saved by 
Livingstone and Stanley. For the most part, such wild statements have 
no place in the works of the present generation of European scholars of 
Africa, since they are known to have no resemblance to reality. 
However, some writers still preach that ‘the Bantu could be saved from 
the wasting struggles and from their general economic and technical 
backwardness only by the imposition of stable (European) government’.
Another supposed credit of the colonialists is that they developed 
nationalism in Africa. That is a superficial and mischievous claim, 
which entirely ignores the numerous states in Africa on the eve of 
colonisation, and the direction of their evolution. Nationalism is a 
certain form of unity which grows out oí historical experience. It is a 
sense of oneness that emerges from social groups trying to control their 
environment and to defend their gains against competing groups. The 
nation state also imposes order and maintains stability within its own 
boundaries, usually on behalf of a given class. All of those 
characteristics were present in 19th century African states, some of 
which were much larger than the colonies arbitrarily defined by 
Europeans.
It is true that the present African nationalism took the particular form of 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (29 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 350 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
adopting the boundaries carved by the imperialists. That was an 
inevitable consequence of the fact that the struggle to regain African 
independence was conditioned by the administrative framework of the 
given colonies. But it would show crass ignorance of the African past to 
say that colonialism modernised Africa politically through nation states, 
especially when the implication is that such a level of political 
organisation and stability would otherwise have been impossible.
One colonialist proposition that has at least an air of plausibility is that 
capitalism and colonial rule meant greater individual freedom for many 
Africans. Young men earning wages or individuals farming for cash 
became independent of the corporate demands of their families. It is 
debatable to what extent that was a worthwhile phenomenon, but it 
could be said to be somewhat comparable to the way in which 
capitalism freed the individual in Europe from the restrictions of feudal 
society and from such bonds as those imposed by morally self-righteous 
people. Nevertheless, when any given African did break from what 
were proving to be onerous extended family obligations, what freedom 
did he acquire? His choice of alternatives were narrowly dictated by the 
colonialists, and he was only ‘free’ to participate in the money economy 
and in the European-oriented cultural sector at the very lowest and 
uncreative levels.
There is a more sympathetic school of historians of Africa who contend 
that to see colonialism as completely negative is to underrate the 
initiative of Africans. Africans, they say, moved boldly into the labour 
market, into cash-crop farming, into commerce in some instances, into 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (30 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 351 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
the educational field and into the churches. Yet, those were simply 
responses (albeit vigorous ones) to the options laid open by the 
colonialists. True historical initiative by a whole people or by 
individuals requires that they have the power to decide on the direction 
in which they want to move. That latter aspect had to await the decade 
of the 1960s.
Within any social system, the oppressed find some room to manoeuvre 
through their own initiative. For instance, under the slave regime of 
America and the West Indies, Africans found ways and means of 
gaining small advantages. They would flatter and ‘con’ the 
slavemasters, who were so arrogant and bigoted that they were readily 
fooled. Similarly, under colonialism many Africans played the game to 
secure what they could. Africans in positions like interpreters, police 
and court officials often had their way over the ruling Europeans. 
However, that should not be mistaken for power or political 
participation or the exercise of individual freedom. Under slavery, 
power lay in the hands of the slavemasters: under colonialism, power 
¡ay in the hands of the colonialists. The loss of power for the various 
African states meant a reduction in the freedom of every individual.
Colonialism was a negation of freedom from the viewpoint of the 
colonised. Even in quantitative terms it could not possibly bring modern 
political liberation to Africans comparable to the little that had been 
achieved by capitalism as an improvement on feudalism. In its political 
aspects, capitalism in the metropoles included constitutions, 
parliaments, freedom of the press, etc. All of those things were limited 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (31 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 352 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
in their application to the European working class, but they existed in 
some form or fashion in the metropoles ever since the American War of 
Independence and the French Revolution. But Jules Ferry, a former 
French colonial minister, explained that the French Revolution was not 
fought on behalf of the blacks of Africa. Bourgeois liberty, equality and 
fraternity was not for colonial subjects. Africans had to make do with 
bayonets, riot-acts and gunboats.
6.2 Negative character of the social, political and economic 
consequences
The argument so far has been aimed at showing that benefits from 
colonialism were small and they were not gifts from the colonialists. 
But rather fruits of African labour and resources for the most part. 
Indeed, what was called ‘the development of Africa’ by the colonialists 
was a cynical short-hand expression for ‘the intensification of colonial 
exploitation in Africa to develop capitalist Europe’. The analysis has 
gone beyond that to demonstrate that numerous false claims are made 
purporting to show that Europe developed Africa in the sense of 
bringing about social order, nationalism and economic modernisation. 
However, all of that would still not permit the conclusion that 
colonialism had a negative impact on Africa’s development. In offering 
the view that colonialism was negative, the aim is to draw attention to 
the way that previous African development was blunted, halted and 
turned back. In place of that interruption and blockade, nothing of 
compensatory value was introduced.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (32 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 353 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
The colonisation of Africa lasted for just over 70 years in most parts of 
the continent. That is an extremely short period within the context of 
universal historical development. Yet, it was precisely in those years 
that in other parts of the world the rate of change was greater than ever 
before. As has been illustrated, capitalist countries revolutionised their 
technology to enter the nuclear age. Meanwhile, Socialism was 
inaugurated, lifting semi-feudal semi-capitalist Russia to a level of 
sustained economic growth higher than that ever experienced in a 
capitalist country. Socialism did the same for China and North Korea — 
guaranteeing the well/being and independence of the state as well as re-
organising the internal social arrangements in a far more just manner 
than ever before. It is against those decisive changes that events in 
Africa have to be measured. To mark time or even to move slowly 
while others leap ahead is virtually equivalent to going backwards. 
Certainly, in relative terms, Africa’s position vis-à-vis its colonisers 
became more disadvantageous in the political, economic and military 
spheres.
The decisiveness of the short period of colonialism and as negative 
consequences for Africa spring mainly from the fact that Africa lost 
power. Power is the ultimate determinant in human society, being basic 
to the relations within any group and between groups. It implies the 
ability to defend one’s interests and if necessary to impose one’s will by 
any means available. In relations between peoples, the question of 
power determines manoeuvrability in bargaining, the extent to which 
one people respect the interests of another, and eventually the extent to 
which a people survive as a physical and cultural entity. When one 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (33 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 354 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
society finds itself forced to relinquish power entirely to another society 
that n itself is a form of underdevelopment.
During the centuries of pre-colonial trade, some control over social 
political and economic life was retained in Africa, in spite of the 
disadvantageous commerce with Europeans. That little control over 
internal matters disappeared under colonialism. Colonialism went much 
further than trade. It meant a tendency towards direct appropriation by 
Europeans of the social institutions within Africa. Africans ceased to set 
indigenous cultural goals and standards, and lost full command of 
training young members of the society. Those were undoubtedly major 
steps backwards.
The Tunisian, Albert Memmi, puts forward the following proposition:
The most serious blow suffered by the colonised is being removed from 
history and from the community. Colonisation usurps any free role in 
either war or peace, every decision contributing to his destiny and that of 
the world, and all cultural and social responsibility.
Sweeping as that statement may initially appear, it is entirely true. The 
removal from history follows logically from the loss of power which 
colonialism represented. The power to act independently is the 
guarantee to participate actively and consciously in history. To be 
colonised is to be removed from history, except in the most passive 
sense. A striking illustration of the fact that colonial Africa was a 
passive object is seen in its attraction for white anthropologists, who 
came to study ‘primitive society’. Colonialism determined that Africans 
were no more makers of history than were beetles objects to be looked 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (34 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 355 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
at under a microscope and examined for unusual features.
The negative impact of colonialism in political terms was quite 
dramatic. Overnight, African political states lost their power, 
independence and meaning — irrespective of whether they were big 
empires or small polities. Certain traditional rulers were kept in office, 
and the formal structure of some kingdoms was partially retained, but 
the substance of political life was quite different. Political power had 
passed into the hands of foreign overlords. Of course, numerous African 
states in previous centuries had passed through the cycle of growth and 
decline. But colonial rule was different. So long as it lasted, not a single 
African state could flourish.
To be specific, it must be noted that colonialism crushed by force the 
surviving feudal states of North Africa; that the French wiped out the 
large Muslim states of the Western Sudan, as well as Dahomey and 
kingdoms in Madagascar; that the British eliminated Egypt, the Mahdist 
Sudan, Asante, Benin, the Yoruba kingdoms. Swaziland, Matabeleland, 
the Lozi and the East African Lake kingdoms as great states. It should 
further be noted that a multiplicity of smaller and growing states were 
removed from the face of Africa by the Belgians, Portuguese, British, 
French, Germans, Spaniards and Italians. Finally, those that appeared to 
survive were nothing but puppet creations. For instance, the Sultan of 
Morocco retained nominal existence under colonial rule which started 
in 1912; and the same applied to the Bey of Tunis; but Morocco and 
Tunisia were just as much under the power of French colonial 
administrators as neighbouring Algeria, where the feudal rulers were 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (35 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 356 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
removed altogether.
Sometimes, the African rulers who were chosen to serve as agents of 
foreign colonial rule were quite obviously nothing but puppets. The 
French and the Portuguese were in the habit of choosing their own 
African ‘chiefs'; the British went to Iboland and invented ‘warrant 
chiefs'; and all the colonial powers found it convenient to create 
‘superior’ or ‘paramount’ rulers. Very often, the local population hated 
and despised such colonial stooges. There were traditional rulers such 
as the Sultan of Sokoto, the Kabaka of Buganda and the Asantehene of 
Asante, who retained a great deal of prestige in the eyes of Africans, but 
they had no power to act outside the narrow boundaries laid down by 
colonialism, lest they find themselves in the Seychelles Islands as 
‘guests of His Majesty’s Government’.
One can go so far as to say that colonial rule meant the effective 
eradication of African political power throughout the continent, since 
Liberia and Ethiopia could no longer function as independent states 
within the context of continent-wide colonialism. Liberia in particular 
had to bow before foreign political, economic and military pressures in 
a way that no genuinely independent state could have accepted; and 
although Ethiopia held firm until 1936, most European capitalist 
nations were not inclined to treat Ethiopia as a sovereign state, 
primarily because it was African, and Africans were supposed to be 
colonial subjects.
The pattern of arrest of African political development has some features 
which can only be appreciated after careful scrutiny and the taking 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (36 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 357 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
away of the blinkers which the colonisers put on the eyes of their 
subjects. An interesting case in point is that of women’s role in society. 
Until today, capitalist society has failed to resolve the inequality 
between man and woman, which was entrenched in all modes of 
production prior to socialism. The colonialists in Africa occasionally 
paid lip-service to women’s education and emancipation, but 
objectively there was deterioration in the status of women owing to 
colonial rule.
A realistic assessment of the role of women in independent pre-colonial 
Africa shows two contrasting but combined tendencies. In the first 
place, women were exploited by men through polygamous 
arrangements designed to capture the labour power of women. As 
always, exploitation was accompanied by oppression; and there is 
evidence to the effect that women were-sometimes treated like beasts of 
burden, as for instance in Muslim African societies. Nevertheless, there 
was a counter tendency to ensure the dignity of women to greater or 
lesser degree in all African societies. Mother-right was a prevalent 
feature of African societies, and particular women held a variety of 
privileges based on the fact that they were the keys to inheritance.
More important still, some women had real power in the political sense, 
exercised either through religion or directly within the politico-
constitutional apparatus. In Mozambique, the widow of an Nguni king 
became the priestess in charge of the shrine set up in the burial place of 
her deceased husband, and the reigning king had to consult her on all 
important matters. In a few instances, women were actually heads of 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (37 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 358 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
state. Among the Lovedu of Transvaal, the key figure was the Rain-
Queen, combining political and religious functions. The most frequently 
encountered role of importance played by women was that of ‘Queen 
Mother’ or ‘Queen Sister’. In practice, that post was filled by a female 
of royal blood, who might be mother, sister or aunt of the reigning king 
in places such as Mali, Asante and Buganda. Her influence was 
considerable, and there were occasions when the ‘Queen Mother’ was 
the real power and the male king a mere puppet.
What happened to African women under colonialism is that the social, 
religious, constitutional and political privileges and rights disappeared, 
while the economic exploitation continued and was often intensified. It 
was intensified because the division of labour according to sex was 
frequently disrupted. Traditionally, African men did the heavy labour of 
felling trees, clearing land, building houses, etc., apart from conducting 
warfare and hunting. When they were required to leave their farms to 
seek employment, women remained behind burdened with every task 
necessary for the survival of themselves, the children and even the men 
as far as foodstuffs were concerned. Moreover, since men entered the 
money sector more easily and in greater numbers than women, 
women’s work became greatly inferior to that of men within the new 
value system of colonialism: men’s work was ‘modern’ and women’s 
was ‘traditional’ and ‘backward’. Therefore, the deterioration in the 
status of African women was bound up with the loss of political power 
by African society as a whole and with the consequent loss of the right 
to set indigenous standards of what work had merit and what did not.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (38 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 359 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
One of the most important manifestations of historical arrest and 
stagnation in colonial Africa is that which commonly goes under the 
title of ‘tribalism’. That term, in its common journalistic setting, is 
understood to mean that Africans have a basic loyalty to tribe rather 
than nation and that each tribe still retains a fundamental hostility 
towards its neighbouring tribes. The examples favoured by the capitalist 
press and bourgeois scholarship are those of Congo and Nigeria. Their 
accounts suggest that Europeans tried to make a nation out of the 
Congolese and Nigerian peoples, but they failed, because the various 
tribes had their age long hatreds; and, as soon as the colonial power 
went, the natives returned to killing each other. To this phenomenon, 
Europeans often attach the word atavism, to carry the notion that 
Africans were returning to their primitive savagery. Even a cursory 
survey of the African past shows that such assertions are the exact 
opposite of the truth.
It is necessary to discuss briefly what comprises a ‘tribe’ — a term that 
has been avoided in this analysis, partly because it usually carries 
derogatory connotations and partly because of its vagueness and the 
loose ways in which it is employed in the literature on Africa. 
Following the principle of family living, Africans were organised in 
groups which had common ancestors. Theoretically, the ‘tribe’ was the 
largest group of people claiming descent from a common ancestor at 
some time in the remote past. Generally, such a group could therefore 
be said to be of the same ethnic stock, and their language would have a 
great deal in common. Beyond that, members of a ‘tribe’ were seldom 
all members of the same political unit and very seldom indeed did they 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (39 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 360 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
all share a common social purpose in terms of activities such as trade 
and warfare. Instead, African states were sometimes based entirely on 
part of the members of a given ethnic group or (more usually) on an 
amalgamation of members of different ethnic communities.
All of the large states of 19th-century Africa were multiethnic, and their 
expansion was continually making anything like ‘tribal’ loyalty a thing 
of the past, by substituting in its place national and class ties. However, 
in all parts of the world that substitution of national and class ties for 
purely ethnic ones is a lengthy historical process; and, invariably there 
remains for long periods certain regional pockets of individuals who 
have their own narrow regional loyalties, springing from ties of kinship, 
language and culture. In Asia, the feudal states of Vietnam and Burma 
both achieved a considerable degree of national homogeneity over the 
centuries before colonial rule. But there were pockets of ‘tribes’ or 
‘minorities’ who remained outside the effective sphere of the nation 
state and the national economy and culture.
In the first place, colonialism blocked the further evolution of national 
solidarity, because it destroyed the particular Asian or African states 
which were the principal agents for achieving the liquidation of 
fragmented loyalties. In the second place, because ethnic and regional 
loyalties which go under the name of ‘tribalism’ could not be 
effectively resolved by the colonial state, they tended to fester and grow 
in unhealthy forms. Indeed, the colonial powers sometimes saw the 
value of stimulating the internal ‘tribal’ jealousies so as to keep the 
colonised from dealing with their principal contradiction with the 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (40 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 361 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
European overlords — i.e., the classic technique of divide and rule. 
Certainly, the Belgians consciously fostered that; and the racist whites 
in South Africa had by the 1950s worked out a careful plan to ‘develop’ 
the oppressed African population as Zulu, as Xhosa and as Sotho so that 
the march towards broader African national and class solidarities could 
be stopped and turned back.
The civil war in Nigeria is generally regarded as having been a tribal 
affair. To accept such a contention would mean extending the definition 
of tribe to cover Shell Oil and Gulf Oil! But, quite apart from that, it 
must be pointed out that nowhere in the history of pre-colonial 
independent Nigeria can anyone point to the massacre of Ibos by 
Hausas or any incident which suggests that people up to the 19th 
century were fighting each other because of ethnic origin. Of course 
there were wars, but they had a rational basis in trade rivalry, religious 
contentions, and the clashes of political expansion. What came to be 
called tribalism at the beginning of the new epoch of political 
independence in Nigeria was itself a product of the way that people 
were brought together under colonialism so as to be exploited. It was a 
product of administrative devices, of entrenched regional separations, of 
differential access by particular ethnic groups into the colonial economy 
and culture.
Both Uganda and Kenya in East Africa are also situations in which a 
supposedly tribal factor continued to be pre-eminent. There is no doubt 
that the existence of the Buganda kingdom within independent Uganda 
posed certain problems. But, even after mis-applying the definition of a 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (41 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 362 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
tribe to the Baganda, it still remains true that the Buganda problem was 
a colonial problem. It was created by the presence of the missionaries 
and the British, by the British (Mailo) land settlement in Uganda in 
1900, and by the use which Britain made of the Baganda ruling class as 
‘sub-imperialists’ within the colony of Uganda.
In Kenya, the pattern of colonialism was different from that in Uganda, 
because of the presence of white settlers. No African group was allowed 
any power in the capacity of NCOs for the Colonial Office, since the 
white settlers themselves filled the role. The white settlers took the best 
land and then tried to create a new world with African labour. However, 
the African community which lay outside the immediate white settler 
sector was regulated along tribal lines. One of the numerous Royal 
Commissions of British colonialism published a report on Kenya in 
1934. A contemporary Kenyan historian commented on that report as 
follows:
The Commission’s recommendations, which were accepted by the British 
government, implied that Kenya was to be partitioned into two racial 
blocks, African and European. And in the African sector, all economic, 
social and political developments were to be conducted on tribal lines. 
Racialism thus became institutionalised.
Human activity within small groups connected only by kinship relations 
(such as the tribe) is a very transient phase through which all continents 
passed in the phase of communalism. When it ceased to be transient and 
became institutionalised in Africa, that was because colonialism 
interrupted African development. That is what is implied in Memmi’s 
reference to Africans being removed from history. Revolutionary 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (42 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 363 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
African thinkers such as Franz Fanon and Amilcar Cabral expressed the 
same sentiments somewhat differently when they spoke of colonialism 
having made Africans into objects of history. Colonised Africans, like 
pre-colonial African chattel slaves, were pushed around into positions 
which suited European interests and which were damaging to the 
African continent and its peoples. In continuation, some further socio-
economic implications of that situation will be examined.
Pre-colonial trade had started the trend of the disintegration of African 
economies and their technological impoverishment. Colonial rule 
speeded up that trend. The story is often told that in order to make a 
telephone call from Accra in the British colony of the Gold Coast to 
Abidjan in the adjacent French colony of Ivory Coast it was necessary 
to be connected first with an operator in London and then with an 
operator in Paris who could offer a line to Abidjan. That was one 
reflection of the fact that the Gold Coast economy was integrated into 
the British economy, and the Ivory Coast economy was integrated into 
the French economy, while the neighbouring African colonies had little 
or no effective economic relations. The following conclusion reached 
by the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa in 1959 goes 
directly to the point.
The most outstanding characteristic of the transportation systems of Africa 
is the comparative isolation in which they have developed within the 
confines of individual countries and territories. This is reflected in the lack 
of links between countries and territories within the same geographical 
sub-region.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (43 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 364 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Some African trade did persist across colonial boundaries. For instance, 
the centuries-old trade in kola nuts and gold from the forests of West 
Africa to North Africa never completely ceased. Besides, new forms of 
African trade developed, notably with regard to supplying foodstuffs to 
towns or cash-crop areas where there was insufficiency of food. That 
kind of trade could be entirely within a colony or it could cross colonial 
boundaries. However, the sum total of energy that went into expansion 
of inter-African trade was extremely small in comparison with trade 
that was export-oriented. Since this inter-African trade did not bring 
benefits to Europeans it was not encouraged by them, and up to the 
latter part of the colonial period only 10% of Africa’s trade was 
internal.
It is also worth noting that Africa was denied the opportunity of 
developing healthy trade links with parts of the world other than Europe 
and North America. Some trade persisted across the Indian Ocean, but 
on the whole it is fair to say that the roads in Africa led to the sea-ports 
and the sea-lanes led to Western Europe and North America. That kind 
of lop-sidedness is today part of the pattern of underdevelopment and 
dependence.
The damaging impact of capitalism on African technology is even more 
clearly measurable in the colonial period than in the earlier centuries. In 
spite of the slave trade and of the import of European goods> most 
African handicraft industries still had vitality at the start of the colonial 
period. They had undergone no technological advance and they had not 
expanded, but they had survived. The mass-production of the more 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (44 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 365 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
recent phase of capitalism virtually obliterated African industries such 
as cloth, salt, soap, iron and even pottery making.
In North Africa, handicraft industries had made the greatest advances 
before colonialism, in spheres ranging from brass work to woollens. As 
in the towns of feudal Europe, craft workshops flourished in Algerian 
towns like Oran, Constantine, Algiers and Tlemcen. But French 
colonialism destroyed the handicraft industries and threw thousands out 
of work. The same thing had happened in Europe itself when new 
machines had thrown artisans out of employment in places like 
Lancashire and Lyons, but in that instance the new machines became 
the basis of the prevailing mode of production, and formerly 
independent artisans returned to factories as proletarians to master 
different skills and expand the productive capacity of their society. In 
Africa it was simply destruction without redress. By the time that 
political independence was achieved, surviving craftsmanship had been 
turned towards attracting tourists rather than meeting the real needs of 
African people.
Besides, as was true of the European slave trade, the destruction of 
technology under colonialism must be related to the barriers raised in 
the path of African initiative. The vast majority of Africans drawn into 
the colonial money economy were simply providing manual labour, 
which stimulated perspiration rather than scientific initiative. Africans 
connected to the trading sector were sometimes successful in a limited 
way. The resourcefulness of West African market women is well 
known, but it was put to petty purposes. The problem posed to 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (45 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 366 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
capitalists and workers in Europe while making insecticide from 
African pyrethrum was one requiring that resourcefulness be expressed 
in a technical direction. But the problem posed to an African market 
woman by the necessity to make a penny more profit on every tin of 
imported sardines was resolved sometimes by a little more vigour, 
sometimes by a touch of dishonesty, and sometimes by resort to ‘juju’.
Colonialism induced the African ironworker to abandon the process of 
extracting iron from the soil and to concentrate instead on working 
scraps of metal imported from Europe. The only compensation for that 
interruption would have been the provision of modern techniques in the 
extraction and processing of iron. However, those techniques were 
debarred from Africa, on the basis of the international division of labour 
under imperialism. As was seen earlier, the non-industrialisation of 
Africa was not left to chance. It was deliberately enforced by stopping 
the transference to Africa of machinery and skills which would have 
given competition to European industry in that epoch.
In the period of African development preceding colonialism, some areas 
moved faster than others and provided the nuclei for growth on a wide 
regional basis. Northern Nigeria was one of those; and it virtually went 
to sleep during the colonial period. The British cut it off from the rest of 
the Muslim world and fossilised the social relations, so that the serfs 
could not achieve any change at the expense of the ruling aristocracy.
On every continent and within nation states, some features of growth 
were always more outstanding than others, and thereby offered a lead to 
the rest of the society. The towns played that role in late feudal 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (46 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 367 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
European society, while the electrical industry was an example of a 
similar impetus for development in metropolitan capitalist society in the 
first decades of this century. Colonialism provided Africa with no real 
growth points. For instance, a colonial town in Africa was essentially a 
centre of administration rather than industry. Towns did attract large 
numbers of Africans, but only to offer them a very unstable life based 
on unskilled and irregular employment. European towns had slums, but 
the squalor of towns in underdeveloped countries is a special 
phenomenon. It was a consequence of the inability of those towns to 
play the role of expanding the productive base. Fortunately, Africa was 
never as badly off in this respect as Asia and Latin America.
Instead of speeding up growth, colonial activities such as mining land 
cash-crop farming speeded up the decay of ‘traditional’ African life. In 
many parts of the continent, vital aspects of culture were adversely 
affected, nothing better was substituted, and only a lifeless shell was 
left. The capitalist forces behind colonialism were interested in little 
more than the exploitation of labour. Even areas that were not directly 
involved in the money economy exported labour. In extracting that 
labour, they tampered with the factor that was the very buttress of the 
society, for African ‘traditional’ life when deprived of its customary 
labour force and patterns of work was no longer ‘traditional’.
During the colonial era, many thinly-populated villages appeared in 
central and southern Africa, comprising women, children and old men. 
They practised subsistence agriculture which was not productive 
enough, and colonialists contrasted them with cash-crop areas, which in 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (47 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 368 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
comparison were flourishing. However, it was precisely the impact of 
colonialism which left so many villages deserted and starving, because 
the able-bodied males had gone off to labour elsewhere. Any district 
deprived of its effective labouring population could not be expected to 
develop.
There were several spots within different colonies which were 
sufficiently far removed from towns and colonial administration that 
they neither grew cash-crops nor supplied labour. In Southern Sudan, 
for instance, there were populations who continued to live a life not 
dissimilar to that which they had followed in previous centuries. Yet, 
even for such traditional African societies the scope for development no 
longer existed. They were isolated by the hold which the colonialists 
had on the rest of the continent. They could not interact with other parts 
of Africa. They were subject to increasing encroachment by the money 
economy and were more and more to be regarded as historical relics. 
The classic example of this type of obstructed historical development is 
to be found in the U.S.A., where the indigenous population of ('Red’) 
Indians who survived slaughter by the whites were placed in 
reservations and condemned to stagnation. Indian reservations in North 
America are living museums to be visited by white tourists who 
purchase curios.
In South Africa and Rhodesia, the policy of establishing ‘native 
reserves’ was openly followed. Inside a reserve, the major means of 
production was the land. But the quantity and fertility of the land 
allocated was entirely inadequate to support the numbers of Africans 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (48 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 369 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
who were driven in. The reserves were reservoirs of cheap labour, and 
dumping grounds for those who could not be accommodated within the 
money economy of the racist southern section of Africa. Further north, 
there were no areas named as ‘reserves’, except ir, colonial Kenya and 
to a very limited extent in Tanganyika. But the money economy was 
constantly transforming the traditional sector into one which was just as 
deprived as any reserve.
The money economy of colonialism was a growing sector. That is not 
to be denied. However, it has already been indicated how limited that 
growth was, viewed over the continent as a whole. The growth in the so-
called modern sector exercised adverse effects on the non-monetary 
sector. What remains is to emphasise that the character of growth in 
Africa under colonialism was such that it did not constitute 
development — i.e., it did not enlarge the capacity of the society to deal 
with the natural environment, to adjudicate relations between members 
of the society, and to protect the population from external forces. Such a 
statement is already implicitly borne out in the inability of capitalism to 
stimulate skilled labour in colonial Africa. A system which must stand 
in the way of the accumulation of skills does not develop anything or 
anybody. It is implicit too in the manner in which Africa was cut into 
economic compartments having no relation one to another, so that, even 
though the volume of commercial activity within each 
compartmentalised colony may have increased, there was no 
development comparable to that which linked together the various 
states of the U.S.A.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (49 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 370 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
In recent times, economists have been recognising in colonial and post-
colonial Africa a pattern that has been termed ‘growth without 
development’. That phrase has now appeared as the title of books on 
Liberia and Ivory Coast. It means that goods and services of a certain 
type are on the increase. There may be more rubber and coffee 
exported, there may be more cars imported with the proceeds, and there 
may be more petrol stations built to service the cars. But the profit goes 
abroad, and the economy becomes more and more a dependency of the 
metropoles. In no African colony was there economic integration, or 
any provision for making the economy self-sustained and geared to its 
own local goals. Therefore, there was growth of the so-called ‘enclave’ 
import/export sector, but the only things which developed were 
dependency and underdevelopment.
A further revelation of growth without development under colonialism 
was the over-dependence on one or two exports. The term 
‘monoculture’ is used to describe those colonial economies which were 
centred around a single crop. Liberia (in the agricultural sector) was a 
monoculture dependent on rubber, Gold Coast on cocoa, Dahomey and 
South-east Nigeria on palm produce, Sudan on cotton, Tanganyika on 
sisal, and Uganda on cotton. In Senegal and Gambia, groundnuts 
accounted for 85% to 90% of money earnings. In effect, two African 
colonies were told to grow nothing but peanuts!
Every farming people have a staple food, plus a variety of other 
supplements. Historians, agronomists, and botanists have all 
contributed to showing the great variety of such foods within the pre-
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (50 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:31 AM]


--- PAGE 371 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
colonial African economy. There were numerous crops which were 
domesticated within the African continent, there were several wild food 
species (notably fruits) and Africans had shown no conservatism in 
adopting useful food plants of Asian or American origin. Diversified 
agriculture was within the African tradition. Monoculture was a 
colonialist invention.
Those who justify the colonial division of labour suggest that it was 
‘natural’ and respected the relative capacities for specialisation of the 
metropoles and colonies. Europe, North America and Japan were 
capable of specialising in industry and Africa in agriculture. Therefore, 
it was to the ‘comparative advantage’ of one part of the world to 
manufacture machines while another part engaged in simple hoe-culture 
of the soil. That kind of arrogant partition of the world was not new. In 
the 15th century, the feudal monarchies of Portugal and Spain wanted 
the whole world for themselves, and they got the Pope to draw a line 
around the globe, making the allocations. But Britain, Holland and 
France suggested that they were not at all convinced that Adam had left 
a will which gave the earth to Portugal and Spain. In like manner, it can 
be questioned whether there is any testament which stated that the river 
Gambia should inherit ground-nut growing while the river Clyde (of 
Scotland) should become a home of shipbuilding.
There was nothing ‘natural’ about monoculture. It was a consequence 
of imperialist requirements and machinations, extending into areas that 
were politically independent in name. Monoculture was a characteristic 
of regions falling under imperialist domination. Certain countries in 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (51 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:32 AM]


--- PAGE 372 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Latin America such as Costa Rica and Guatemala were forced by 
United States capitalist firms to concentrate so heavily on growing 
bananas that they were contemptuously known as ‘banana republics’. In 
Africa, this concentration on one or two cash-crops for sale abroad had 
many harmful effects. Sometimes, cash-crops were grown to the 
exclusion of staple foods — thus causing famines. For instance, in 
Gambia rice farming was popular before the colonial era, but so much 
of the best land was transferred to groundnuts that rice had to be 
imported on a large scale to try and counter the fact that famine was 
becoming endemic. In Asante, concentration on cocoa raised fears of 
famine in a region previously famous for yams and other foodstuff.
Yet the threat of famine was a small disadvantage compared to the 
extreme vulnerability and insecurity of monoculture. When the crop 
was affected by internal factors such as disease, that amounted to an 
overwhelming disaster, as in the case of Gold Coast cocoa when it was 
hit by swollen-shoot disease in the 1940s. Besides, at all times, the price 
fluctuations (which were externally controlled) left the African 
producer helpless in the face of capitalist manoeuvres.
From a capitalist viewpoint, monocultures commended themselves 
most because they made colonial economies entirely dependent on the 
metropolitan buyers of their produce. At the end of the European slave 
trade, only a minority of Africans were sufficiently committed to 
capitalist exchange and sufficiently dependent upon European imports 
to wish to continue the relationship with Europe at all costs. 
Colonialism increased the dependence of Africa on Europe in terms of 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (52 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:32 AM]


--- PAGE 373 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
the numbers of persons brought into the money economy and in terms 
of the number of aspects of socio-economic life in Africa which derived 
their existence from the connection with the metropole. The ridiculous 
situation arose by, which European trading firms, mining companies, 
shipping lines, banks, insurance houses and plantations all exploited 
Africa and at the same time caused Africans to feel that without those 
capitalist services no money or European goods would be forthcoming, 
and therefore Africa was in debt to its exploiters!
The factor of dependency made its impact felt in every aspect of the life 
of the colonies, and it can be regarded as the crowning vice among the 
negative social, political and economic consequences of colonialism in 
Africa, being primarily responsible for the perpetuation of the colonial 
relationship into the epoch that is called neo-colonialism.
Finally, attention must be drawn to one of the most important 
consequences of colonialism on African development, and that is the 
stunting effect on Africans as a physical species. Colonialism created 
conditions which led not just to periodic famine, but to chronic 
undernourishment, mal-nutrition and deterioration in the physique of 
the African people. If such a statement sounds wildly extravagant, it is 
only because bourgeois propaganda has conditioned even Africans to 
believe that malnutrition and starvation were the natural lot of Africans 
from time immemorial. A black child with a transparent rib-case, huge 
head, bloated stomach, protruding eyes, and twigs as arms and legs was 
the favourite poster of the large British charitable operation known as 
Oxfam. The poster represented a case of Kwashiorkor — extreme 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (53 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:32 AM]


--- PAGE 374 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
malignant mulnutrition. Oxfam called upon the people of Europe to 
save starving African and Asian children from Kwashiorkor and such 
ills. Oxfam never bothered their consciences by telling them that 
capitalism and colonialism created the starvation, suffering and misery 
of the child in the first place.
There is an excellent study of the phenomenon of hunger on a world 
scale by a Brazilian scientist, Josue de Castro. It incorporates 
considerable data on the food and health conditions among Africans in 
their independent pre-colonial state or in societies untouched by 
capitalist pressures; and it then makes comparisons with colonial 
conditions. The study convincingly indicates that African diet was 
previously more varied, being based on a more diversified agriculture 
than was possible under colonialism. In terms of specific nutritional 
deficiencies, those Africans who suffered most under colonialism were 
those who were brought most fully into the colonial economy: namely, 
the urban workers.
For the sake of the doubters, several of de Castro’s observations are 
listed below (occasionally supplemented by other data).
1.  Investigators who have studied the nutritional conditions of 
‘primitive’ Africans in tropical Africa are unanimous in 
stating that they show no clinical signs of dietary deficiency. 
One of the most striking indications of the superiority of 
indigenous African diet is the magnificent condition of the 
teeth. One researcher among six ethnic groups in Kenya could 
not find a single case of tooth decay, not a single deformation 
of the dental arch. But when those same people were 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (54 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:32 AM]


--- PAGE 375 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
transplanted and put on the ‘civilised’ diet available under 
colonialism, their teeth began to decay at once.
2.  In Egypt, the peasants or fellahin had always suffered from 
periodic famines, but under colonialism this deteriorated to 
become chronic hunger. It was the intervention of the British 
which upset the balance of the peasants’ diet; and comparison 
with early accounts shows that there was once a much greater 
variety of legumes and fruits.
3.  The kwashiorkor (of the Oxfam posters) is itself noticeable 
wherever the African’s contact with the European was 
prolonged. A Committee on Nutrition in the Colonial Empire 
found a noticeable absence of animal fat and protein in the 
Gambia. The absence of proteins of good quality is one of the 
principal contributors to kwashiorkor; and once again 
comparison with what Europeans saw in the Gambia ever 
since the 15th century would indicate that a change had come 
about after the coming of the whites. The Gambia not only 
grew a variety of food in the early period, but it was stock-
raising country where meat was consumed in considerable 
quantity. Throughout the 17th and 18th centuries, cattle hides 
were sold by the thousands to European buyers every year, 
and the local population ate the meat. How then could they 
have suffered from an absence of animal fat!
4.  Studies in Equatorial Africa have revealed frequent signs of 
dietary deficiencies caused by the absence of fresh foods 
among Africans entering the service of the colonisers. These 
include, beriberi, rickets and scurvy. Rickets is a typical 
temperate climate disease, to which lack of sun contributes. 
But after colonialism had so destroyed the pattern of judicious 
food consumption in tropical Africa, even the sun was not 
enough to keep children’s bones straight. As for scurvy, that 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (55 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:32 AM]


--- PAGE 376 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
is so closely identified with the English sailor that he was 
nicknamed ‘Limey’, from eating limes to prevent scurvy 
while lacking access to fresh food on long sea voyages. 
However, a scurvy epidemic broke out in the middle of 
Tanganyika in the colonial epoch-among workers in the 
goldfields, whose wages and conditions of work did not 
permit them to get fresh citrus and other nourishment.
5.  In South Africa, white settlement and capitalism transformed 
African diet from meat and cereal to dependence on mealy-
meal (maize). Pellagra or ‘rough skin’ was unknown in South 
Africa until about 1914. Subsequently, it became a scourge 
among Africans, because it derives from absence of milk and 
meat.
6.  An official report on Basutoland (now Lesotho) had this to 
say: ‘According to residents of long-standing, the physique 
and health of the Basuto today is not what it used to be. 
Malnutrition is seen in every village, dispensary, school and 
recruiting office. Mild scurry and subscorbic conditions are 
not infrequent; pellagra is becoming more and more frequent 
and lower resistance to disease increasingly apparent. It is 
becoming generally accepted, too, that the occurrence of 
leprosy is associated with faulty diet.’
To clinch the argument that colonialism had a deleterious effect on the 
African as a physical (and hence mental) entity, it is useful to point to 
those African peoples who until today have managed to maintain their 
own pattern of existence in so far as food is concerned. The pastoral 
Masai, Galla, Ankoli, Batutsi and Somali are all in that category. Their 
physique is generally so superb, their resistance and endurance so great, 
that they have become the objects of scientific research to discover why 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (56 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:32 AM]


--- PAGE 377 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
they do so much better than the ‘well-fed’ capitalists who are collapsing 
from heart disease.
In the light of the prevailing balance-sheet concept of what colonial rule 
was about, it still remains to take note of European innovations in 
Africa such as modern medicine, clinical surgery and immunisation. It 
would be absurd to deny that these were objectively positive features, 
however limited they were quantitatively. However, they have to be 
weighed against the numerous setbacks received by Africa in all 
spheres due to colonialism as well as against the contributions Africa 
made to Europe. European science met the needs of its own society, and 
particularly those of the bourgeoisie. The bourgeoisie did not suffer 
from hunger and starvation. Bourgeois science therefore did not 
consider those things as needs which had to be met and overcome — 
not even among their own workers and least of all on behalf of 
Africans. This is just a specific application of the general principle that 
the exploitation of Africa was being used to create a greater gap 
between Africa and capitalist Europe. The exploitation and the 
comparative disadvantage are the ingredients of underdevelopment.
6.3 Education for Underdevelopment
Education is crucial in any type of society for the preservation of the 
lives of its members and the maintenance of the social structure. Under 
certain circumstances, education also promotes social change. The 
greater portion of that education is informal, being acquired by the 
young from the example and behaviour of elders in the society. Under 
normal circumstances, education grows out of the environment; the 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (57 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:32 AM]


--- PAGE 378 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
learning process being directly related to the pattern of work in the 
society. Among the Bemba of what was then Northern Rhodesia, 
children by the age of six could name fifty to sixty species of tree plants 
without hesitation, but they knew very little about ornamental flowers. 
The explanation is simply that knowledge of the trees was a necessity in 
an environment of ‘cut and burn’ agriculture and in a situation where 
numerous household needs were met by tree products. Flowers, 
however, were irrelevant to survival.
Indeed, the most crucial aspect of pre-colonial African education was 
its relevance to Africans, in sharp contrast with what was later 
introduced. The following features of indigenous African education can 
be considered outstanding: its close links with social life, both in a 
material and spiritual sense; its collective nature; its many-sidedness; 
and its progressive development in conformity with the successive 
stages of physical, emotional and mental development of the child. 
There was no separation of education and productive activity or any 
division between manual and intellectual education. Altogether, through 
mainly informal means, pre-colonial African education matched the 
realities of pre-colonial African society and produced well-rounded 
personalities to fit into that society.
Some aspects of African education were formal: that is to say, there was 
a specific programme and a conscious division between teachers and 
pupils. Formal education in pre-colonial Africa was also directly 
connected with the purposes of the society, just like informal education. 
The programmes of teaching were restricted to certain periods in the 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (58 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:32 AM]


--- PAGE 379 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
life of every individual, notably the period of initiation or ‘coming of 
age’. Many African societies had circumcision ceremonies for males or 
for both sexes, and for some time before the ceremonies a teaching 
programme was arranged. The length of time involved could vary from 
a few weeks to several years. A famous example of the latter was the 
initiation school held by the Poro brotherhood in Sierra Leone. Formal 
education was also available at later stages in life, such as on the 
occasion of passing from one age-grade to another or of joining a new 
brotherhood. Specialised functions such as hunting, organising religious 
ritual, and the practice of medicine definitely involved formal education 
within the family or clan. Such educational practices all dated back to 
communal times in Africa, but they persisted in the more developed 
African feudal and pre-feudal societies, and they were to be found on 
the eve of colonialism.
As the mode of production moved towards feudalism in Africa, new 
features also emerged within the educational pattern. There was, for 
instance, more formal specialisation, because the proportion of formal 
to informal education increases with technological advance. Apart from 
hunting and religion, the division of labour made it necessary to create 
guilds for passing down the techniques of iron working, leather making, 
cloth manufacture, pottery moulding, professional trading, and so on. 
The emphasis on military force also led to formal education in that 
sphere, as in the case of Dahomey, Rwanda and Zulu cited earlier. A 
state structure with a well defined ruling class always encouraged the 
use of history as a means of glorifying the class in power. So, in the 
Yoruba state of Keta in the 19th century, there existed a school of 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (59 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:32 AM]


--- PAGE 380 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
history, where a master drilled into the memories of his pupils a long 
list of the kings of Keta and their achievements. Of course, reliance on 
memory alone placed severe limits on education of that type, and that is 
why education was much more advanced in those African countries 
where the use of writing had come into being.
Along the Nile, in North Africa, in Ethiopia, in the Western Sudan, and 
along the East African coast, a minority of Africans became literate, 
producing a situation comparable to Asia and Europe before the latter 
part of the 19th century. As in other parts of the world, literacy in 
Africa was connected with religion, so that in Islamic countries it was a 
Koranic education and in Christian Ethiopia the education was designed 
to train priests and monks. Muslim education was particularly extensive 
at the primary level, and it was also available at the secondary and 
university levels. In Egypt there was the Al-Azhar University, in 
Morocco the University of Fez, and in Mali the University of Timbuctu 
— all testimony to the standard of education achieved in Africa before 
the colonial intrusion.
The colonizers did not introduce education into Africa: they introduced 
a new set of formal educational institutions which partly supplemented 
and partly replaced those which were there before. The colonial system 
also stimulated values and practices which amounted to new informal 
education. The main purpose of the colonial school system was to train 
Africans to help man the local administration at the lowest ranks and to 
staff the private capitalist firms owned by Europeans. In effect, that 
meant selecting a few Africans to participate in the domination and 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (60 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:32 AM]


--- PAGE 381 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
exploitation of the continent as a whole. It was not an educational 
system that grew out of the African environment or one that was 
designed to promote the most rational use of material and social 
resources. It was not an educational system designed to give young 
people confidence and pride as members of African societies, but one 
which sought to instil a sense of deference towards all that was 
European and capitalist. Education in Europe was dominated by the 
capitalist class. The same class bias was automatically transferred to 
Africa; and to make matters worse the racism and cultural boastfulness 
harboured by capitalism were also included in the package of colonial 
education. Colonial schooling was education for subordination, 
exploitation, the creation of mental confusion and the development of 
underdevelopment.
A European-type school system hardly operated during the first forty 
years or so of colonialism. In that period, missionaries gave schooling 
for their own Christianizing purposes, and it was in the 1920s that the 
colonizing powers carried out a series of investigations into educational 
possibilities in Africa. Thereafter, colonial education became systematic 
and measurable, though it approached its maximum dimensions only in 
the post second World War era.
Colonial education was a series of limitations inside other limitations. 
The first practical limitation was politico-financial, which means the 
political policy guiding financial expenditure rather than the actual 
availability of money. The metropolitan governments and their African 
administrations claimed that there was not enough money for education. 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (61 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:32 AM]


--- PAGE 382 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
As late as 1958, the British Colonial Office said of Northern Rhodesia:
Until more money becomes available for the building of schools, no rapid 
progress can be expected and the practical prospects of providing full 
primary education for all children therefore remains fairly remote.
It is amazing that Northern Rhodesia with its immense copper wealth 
did not have enough money to educate Africans! One cannot be certain 
whether the colonialists were trying to deceive others or whether they 
had succeeded in fooling themselves; but probably most of the confused 
white settlers in the Rhodesias fell into the latter category, for they 
consistently argued that Africans did not pay as much tax per head as 
Europeans and therefore Africans could not expect to get education and 
other services out of taxes paid by white settlers. This is the 
fundamental failure to perceive that a country’s wealth comes not from 
taxes but from production. African soil and African labour in Northern 
Rhodesia produced vast wealth, but African children under colonialism 
had little access to that wealth for their schooling.
As noted earlier, most of Africa’s surplus was exported; and, out of the 
small portion which remained behind as government revenue, the 
percentage channelled into education was tiny. In every colony, the 
budget for education was incredibly small, compared to amounts being 
spent in capitalist Europe itself. In 1935, of the total revenue collected 
from taxing Africans in French West Africa, only 4.03% was utilised on 
education. In the British colony of Nigeria, it was only 3.4%. In Kenya, 
as late as 1946 only 2.26% of the revenue was spent on African 
education. By 1960, those percentages had all gone up two, three, or 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (62 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:32 AM]


--- PAGE 383 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
four times; but, being so small to begin with, they still remained 
insignificant.
Since such small sums were spent, it followed that another basic 
limitation was quantitative, in the sense that very few Africans made it 
into schools. In the whole of French Equatorial Africa (Chad, Central 
African Republic, Gabon and Congo Brazzaville), there were only 
22,000 pupils enrolled in 1938-and that represented quite a jump over 
figures for the preceding five years. In 1938> the French provided 
education for 77,000 pupils in French West Africa, with a population of 
at least 15 million. A very illuminating fact that should be noted is that 
in 1945 there were more than 80,000 students attending independent 
Islamic schools in French West Africa — a number not far short of 
those attending French-built schools by that date. In other words, it was 
only in the final stages of colonialism that the ruling European power 
began to provide Africans in the former Islamic states of West Africa 
with educational institutions having an enrolment greater than the 
previous formal education.
Occasionally, in West and North Africa, the French government gave 
some financial support to the Koranic primary schools and to the 
medresas or Islamic secondary schools. On the whole, however, the pre-
colonial African school system was simply ignored and it tended to 
decline. In Algeria, the Arab/Islamic institutions of learning suffered 
severely during the French wars of conquest, while others were 
deliberately suppressed when the French gained the upper hand. 
Throughout French North Africa, the old established Islamic 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (63 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:32 AM]


--- PAGE 384 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Universities suffered because colonialism deprived them of the 
economic base which previously gave them support. As with so many 
other aspects of African life, what the colonialists put in must be 
weighed against what they halted and what they destroyed in both real 
and potential terms.
British colonies tended to do on average somewhat better than French 
ones with regard to educational activities, largely because of missionary 
initiatives rather than the British government itself. Ghana, Nigeria, and 
Uganda were fairly well off as far as colonial education went. Of 
course, that was in a purely relative sense, and the absolute numbers 
involved were never large. Sierra Leone was better off educationally 
than French West Africa because the seven out of every 100 children 
going to school in Sierra Leone before the last war compared 
favourably with five out of every 100 in French West Africa. As far as 
the British are concerned, their slightly superior record in some colonies 
is also offset by the very poor educational facilities offered to Africans 
in Kenya, Tanganyika, the Central African territories and South Africa 
itself which was for a long a British responsibility.
One limitation of the educational system of colonial Africa which is 
obscured by statistical averages is the great variation in opportunity 
between different regions in the same colony. In many colonies, only 
Africans living in or near the principal towns had educational 
opportunities. For instance, in Madagascar the capital town of 
Tananarive had the most substantial school facilities; in Gambia literacy 
was high for Bathurst town and low outside; and in Uganda the 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (64 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:32 AM]


--- PAGE 385 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
urbanised region of Buganda practically monopolised education. 
Generally speaking, the unevenness in educational levels reflected the 
unevenness of economic exploitation and the different rates at which 
different parts of a colony entered the money economy. Thus, in Gold 
Coast, the Northern Territories were neglected educationally, because 
they did not offer the colonialists any products for export. In Sudan, it 
was the huge southern region which was in a similar position. Inside 
Tanganyika, a map showing the major cotton and coffee areas virtually 
coincides with a map showing areas in which colonial education was 
available. It means that those whom the colonialists could not readily 
exploit were not offered even ¡he crumbs of education.
The closer one scrutinises the educational contribution of colonialism 
even in purely quantitative terms, the more it shrinks into 
insignificance. It must be noted, for instance, that there was an 
extremely high rate of ‘drop-outs’. A large percentage of those enrolled 
never finished school. In big capitalist countries like the U.S.A., there 
are many drop-outs at the college and university level: in colonial 
Africa, the drop-outs were occurring at the primary level, at a rate as 
high as 50%. For every student who completed primary school, one fell 
by the wayside. The drop-outs were from primary schools, because 
there was hardly any other type of school — this absence of secondary, 
technical and university education being yet another of the stumbling 
blocks.
Africans were being educated inside colonial schools to become junior 
clerks and messengers. Too much learning would have been both 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (65 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:32 AM]


--- PAGE 386 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
superfluous and dangerous for clerks and messengers. Therefore, 
secondary education was rare and other forms of higher education were 
virtually non-existent, throughout most of the colonial epoch. That 
which was provided went mainly to non-Africans. As late as 1959, 
Uganda spent about £11 per African pupil, £38 per Indian and £186 on 
each European child — the difference being due largely to the 
availability of secondary education for the children of the capitalists and 
the middlemen. In Kenya, the discrimination was worse and the number 
of European children involved was high. In 1960, more than 11,000 
European children were attending school in Kenya, and of those 3,000 
were receiving secondary education. The settler colony of Algeria 
displayed similar characteristics. Only 20% of the secondary pupils in 
1954 were denoted as ‘Muslims’, which meant in effect ‘Algerian’ as 
distinct from European. Other minorities also did better than the 
indigenous population. For instance, the Jews in North Africa and 
especially in Tunisia played the middlemen roles, and their children 
were all educated right up to secondary standards.
African countries without a big white settler population also had racist 
educational structures with regard to opportunities at all levels and 
especially opportunities for higher education. In Senegal in 1946, the 
high school had 723 pupils, of whom 174 were Africans. Later on, a 
university was set up in Dakar (to serve the whole of French West 
Africa); and yet in the 1950s on the eve of independence, more than 
half of the university students were French.
The Portuguese have not been discussed so far, because there is 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (66 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:32 AM]


--- PAGE 387 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
scarcely any education to be discussed in their colonial territories. For 
many years, the statistical data was never made available, and when 
published towards the end of the colonial period the figures were often 
inflated. What is undeniable is that the African child growing up in 
Portuguese colonial territories stood one chance out of a hundred of 
getting instruction beyond Standard II or Standard III. The secondary 
schools that came into existence were for Europeans and Indians, the 
latter drawn mainly from Goa. The colonial powers with small 
territories in Africa were Spain and Italy. Like Portugal, they were also 
backward from a European capitalist viewpoint, and they provided their 
colonial subjects with a tiny amount of primary education and no 
secondary education.
Belgium was in a somewhat special category as far as colonial 
education was concerned. Although small, Belgium was a relatively 
developed and industrialized country, and it ruled one of the richest 
areas of Africa: namely, the Congo. By colonial standards, the people of 
Congo and Rwanda-Burundi had fair access to primary education, but 
schooling beyond that was almost impossible to obtain. This was the 
consequence of a deliberate policy pursued by the Belgian government 
and the Catholic Church. The African ‘native’ was to be gradually 
civilized. To give him secondary education was like asking a young 
child to chew meat when he should be eating porridge. Furthermore, the 
Belgians were so interested in the welfare of the African masses that 
they argued that no highly educated African would be able to serve his 
own people! Consequently, it was only in 1948 that a Belgian 
commission recommended the establishment of secondary schools for 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (67 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:32 AM]


--- PAGE 388 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Africans in the colonies. It is not at all surprising that, at the time of 
regaining political independence, the Congo had only 16 graduates out 
of a population of more than 13 million.
Educationalists often refer to ‘the educational pyramid’, comprising 
primary education as the base and going upwards through secondary, 
teacher-training, higher technical and university facilities-the last 
named being so small that it could be represented as the point at the top 
of the pyramid. Throughout Africa, the primary base was narrow and 
yet the pyramid sloped shallowly because so few of the primary 
students could continue beyond that level. Only in certain British 
colonies was the pyramid really completed by significant higher and 
university education. West Africa had Achimota and Yaba Colleges, 
apart from Fourah Bay which was at University level. Ibadan and the 
University of Ghana also carne into existence some years before the end 
of the colonial regime. In the Sudan, there was Gordon College which 
evolved into the University of Khartoum, and in East Africa there was 
Makerere University.
The following data for the year 1958 could he used to illustrate the 
educational pyramid m Southern Rhodesia, where African education 
was not well favoured. Total kindergarten enrolment was 227,000. In 
the primary schools 77,000 entered Standard I, and 10,000 made it to 
Standard VI. Secondary education began with 3,000 pupils, of whom 
only 13 made it to Standard XII (Form IV). In that year, there were no 
African graduates from the recently established University College in 
Salisbury, but by 1960 there were three.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (68 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:32 AM]


--- PAGE 389 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
The final word on the quantity of education provided by Europe to 
Africa can be said in the form of the statistics at the beginning of the 
rule of the new African states. Some scholars have worked out a 
statistical index on education whereby educational facilities are 
evaluated in numbers from 0 to 100, moving from the poorest to the 
most advanced. On that index, most African countries are below 10. 
The developed exploiter countries and the Socialist states are usually 
above 80. A UNESCO publication on education in black independent 
Africa said:
Of this population (of around 170 million), a little more than 25 million 
are of school age and of these nearly 13 million have no opportunity of 
going to school — and of the ‘privileged’ 12 million less than half 
complete their primary education. Only three out of every 100 children 
see the inside of a secondary school while not even two of every 
thousand have a chance of receiving some sort of higher education in 
Africa itself. The overall estimated illiteracy rate of 80 to 85% is nearly 
twice that of the average world figure.
The imperialist whites use the above evidence to snigger at Africans for 
being ‘illiterate natives’, and they would argue that illiteracy is part of 
‘the vicious circle of poverty’. Yet, the same people boast proudly that 
they have educated Africa. It is difficult to see how they can have it 
both ways. If independent Africa is still without the benefits of modern 
education (as it is) then 75 years of colonial exploitation undoubtedly 
have something to do with that state of affairs; and the absurdity is so 
much the greater when one contemplates how much Africa produced in 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (69 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:32 AM]


--- PAGE 390 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
that period and how much of that went to develop all aspects of 
European capitalist society, including their educational institutions. 
Cecil Rhodes could afford to leave a legacy of lavish scholarships to 
white students for study at Oxford University, having made a fortune 
from exploiting Africa and Africans.
Those Africans who had access to education were faced with certain 
qualitative problems. The quality was poor by prevailing European 
standards. The books, the methods of teaching and the discipline were 
all brought to Africa in the 19th century; and, on the whole, colonial 
schools remained sublimely indifferent to the 20th century. New ideas 
that were incorporated in the capitalist metropoles never reached the 
colonies. In particular, the fantastic changes in science did not reach 
African classrooms, for there were few schools where science subjects 
were taught. Similarly, the evolution of higher technical education did 
not have any counterpart in colonial Africa.
There were numerous absurdities in the transplantation of a version of 
European education into Africa. When the Bemba children mentioned 
above went to school, they had no programme of instruction relating to 
the plant life with which they would otherwise have familiarised 
themselves. Instead, they were taught about flowers — and about 
European roses at that. Dr. Kofi Busia some years ago made the 
following admission:
At the end of my first year at secondary school (Mfantsipim, Cape Coast, 
Ghana), I went home to Wenchi for the Christmas vacation. I had not been 
home for four years, and on that visit, I became painfully aware of my 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (70 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:32 AM]


--- PAGE 391 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
isolation. I understood our community far less than the boys of my own 
age who had never been to school. Over the years, as I went through 
college and university, I felt increasingly that the education I received 
taught me more and more about Europe and less and less about my own 
society.
Eventually, Busia knew so little about African society that he proposed 
that independent Africans should ‘dialogue’ with the fascist racist white 
minority that maintains apartheid in South Africa.
Some of the contradictions between the content of colonial education 
and the reality of Africa were really incongruous. On a hot afternoon in 
some tropical African school, a class of black shining faces would listen 
to their geography lesson on the seasons of the year — spring, summer, 
autumn and winter. They would learn about the Alps and the river 
Rhine but nothing about the Atlas mountains of North Africa or the 
river Zambezi. If those students were in a British colony, they would 
dutifully write that ‘we defeated the Spanish armada in 1588’ — at a 
time when Hawkins was stealing Africans and being knighted by Queen 
Elizabeth I for so doing. If they were in a French colony, they would 
learn that ‘the Gauls, our ancestors, had blue eyes’, and they would be 
convinced that ‘Napoleon was our greatest general’ — the same 
Napoleon who re-instituted slavery in the Caribbean island of 
Guadeloupe, and was only prevented from doing the same in Haiti 
because his forces were defeated by an even greater strategist and 
tactician, the African, Toussaint L'Ouverture.
To some extent Europeans thoughtlessly applied their own curricula 
without reference to African conditions; but very often they deliberately 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (71 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:32 AM]


--- PAGE 392 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
did so with intent to confuse and mystify. As late as 1949, a Principal 
Education Officer in Tanganyika carefully outlined that the Africans of 
that colony should be bombarded in primary school with propaganda 
about the British royal family. The theme of the (British) king as a 
father should be stressed throughout the syllabus and mentioned in 
every lesson’, he said. He further urged that African children should be 
shown numerous pictures of the English princesses and their ponies at 
Sandringham and Windsor Castle.
Whatever little was discussed about the African past in colonial schools 
was about European activities in Africa. That trend is now sufficiently 
reversed to allow the present generation of African pupils to smile at the 
thought that Europeans ‘discovered’ Mount Kenya, the river Niger, etc. 
But in the colonial period, the paradox was that whoever had an 
opportunity to be educationally misguided could count himself lucky, 
because that misguidance was a means of personal advance within the 
structure created by European capitalists in and for Africa.
The French, Portuguese and Belgians made it clear that education at any 
level was designed ‘to civilise the African native’, and of course only a 
civilised native could hope to gain worthwhile employment and 
recognition from the colonialists. According to the French, an African, 
after receiving French education, stood a chance of becoming an 
assimilée — one who could be assimilated or incorporated into the 
superior French culture. The Portuguese used the word assimilado, 
which means exactly the same; and Portuguese colonial law 
distinguished sharply between a native and an assimilado. The latter 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (72 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:32 AM]


--- PAGE 393 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
was sometimes called a civilisado ('one who is civilised’) because of 
being able to read and write Portuguese. That sort of African was 
rewarded with certain privileges. One great irony was that in Portugal 
up to 1960, nearly half of the population was illiterate, and, therefore, if 
they had been put to the same test they would have been judged 
uncivilised! Meanwhile, the Belgians were parading around with the 
same system. They called their ‘educated Bantu’ in Congo the évolués 
(’those who have evolved’ from savagery to civilisation, thanks to the 
Belgians).
Somehow, the British avoided hard and fast legal distinctions between 
the educated and uneducated African, but they encouraged cultural 
imitation all the same. Governor Cameron of Tanganyika in the 1920s 
was known as a ‘progressive’ governor. But when he was attacked for 
trying to preserve the African personality in the educational system, he 
denied the charge and declared that his intention was that the African 
should cease to think as an African and instead should become ‘a fair-
minded Englishman’. Students who came out of Livingstonia or 
Blantyre Mission in Malawi were widely known to be black Scotsmen, 
because of the effort of Scottish missionaries. In Sierra Leone, the white 
cultural influence went back to the 18th century, and Sierra Leone 
Creoles stood out even from the rest of miseducated black people. The 
Creoles were not satisfied with an English Christian name or even with 
one European surname: they had to Choose two European surnames and 
connect them with a hyphen. Of course, in practical terms, the 
education with all its warped values meant that the educated handful 
went as far as colonialism would allow Africans to go in the civil 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (73 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:32 AM]


--- PAGE 394 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
service or in the employ of private capitalist firms.
During the colonial epoch and afterwards, criticism was justly levelled 
at the colonial educational system for failing to produce more secondary 
school pupils and more university graduates. And yet, it can be said that 
among those who had the most education were to be found the most 
alienated Africans on the continent. Those were the ones who evolved 
and were assimilated. At each further stage of education, they were 
battered by and succumbed to the values of the white capitalist system; 
and, after being given salaries, they could then afford to sustain a style 
of life imported from outside. Access to knives and forks, three-piece 
suits and pianos then further transformed their mentality. There is a 
famous West Indian calypsonian who in satirizing his colonial school 
days, remarked that had he been a bright student he would have learnt 
more and turned out to be a fool. Unfortunately, the colonial school 
system educated far too many fools and clowns, fascinated by the ideas 
and way of life of the European capitalist class. Some reached a point of 
total estrangement from African conditions and the African way of life, 
and like Blaise Diagne of Senegal they chirped happily that they were 
and would always be ‘European’.
There is no getting away from the conclusion reached by the African 
educationalist, Abdou Moumini, that ‘Colonial education corrupted the 
thinking and sensibilities of the African and filled him with abnormal 
complexes’. It followed that those who were Europeanised were to that 
extent de-Africanised, as a consequence of the colonial education and 
the general atmosphere of colonial life. Many examples are cited in 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (74 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:32 AM]


--- PAGE 395 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
present-day Africa of the insulting treatment of aspects of African 
culture in the colonial period, based on cultural imperialism and white 
racism. What is seldom commented upon is the fact that many Africans 
were the victims of fascism at the hands of the Portuguese and Spanish, 
at the hands of the Italians and the Vichy French regime for a brief 
period in the late 1930s and the early 1940s, and at the hands of the 
British and Boers in South Africa throughout this century. The fascist 
colonial powers were retarded capitalist states, where the government 
police machinery united with the Catholic church and the capitalists to 
suppress Portuguese and Spanish workers and peasants and to keep 
them ignorant. Understandably, the fascist colonialists wanted to do the 
same to African working people, and in addition they vented their 
racism on Africans, just as Hitler had done on the Jews.
Like most colonial administrations, that of the Italians in Libya 
disregarded the culture of the Africans. However, after Mussolini the 
fascist carne to power, the disregard gave way to active hostility, 
especially in relation to the Arabic language and the Muslim religion. 
The Portuguese and Spanish had always shown contempt for African 
language and religion. Schools of kindergarten and primary level for 
Africans in Portuguese colonies were nothing but agencies for the 
spread of the Portuguese language. Most schools were controlled by the 
Catholic church, as a reflection of the unity of church and state in 
fascist Portugal. In the little-known Spanish colony of Guinea (Rio 
Muni), the small amount of education given to Africans was based on 
eliminating the use of local languages by the pupils and on instilling in 
their hearts ‘the holy fear of God’. Schools in colonial Africa were 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (75 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:32 AM]


--- PAGE 396 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
usually blessed with the names of saints or bestowed with the names of 
rulers, explorers and governors from the colonising power. In Spanish 
Guinea, that practice was followed, resulting in the fact that Rio Muni 
children had to pass by the José Antonio school — the equivalent of 
saying the Adolf Hitler school if the region were German, for the school 
was named in honour of José Antonio, the founder of the Spanish 
fascist party.
Another aspect of the colonial educational and cultural patterns which 
needs investigation is the manner in which European racism and 
contempt was expressed not only by hostility to African culture but by 
paternalism and by praise of negative and static social features. There 
were many colonialists who wished to preserve in perpetuity everything 
that was African, if it appeared quaint or intriguing to them. Such 
persons merely succeeded in cutting African life off from the 
potentially beneficial aspects of the international world. An excellent 
example is the kind of work done in Gabon by Albert Schweitzer, who 
was in charge of a dirty unhygienic hospital with dogs, cats, goats and 
chickens running around, under the guise of fitting in to the African 
culture and environment.
As late as 1959, a friend and colleague of Albert Schweitzer defended 
his unsterile hospital in the following terms:
Now to the domestic animals at the Hospital. People have been shocked 
by the informality with which animals and people mix, and although it is 
perhaps not always defensible on hygienic grounds, the mixture adds 
considerably to the charm of the place.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (76 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:32 AM]


--- PAGE 397 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
The writer was a dental surgeon from New York, who would obviously 
have had a fit if a goat or chicken had wandered into his New York 
surgery. He knew full well that at Schweitzer’s hospital ‘the goats, dogs 
and cats visit hospital wards teeming with microbial life of the most 
horrifying varieties’, but he defended their habitation with Africans 
because that was part of the culture and charm that had to be preserved!
In the educational sphere, the Belgians carried out a language policy 
which might appeal to contemporary nationalists, for they insisted that 
primary education should be in one of the five main African languages 
of the territory. However, in practice, they used that apparently 
progressive decision to seal off one Congolese ethnic group from 
another and to cut the educated off from a wider world of knowledge, 
because the missionaries translated into the local languages only that 
which they thought desirable. The policy of mock respect for African 
culture reached its highest expression in South Africa in the notorious 
Bantu Education Act of 1953, which sought to promote the differences 
between Zulu, Sotho, Xhosa, Venda, etc. — differences which were 
part of an early stage of development and which would have been 
transcended if there were no European intervention or if under white 
rule specific steps were not taken to maintain the anachronistic ‘tribal’ 
entities.
Not all colonial educators and administrators were consciously taking 
up the position that the African should be educated the better to be 
enslaved. On the contrary, most of them thought that they were doing 
Africans a great favour; and there were a few who were enlightened 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (77 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:32 AM]


--- PAGE 398 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
enough to realise that there was scope for devising a school programme 
which was less divorced from African reality. In 1928, even the French 
education minister was shocked to learn that Africans were taught that 
the Gauls, their ancestors, had blue eyes. From the 1920s, both Britain 
and France produced colonial educators and education commissions 
which urged greater relevance of teaching programmes in Africa. They 
also put forward suggestions such as the use of local languages in 
primary schools, more education for girls, and .in end to the white-
collar orientation of schooling. However, the seemingly progressive 
nature of those recommendations could not change the fact that colonial 
education was an instrument to serve the European capitalist class in its 
exploitation of Africa. Whatever colonial educators thought or did 
could not change that basic fact.
To recommend that African girls should go to school is more than just 
an educational policy. It has tremendous social implications, and it pre-
supposes that the society will usefully employ the educated woman. 
Metropolitan capitalist society itself had failed to liberate women, to 
offer them equal educational opportunities, or to provide them with 
responsible jobs at equal rates of pay with men. That being the case, it 
was wishful thinking to imagine that the colonial educational system 
would take any serious interest in African women, especially since the 
colonialists would have had to transform the consciousness on that 
matter which was characteristic of feudal and pre-feudal societies. 
Nowhere did the cash-crop economy or the export of basic ores make 
provision for educated women. As in the capitalist metropoles, it was 
assumed that the civil service was for men. Therefore, the extremely 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (78 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:32 AM]


--- PAGE 399 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
limited employment sector in the colonies had nothing to offer educated 
women, and modern education remained a luxury with which few 
African women came into contact.
Another progressive suggestion made by some colonial educationists 
was for more agricultural and technical schooling. But, genuine 
technical education was ruled out, because the fundamental purpose of 
the colonial economy did not permit the development of industry and 
skills within Africa. Only in rare cases, such as in the Congo, was there 
an objective necessity for technically trained Africans. In the later 
stages of colonial rule in Congo, mineral exploitation had developed to 
such a point that there was practical need for extensive rudimentary 
technical skills among African workers. A few Katangese and other 
Congolese also received technical training of a secondary equivalent. 
Significantly enough, in such cases, the private companies took the 
initiative, since their profits were at stake, and the technical schools 
were extensions of their production processes. However, for the most 
part, whatever skilled jobs needed to be done within the restricted field 
of mining and industry in Africa were met by the importation of 
Europeans.
Agriculture was not carried on as a scientific industry, as in Scandinavia 
or New Zealand, where whites were farming on an intensive capitalist 
basis. As noted earlier, the production of cash crops in Africa was 
stimulated by the minimum expenditure on the part of Europeans and 
with no infusion of new technology. Therefore, when educational 
advisers suggested agricultural education relevant lo African needs this 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (79 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:32 AM]


--- PAGE 400 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
meant no addition lo African knowledge. In many colonial schools, 
agriculture became an apology for a subject. It was part of the drudgery 
of the institution. The teachers received no agricultural education, and, 
therefore, they could not teach anything scientific. Children acquired 
nothing but distaste for the heavy labour of shamba work, and in fact it 
was used as a form of punishment.
Early educational commissions also accorded high priority to religious 
and moral flavouring of instruction-something that was disappearing in 
Europe itself. The role of the Christian church in the educational 
process obviously needs special attention. The Christian missionaries 
were as much part of the colonising forces as were the explorers, traders 
and soldiers. There may be room for arguing whether in a given colony 
the missionaries brought the other colonialist forces or vice versa, but 
there is no doubting the fact that missionaries were agents of 
colonialism in the practical sense, whether or not they saw themselves 
in that light. The imperialist adventurer, Sir Henry Johnston disliked 
missionaries, but he conceded in praise of them that ‘each mission 
station is an exercise in colonisation’.
In Europe, the church had long held a monopoly over schooling from 
feudal times right into the capitalist era. By the late 19th century, that 
situation was changing in Europe; but, as far as the European colonisers 
were concerned, the church was free to handle the colonial educational 
system in Africa. The strengths and weaknesses of that schooling were 
very much to be attributed to the church.
Both inside and outside church and school, the personnel of the church 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (80 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:32 AM]


--- PAGE 401 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
were instrumental in setting values during the colonial epoch. They 
taught an ethic of human relations that in itself could appeal to the finer 
instincts of Africans, just as it had previously stirred other Europeans. 
Of course, there was a huge gap between European conduct and the 
Christian principles with which they were associated; and, on the part of 
the Africans, it was also true that motives for accepting Christianity 
often had nothing to do with the content of the religion. Indeed, the 
church as a source of education was probably more attractive to many 
converts than the church as a dispenser of religion.
Whatever the church taught in any capacity may be considered as a 
contribution to formal and informal education in colonial Africa, and its 
teachings must be placed within a social context. The church’s role was 
primarily to preserve the social relations of colonialism, as an extension 
of the role it played in preserving the social relations of capitalism in 
Europe. Therefore, the Christian church stressed humility, docility and 
acceptance. Ever since the days of slavery in the West Indies, the 
church had been brought in on condition that it should not excite the 
African slaves with doctrines of equality before God. In those days, 
they taught slaves to sing that all things were bright and beautiful, and 
that the slave master in his castle was to be accepted as God’s work just 
like the slave living in a miserable hovel and working 20 hours per day 
under the whip. Similarly, in colonial Africa churches could be relied 
upon to preach turning the other cheek in the face of exploitation, and 
they drove home the message that everything would be right in the next 
world. Only the Dutch Reformed Church of South Africa was openly 
racist, but all others were racist in so far as their European personnel 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (81 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:32 AM]


--- PAGE 402 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
were no different from other whites who had imbibed racism and 
cultural imperialism as a consequence of the previous centuries of 
contact between Europeans and the rest of the world.
In serving colonialism, the church often took up the role of arbiter of 
what was culturally correct. African ancestral beliefs were equated with 
the devil (who was black anyway), and it took a very long time before 
some European churchmen accepted prevailing African beliefs as 
constituting religion rather than mere witchcraft and magic. However, 
in its hostility towards African cultural and religious manifestations, the 
Christian church did perform certain progressive tasks. Practices such 
as killing twins and trial by ordeal were frowned upon by the European 
missionaries, and those were reflections of superstitious ideas rooted in 
an early stage of African development, when something like the birth of 
twins could not be scientifically explained, and, therefore, gave rise to 
religious fear.
It is to be noted that in West Africa long before the Colonial Scramble, 
many outcasts in society and persons who suffered from religious and 
social prejudices were the first converts of the Christian church. What 
was supported by one section of the population was opposed by 
another, and in the present century the cultural imperialism of the 
church excited great opposition. Prevailing African customs such as 
polygamy were attacked without reference to their socio-economic 
function. On the question of monogamy the Christian missionaries were 
introducing not a religious principle but rather a facet of European 
capitalist society. For their propaganda to have been successful, 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (82 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:32 AM]


--- PAGE 403 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
European activity had to work a transformation in the extended family 
patterns of African societies. That was very slow in occurring, and, in 
the meanwhile, many Africans accepted the religious aspects while 
rejecting the cultural appendages and the European missionaries 
themselves.
Much has been written about the trend in colonial Africa known as the 
Independent Church movement. It was a trend in which thousands of 
African Christians participated by breaking away from European 
churches (especially Protestant churches), and setting up their own 
places of worship under Christian African leadership. The motives were 
varied. Some Independent churches were highly nationalistic, like that 
established by John Chilembwe who led an armed nationalist uprising 
in Nyasaland (Malawi) in 1917. Others developed as a response of 
those Africans aspiring to be priests or pastors to the discrimination 
practised against them by white missionaries. One constant factor was 
disgust with the way that Europeans forced Africans to identify as 
Europeans. Revolting against that concept, one Zulu Independent 
church put the question to the local population ‘Are you a Jew or a 
Zulu? Were you there when they crucified their Lord?’ Nevertheless, 
many Africans came to accept the dehumanising principle of alienation 
from self. African identification with Europeans (be they Gentile or 
Jew) was a pillar of the informal education of the colonial epoch.
In the final analysis, perhaps the most important principle of colonial 
education was that of capitalist individualism. Like many aspects of the 
superstructure of beliefs in a society, it had both its negative and 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (83 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:32 AM]


--- PAGE 404 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
positive sides, viewed historically. The European bourgeoisie were 
progressive when they defended the individual from the excessive 
control of the father in the family and against the collective regulations 
of the church and feudal society. However, the capitalist system then 
went on to champion and protect the rights of the individual property 
owners against the rights of the mass of exploited workers and peasants. 
When capitalism had its impact on Africa in the colonial period, the 
idea of individualism was already in its reactionary phase. It was no 
longer serving to liberate the majority but rather to enslave the majority 
for the benefit of a few.
When individualism was applied to land, it meant that the notions of 
private ownership and the transfer of land through sale became 
prevalent in some parts of the continent. Much more widespread was 
the new understanding that individual labour should benefit the person 
concerned and not some wider collective, such as the clan or ethnic 
group. Thus, the practice of collective labour and egalitarian social 
distribution gave way to accumulative tendencies. Superficially, it 
appeared that individualism brought progress. Some individuals owned 
large coffee, cocoa or cotton shambas, and others rose to some 
prominence in the colonial administration through education. As 
individuals, they had improved their lot, and they became models of 
achievement within the society. Any model of achievement is an 
educational model, which directs the thoughts and actions of young and 
old in the society. The model of personal achievement under 
colonialism was really a model for the falling apart and the 
underdevelopment of African society taken as a whole.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (84 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:32 AM]


--- PAGE 405 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
It is a common myth within capitalist thought that the individual 
through drive and hard work can become a capitalist. In the U.S.A., it is 
usual to refer to an individual like John D. Rockefeller as someone who 
rose ‘from rags to riches’. To complete the moral of the Rockefeller 
success story, it would be necessary to fill in the details on all the 
millions of people who had to be exploited in order for one man to 
become a multi-millionaire. The acquisition of wealth is not due to hard 
work alone, or the Africans working as slaves in America and the West 
Indies would have been the wealthiest group in the world. The 
individualism of the capitalist must be seen against the hard and 
unrewarded work of the masses.
The idea of individualism was more destructive in colonial Africa than 
it was in metropolitan capitalist society. In the latter, it could be said 
that the rise of the bourgeois class indirectly benefitted the working 
classes, through promoting technology and raising the standard of 
living. But, in Africa, colonialism did not bring those benefits-it merely 
intensified the rate of exploitation of African labour and continued to 
export the surplus. In Europe, individualism led to entrepreneurship and 
adventurism of the type which spearheaded Europe’s conquest of the 
rest of the world. In Africa, both the formal school system and the 
informal value system of colonialism destroyed social solidarity and 
promoted the worst form of alienated individualism without social 
responsibility. That delayed the political process through which the 
society tried to regain its independence.
Up to this point, it has consistently been held that development is rooted 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (85 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:32 AM]


--- PAGE 406 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
in the material environment, in the techniques of production and in the 
social relations deriving from people’s work. There are what are known 
as ‘conspiracy theories of history’ by which the happenings of whole 
epochs are presented as being the secret scheming of one group or 
another. Such an approach is not to be recommended in the study of 
Africa’s relations with Europe. However, with regard to colonial 
educational policy, one comes closest to finding the elements of 
conscious planning by a group of Europeans to control the destiny of 
millions of Africans over a considerable period of time extending into 
the future. The planning of colonial education for the subjugation of 
Africa was most fully displayed by the French, because French 
politicians and administrators had the habit of openly expressing their 
thoughts on Africa. Therefore, the words of the French colonialists 
themselves will be cited here to illustrate how the colonial educational 
system did not leave vital political matters to chance, but was 
consciously carrying out policies hostile to the regaining of freedom by 
African peoples.
Ever since the period of the imperialist Scramble for Africa, French 
leaders realised that it was imperative to start some schools in the parts 
of Africa claimed by France, so that French language and culture might 
be accepted by some Africans, who would then identify with France 
rather than Britain or Portugal or some other European rival. This was 
particularly true in disputed frontier zones. Eugenne Etienne, a French 
minister at the start of the colonial era, stated that the extension of the 
French language was necessary as ‘a measure of national defence’. As 
early as 1884, there was set up the Alliance Française as an instrument 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (86 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:32 AM]


--- PAGE 407 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
of educational and cultural imperialism, recognised and supported by 
the French government. The reports of the Alliance Française show 
clearly that they thought of themselves as an arm of French 
imperialism, fighting so that France could entrench itself. For example, 
the Alliance Française wrote of French schools in Upper Guinea in the 
late 19th century:
‘They have to combat the redoubtable influence of the English schools of 
Sierra Leone in this region. The struggle between the two languages 
becomes more intense as one moves to the south, invaded by English 
natives and by their Methodist pastors.’
As seen earlier in the case of Portugal and Spain, the spread of the 
language of the European colonising power was considered of major 
importance. Belgium on the other hand encouraged local languages as a 
means of division and retardation. Only in Tanganyika under German 
rule, was there a positive reaction to the potentialities of Swahili as a 
teaching language, so that there was a further impetus to that language, 
which had already spread by trade, political relations, and personal 
contacts.
Apart from language, the pillar of cultural imperialism in most colonies 
was religion. The church never played as important a role in French 
colonies as it did in other parts of Africa colonised by predominantly 
Catholic countries, and the Protestant churches in British colonies also 
had a much more vital role than the church in French Africa. The 
explanation is that the French bourgeois revolution of the 18th century 
was more thoroughly anti-clerical than any other bourgeois revolution, 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (87 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:32 AM]


--- PAGE 408 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
and the Catholic church was completely separated from government in 
France by 1905, after many years of poor relations. Nevertheless, when 
the French saw that mission schools were helping England to entrench 
itself in Africa, the French government asked the aid of their own 
Catholic church to secure national interests.
From the viewpoint of the colonisers, once the frontiers of a colony 
were firmly decided, the major problem remained that of securing 
African compliance in carrying out policies favourable to the 
metropoles. There was always the possible use of force for that purpose, 
but naked force was best kept in reserve, rather than be utilised for 
everyday affairs. Only education could lay the basis for a smooth-
functioning colonial administration. In the first place, there was the 
elementary language problem of Europeans communicating with 
Africans. Most of the time, Europeans used translators to pass on 
orders, but it was known that African translators seized the opportunity 
to promote themselves and to modify or even sabotage orders. There 
was a saying in French colonial Africa that ‘translation is equal to 
treason’, and the only way to avoid that was to teach the mass of the 
people French.
Then there was the practical aspect of educating Africans to be better 
workers, just as in Europe the workers received education so that they 
would be more efficient and produce extra surplus for the capitalists. In 
colonial Africa, the European bourgeoisie realised that some education 
would maximise the value of labour. Albert Sarrault, a French Colonial 
Minister, stressed in 1914 what he termed ‘the economic utility of 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (88 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 409 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
educating the (African) masses’. Several years earlier the French had 
made a specific statement to the same effect on Madagascar. An 
ordinance of 1899 indicated that the purpose of schooling was
To make the young Malagasy faithful and obedient subjects of France and 
to offer an education which would be industrial, agricultural and 
commercial, so as to ensure that the settlers and various public services of 
the colony can meet their personnel requirements.
In practice, it was not necessary to educate the masses, because only a 
minority of the African population entered the colonial economy in 
such a way that their performance could be enhanced by education. 
Indeed, the French concentrated — (in selecting a small minority, who 
would be thoroughly subjected to French cultural imperialism, and who 
would aid France in administering its vast African colonial possessions. 
William Ponty, an early Governor-General of French West Africa, 
spoke in terms of forming ‘an elite of young people destined to aid our 
own efforts’. In 1919, Henry Simon (then Colonial Minister) outlined a 
programme for secondary education in Africa with a view to ‘making 
the best indigenous elements into complete Frenchmen’.
The best expressions of the political implications of French colonial 
educational policy came in the 1930s; and, by that time, some action 
was also matching the words. Brevié, the Governor-General of French 
West Africa in 1930, urged the extension of the higher levels of primary 
schooling for Africans ‘to help us in our work of colonisation’. Brevié 
was encouraged by the fact that by then there had appeared ‘a native 
elite, of whose zeal for a thorough and exclusive French culture signs 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (89 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 410 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
are already visible’. So with the support of the Inspector-General of 
education, that governor went on to outline plans for African students to 
attend secondary school, so as to become colonial cadres. Any socio-
political system needs its cadres. That was the role played by the 
youngest age-grades in Shaka’s armies and it was the role played by the 
Komsomol or Young Communists in the Soviet Union. Being a cadre 
involved not just training for a practical job but also political orientation 
to serve as a leading element in the system. The French and other 
colonialists understood this very well. This is how Brevié expressed it:
It is in no wise merely a matter of turning out batches of apprentices, 
clerks and officials according to the fluctuating needs of the moment. The 
role of these native cadres is much wider.
Only in North Africa, with its heavy white settler population, did the 
French find it unnecessary to encourage a local elite to run affairs under 
the direction of the metropolis and the governor; although even in 
Algeria there emerged a number of subjects called the Beni Oui Oui — 
literally ‘the Yes, Yes men’, who always assented to carrying out 
French instructions in opposition to the interests of most of their 
brothers. Another far-sighted aspect of French political policy in the 
education sphere is the manner in which they forced the sons of chiefs 
to acquire education. It was a deliberate attempt to capture the loyalty 
of those persons who had previously held political power in 
independent Africa, and it was an attempt at continuity with the pre-
colonial phase. As the French themselves put it, by educating the sons 
of traditional rulers, ‘a bond is thus established between the native 
cadres formed by us and those that the native community recognises’.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (90 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 411 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
In 1935, a team of British educationalists visited French Africa, and 
they admitted with a mixture of jealousy and admiration that France had 
succeeded in creating an elite of Africans in the image of Frenchmen — 
an elite that was helping to perpetuate French colonial rule. To greater 
or lesser extent, all colonial powers produced similar cadres to manage 
and buttress their colonial empires in Africa and elsewhere.
After the second World War, it became obvious that colonial rule could 
not forever be maintained in the same form in Africa; Asia already 
having broken loose and Africa being restless. When the awareness that 
the end was in sight became generalised, the metropolitan powers 
turned to their colonial cadres and handed to them the reins of policy in 
politically independent Africa. It should be emphasised that the choice 
that Africa should be free was not made by the colonial powers but by 
the people of Africa. Nevertheless, the changeover from colonialism to 
what is known as neo-colonialism did have the element of conspiracy in 
it. In 1960, the then British Prime Minister, Harold Macmillan, made 
the oft-quoted statement that ‘a wind of change was blowing across 
Africa’. That was the bourgeois way of expressing what Chinese 
Premier, Chou En-Lai was soon to assert: namely, that ‘Africa was ripe 
for Revolution’. In order to delay or hijack the African revolution, the 
colonising powers turned to a group which they had already created for 
a different purpose — the elite of colonially educated Africans, from 
among whom were selected wherever possible those who were most 
suitable for elevation to political leadership, and the administration and 
military apparatus were left in the hands of similar trustworthy cadres.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (91 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 412 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
There were a few far-sighted Europeans who all along saw that the 
colonial educational system would serve them if and when political 
independence was regained in Africa. For instance, Pierre Foncin, a 
founder of the Alliance Française, stated at the beginning of this 
century that ‘it is necessary to attach the colonies to the metropole by a 
very solid psychological bond, against the day when their progressive 
emancipation ends in a form of federation as is probable-that they be 
and they remain French in language, thought and spirit’. Yet, it was the 
British who first appreciated that they should bow to the inevitable and 
grant African independence. While the French introduced a few African 
representatives into their own Parliament in France so as to try and keep 
African territories tied to France, the British began to prepare to hand 
over to certain selected Africans.
In the metropolitan capitalist countries, there were (and still are) elite 
schools which provided the bulk of the political and other leadership. 
The English public schools of Eton, Harrow, Rugby and Winchester are 
well-known as training grounds of the British ruling class, and by many 
authorities they are considered more important than the Universities to 
which the students of such secondary schools invariably go. In France 
at the secondary level, it was and still is usual to find that students 
emerging from places like the Lycée Louis le Grand and the Ecole 
Normal Superieure Rue d'Ulm are the future cabinet ministers and top 
executives of that country. In the U.S.A., in spite of the myth that 
everyone can reach the top, a high proportion of the ruling class went to 
exclusive schools like the private boys’ schools of Groton, St. Paul’s, 
St. Mark’s and Philips Exeter.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (92 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 413 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Under African conditions, anyone who went to school in the colonial 
period virtually entered the elite> because the numbers enjoying that 
privilege even at the primary level were so small. In addition, within 
each colony there tended to be at least one secondary school or higher 
institute which played the role of furnishing the politico-administrative 
personnel of Africa in the era of political independence. The names of 
cabinet ministers and permanent secretaries of individual African 
countries can be found on the school rolls of Gordon College (Sudan), 
Alliance High School (Kenya), King’s College Budo (Uganda), Tahora 
Secondary School (Tanzania), Livingstonia (Malawi), William Ponty 
(Senegal), Sierra Leone Grammar School, Mfantsipim (Ghana), the 
Lycée Gallieni (Madagascar) and a few others. Besides, there was 
Makerere, Fourah Bay and Achimota, as long standing university or 
near-university institutions.
In retrospect, it is now very clear that one of the most significant 
aspects of the colonial educational system was that provided by the 
armed forces and police. Colonial armies such as the King’s African 
Rifles, the French Free Army and the Congolese Force Publique 
produced sergeants who later became the majors and generals of 
independent Africa, and in several instances the heads of states. 
Policemen also achieved similar rapid promotion, although their 
political position has been rather weaker than the military proper. Like 
their civilian counterparts, the future police and military elite were at 
one time trained to be simply low-level assistants to the colonial 
overlords; but once independence was in sight they were judged by the 
colonisers to have the requisite qualities of colonial cadres — fit to be 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (93 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 414 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
part of the ruling class of neo-colonial Africa. In a few instances, the 
colonial powers towards the latter part of the colonial period rushed to 
train a few Africans at the metropolitan higher institutions of scientific 
violence, notably Sandhurst Military Academy and Hendon Police 
School in Britain and St. Cyr military academy in France. Those few 
who were selected for such training became the cream of the military 
elite, corresponding to those African civilians who went to university 
either in Africa or abroad.
Most of what emerged from the colonial educational system was not 
unique. Educational systems are designed to function as props to a 
given society, and the educated in the young age groups automatically 
carry over their values when their turn comes to make decisions in the 
society. In Africa, the colonialists were training low level 
administrators, teachers, NCOs, railroad booking clerks, etc., for the 
preservation of colonial relations; and it is not surprising that such 
individuals would carry over colonial values into the period after 
independence was regained. The colonialists meanwhile took action 
wherever possible to ensure that persons most favourable to their 
position continued to man African administrations and assumed new 
political and state police powers. Such a presentation of events would 
be termed one-sided by many Europeans and Africans, too. In a sense, 
that is true, and the one-sidedness is deliberate. It is a presentation of 
what the colonial educational system achieved in terms of what it set 
itself to achieve. The other side of the matter is not the good with which 
colonial educators can be credited, but rather the good that emerged in 
spite of the efforts and intentions of the colonisers and because of the 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (94 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 415 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
struggles of African people.
6.4 Development by Contradiction.
The only positive development in colonialism was when it ended. It is 
the purpose of this section to sketch briefly how that development came 
about, with particular reference to the role of the educated sector.
In contrast to a subjective interpretation of what was good about 
colonialism on the one hand and what was bad on the other hand, there 
is the approach which follows closely the aims and achievements of the 
colonisers and the counter aims and achievements of the African 
people. Sometimes, Africans were restricted merely to manipulating 
colonial institutions as best they could; but, in addition, certain 
fundamental contradictions arose within colonial society, and they 
could only be resolved by Africans regaining their sovereignty as a 
people.
Analysis based on the perception of contradictions is characteristic of 
Marxism. Thus, Soviet historians approach the disintegration of 
colonialism within the following framework:
Colonialism fettered the development of the enslaved peoples. To 
facilitate colonial exploitation, the imperialists deliberately hampered 
economic and cultural progress in the colonies; preserved and restored 
obsolete forms of social relations, and fomented discord between 
nationalities and tribes. However, the drive for super profits dictated 
development of the extractive industry, plantations and capitalist farms, 
and ¡he building of ports, railways and roads in the colonies. In 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (95 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 416 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
consequence, social changes took place in the colonies, irrespective of the 
will of the colonialists. New social forces emerged — an industrial and 
agricultural proletariat, a national bourgeoisie and intelligentsia.
Among the different segments of the African population within the so-
called ‘modern’ sector produced by capitalist activity, the cash-crop 
peasantry was the largest. African cash-crop farmers had profound 
grievances against the colonialists, centering on the low price for 
African products and sometimes on land alienation. Agricultural wage 
earners and urban workers had definitely lost their land, and were 
resisting wage slavery. They did so by organising as the European 
proletariat had been doing since its formation; and, by virtue of compact 
organisation, African workers made their presence felt much more 
strongly than their limited numbers might otherwise have warranted. In 
the end, the numerical preponderance of peasants and of those who had 
one foot in the ‘subsistence’ sector was registered in the mass parties. 
But, while peasants depended upon sporadic revolts and boycotts to 
express their grievances, wage earners were engaged in a more 
continuous process of bargaining, petitioning, striking, etc.
The smallest of the social groupings was that of the educated elite or 
intelligentsia. As noted earlier, the number of Africans receiving 
education in the colonial period was so small that anyone who went to 
school was privileged and belonged to an elite. There were only a few 
lawyers and doctors, concentrated mainly in North and West Africa. 
Generally speaking, the intelligentsia were students, clerks and 
teachers. The group of the educated also overlapped with that of 
organised labour leadership, with the traditional African ruling stratum, 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (96 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 417 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
with ex-servicemen and police, and with traders and independent 
craftsmen.
Altogether, the educated played a role in African independence 
struggles far out of proportion to their numbers, because they took it 
upon themselves and were called upon to articulate the interests of all 
Africans. They were also required to provide the political organisation 
that would combine all the contradictions of colonialism and focus on 
the main contradiction, which was that between the colony and the 
metropole.
The contradiction between the educated and the colonialists was not the 
most profound. Ultimately, it was possible for the colonisers to 
withdraw and to satisfy the aspirations of most of the African 
intelligentsia, without in any way relieving the peasant and worker 
majority, who were the most exploited and the most oppressed. 
However, while the differences lasted between the colonisers and the 
African educated, they were decisive.
It has already been argued at some length that colonial education 
reached a limited number of Africans, that it was restricted to 
elementary levels, and that its pedagogical and ideological content was 
such as to serve the interests of Europe rather than Africa. Even so, the 
numbers enrolled would have been much smaller, were it not for efforts 
on the part of Africans themselves. The secondary school opportunities 
would have been narrower, and the ideological content would have 
been more negative, if the activity of the African masses were not in 
constant contradiction to the aims of European colonisers. Above all, 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (97 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 418 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
education for continued enslavement never quite fulfilled its purpose; 
and, instead, different levels of contradiction arose-leading to 
independence, and in some cases heralding a new Socialist epoch by the 
end of colonialism.
If there is anything glorious about the history of African colonial 
education, it lies not in the crumbs which were dropped by European 
exploiters, but in the tremendous vigour displayed by Africans in 
mastering the principles of the system that had mastered them. In most 
colonies, there was an initial period of indifference towards school 
education, but once it was understood that schooling represented one of 
the few avenues of advance within colonial society, it became a 
question of Africans clamouring and pushing the colonialists much 
further than they intended to go.
When Africans took great pains to enter the cash crop economy, that 
generally suited European capitalist ends. But, African initiatives in the 
sphere of education were producing results antagonistic to at least some 
of the purposes of colonial exploitation.
Education in French colonial Africa has been referred to several times 
from the viewpoint of French policy. French administrators also 
commented on African efforts to go beyond the limited number of 
cadres that the French had in mind, and whom the French were 
prepared to subsidise out of African taxes. In 1930, the Governor-
General of French West Africa reported that:
Each new school that is opened is immediately filled to overflowing. 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (98 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 419 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Everywhere, natives in their multitude are clamouring to be educated. 
Here, a Chief wants a school of his own, so he builds it; or again, some 
village or other may offer to bear the cost of fitting out a school. At certain 
places on the Ivory Coast, the villagers pay the teachers out of their own 
pockets. Our pupils often come from distances of 20 to 50 kilometres.
African enthusiasm in seeking more and higher education was not 
confined to any part of the continent; although in some parts it was 
manifested at an earlier date and more intensively. For instance, the 
Gold Coast and Sierra Leone had a tradition of European education 
going hack to the 17th century. Therefore, it was not at all surprising 
that in 1824 the Times Educational Supplement commented that there 
was a universal demand for better and more education on the Gold 
Coast. It was the Gold Coast which produced J. E. K. Aggrey, that 
distinguished African educator and nationalist; and he fired the 
imagination of Africans well beyond the Gold Coast, in so far as formal 
education was concerned.
There was a definite correlation between the degree of colonial 
exploitation and the amount of social services provided. That applied to 
education in particular, so that urban, mining and cash crop areas had a 
virtual monopoly of schools. That was partly due to the capitalist policy 
of enhancing the labour power of workers, but it was also the 
consequence of efforts made by Africans inside the cash economy. 
They made demands on the colonial administration, and they also went 
through a great deal of sacrifice and self-denial to get more school 
places. Thus, one finds that Ibos who were earning income from palm 
oil deployed a significant proportion of their small earnings into 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (99 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 420 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
building schools, usually in association with the church. Incidentally, it 
should be noted here that what were called church or mission schools 
were often entirely financed by Africans. They paid church dues, they 
made donations for the church harvest, they sometimes contributed to a 
special education fund, and they often paid school fees. That pattern 
was widespread in Iboland, and it was not uncommon in other parts of 
colonial Africa. The existence of schools should be traced through the 
church back to palm oil and the people’s labour. Indeed, it must not be 
forgotten that missionaries, administrators, white settlers — the whole 
lot — were living off African labour and resources. In the cash crop 
areas of British Africa, it also became the practice to try and use the 
agricultural produce boards and similar institutions to finance 
education. After all, the agricultural Boards were supposed to have been 
established in the interest of peasant producers. They concentrated on 
exporting surplus in the form of dollar reserves for Britain; but, towards 
the end of colonial rule in the self-government epoch, it was too much 
of a scandal to avoid giving Africans some small part of the benefits of 
their labour, and so the produce Boards were prevailed upon to make 
some funds available for education. For example, in 1953 the Uganda 
Legislative Council voted to spend about £11 million from the Cotton 
Price Stabilisation Fund on welfare schemes, with agricultural 
education receiving a big slice.
Among those Africans who did somewhat better than their brothers 
financially, some philanthropy was expressed in terms of helping 
African children go lo school. The historical records of African 
education under colonial rule reveal certain tit-bits, such as the fact that 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (100 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 421 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
the first secondary school was established in Somalia in 1949 not by the 
colonial administration or on the initiative of the church but by a 
Somali trader. Of course, it is still expected in Africa that anyone who 
is already educated and is earning a salary should in turn help to 
educate at least one more member of his extended family. That is 
precisely because his extended family and his village community often 
made sacrifices to allow him to be educated in the first place. That was 
as true in Mauretania as it was in the reserves of South Africa, and no 
African would have any difficulty in supplying his own examples to 
that effect.
There are now available a number of biographies of Africans who 
gained prominence in the colonial period, usually in the movement for 
the regaining of African independence. It invariably emerges from 
reading such biographies how much of a struggle it was to be educated 
in colonial times. The same conclusion can be reached through reading 
the modern African novel, because the novelist (while writing what is 
called ‘fiction’) is concerned with capturing reality. Apologists for 
colonialism talk as though education were a big meal handed down to 
Africans on a platter. It was not. The educational crumbs dropped were 
so small that individuals scrambled for them; they saved incredibly 
from small earnings and sent their children to school; and African 
children walked miles to and from school, and thought nothing of it.
But, apart from physical and financial sacrifices, Africans in some 
colonies had to wage a political battle to have the principle of African 
education accepted. The colonies in question were those with white 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (101 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 422 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
settler populations.
In Kenya, white settlers made it clear that as far as they were 
concerned, an uneducated African was better than an educated one, and 
that one with the rudiments of education was at least preferable to one 
with more than a few years of schooling. The Beecher report on 
education in Kenya (produced in 1949) was heavily influenced by white 
settlers, and it stated frankly:
Illiterates with the right attitude to manual employment are preferable to 
products of the schools who are not readily disposed to enter manual 
employment.
Because the white settlers were close to the centre of political power in 
the colonial system, they were able to apply their principles to 
education in Kenya; and very little education went to Africans. In 
effect, that meant an exception to the rule that more social facilities 
followed heightened exploitation; but, the Kikuyu (who were the most 
exploited in Kenya) did not accept the situation passively. One line of 
approach was to bombard the colonial government with demands, even 
though Africans were in a far less favourable position to do so than 
white settlers. The demands were partially successful. The Beecher 
report grudgingly conceded a few schools to Africans at the primary 
and secondary level, by suggesting places for 40% of African children 
at junior primary, 10% at senior primary or intermediate, and 1% at 
secondary level. But, by 1960, the number of primary schools was 
double what the whites considered should have been achieved by that 
date, and the number of secondary institutions was three times what the 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (102 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 423 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
white settlers had succeeded in recommending.
Besides, where the government was reluctant to build schools or to 
subsidise missionaries to do so with African taxes, there was an even 
greater incentive to handle educational matters directly. In Kenya, there 
was a spate of what came to be called Independent Schools, comparable 
to the Independent churches, and, in fact, springing from Independent 
churches for the most part. The Independent schools in 292
Kenya formed two major associations: namely, the Kikuyu Independent 
Schools Association and the Kikuyu Karinga Education Association, 
formed in 1929.
In practice, just as the European Christian missions used schools to 
attract converts, so the Independent churches attached great importance 
to schooling. John Chilembwe made striking efforts in that respect, 
aided by brothers recruited from among African descendants in the 
U.S.A.
The Muslim religion was also a stimulator of educational advance 
during the colonial period. In North Africa, Muslims often found it 
necessary to channel their efforts into schools other than those built by 
the colonialists. The Society of Reformist Ulema in Algeria started a 
large primary school programme in 1936. By 1955, its primary schools 
catered for 45,000 Algerian children; and, from 1947, the Society also 
ran a large secondary school. Similarly, in Tunisia, popular initiative 
financed modern Koranic primary schools, providing places for 35,000 
children — equivalent to one out of four going to primary school.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (103 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 424 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
In Morocco, the Muslim schools that were established by popular effort 
possessed the unusual feature of aiming at women’s emancipation by 
having a high percentage of girls far higher than government schools. 
The French colonial administration deliberately kept mention of such 
schools out of their official reports, and they tried to keep their 
existence hidden from visitors.
Another striking example of African self-help with regards to education 
was the project sponsored by the Graduates’ General Congress in 
Sudan. Founded by students, merchants and civil servants in 1937, the 
Graduates’ Congress embarked on a programme of school building. 
Within four years, 100 schools were opened with the help of voluntary 
contributions. A smaller but equally exciting experiment was that of the 
Bugabo United Schoolboys Association, founded by two schoolboys in 
Mwanza, Tanganyika in 1947. It was aimed at adult education and in a 
short time attracted over 1,000 people of all ages. The organisers set up 
a camp where they housed and fed those who turned up, while 
imparting to them the rudiments of literacy.
When Kikuyu peasants or Ga market women or Kabyle shepherds 
saved to build schools and educate their children, that was not entirely 
in accordance with the objective of the colonialists, who wanted cash 
crop payments and other money in circulation to return as profits to the 
metropoles through the purchase of consumer goods. In such small 
ways, therefore, Africans were establishing an order of priorities 
different from that of the colonialists. This intensified in the later years 
of colonialism, when education came to be seen as having political 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (104 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 425 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
significance in the era of self-government.
Having received higher education in colonial Africa in the post second 
World War era, a French African could reach as far as the French 
Assembly in Paris, while an English colonial subject might reach the 
local Legislative Assembly as an elected or nominated member. Those 
openings were absolutely devoid of power, and they were opportunities 
that only the merest handful could achieve; but they were stimulants, 
nonetheless, giving Africans the notion that considerable vertical 
mobility would accompany education. In French Equatorial Africa in 
the late 1940s, it was the African Governor, Felix Eboué, who 
spearheaded the demands for more education for Africans, and he was 
successful to some extent in forcing the hand of his masters in the 
French Overseas Ministry. In that same period and subsequently, it was 
also African effort in the Legislative Councils that kept the question of 
education to the fore. The British had handpicked a few educated 
Africans and some ‘chiefs’ to advise the Governor in the Legislative 
Assembly. Generally, they were decorative like the plumes on the 
Governor’s helmet; but, on the issue of education, no African could 
possibly avoid at least voicing some dissatisfaction with the poor state 
of affairs.
Ultimately, from a purely quantitative viewpoint, Africans pushed the 
colonialists and the British in particular to grant more education than 
was allowed for within the colonial system, and that was an important 
and explosive contradiction that helped Africans regain political 
independence.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (105 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 426 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
It has been observed that British colonies tended to create an educated 
sector that was larger than that which the colonial economy could 
absorb. The explanation for that lies in the efforts of African people, 
although it is true that the French were more rigorous in rejecting 
African demands, and keeping to their schedule of training only a cadre 
elite to serve French interests. As it was, in a colony such as Gold 
Coast, African efforts to achieve education undoubtedly went beyond 
the numbers required to service the economy. Gold Coast was one of 
the first colonies to experience the ‘crisis of primary school leavers’ or 
‘the secondary school bottleneck’. That is to say, among those leaving 
primary schools, many were frustrated because they could not find 
places in secondary schools, nor could they find jobs in keeping with 
the values they had obtained in school and in keeping with the internal 
stratification of African society caused by capitalism.
It is sometimes said that Kwame Nkrumah organised the illiterates in 
the Convention People’s Party. That was a charge contemptuously 
made by other conservative educated Ghanaians, who thought that 
Nkrumah was going too far too fast. In reality, the shock troops in 
Nkrumah’s youth brigade were not illiterate. They had been to primary 
school, and could read the manifestoes and the literature of the African 
nationalist revolution. But, they were extremely disaffected because 
(among other things) they were relative latecomers on the educational 
scene in Cold Coast, and there was no room in the restricted African 
establishment of the cocoa monoculture.
Colonial powers aimed at giving a certain amount of education to keep 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (106 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 427 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
colonialism functioning; Africans by various means required more 
education at the lower level than their ‘allowance’, and this was .one of 
the factors which brought about deep crisis, and forced the British to 
consider the idea of withdrawing their colonial apparatus from Gold 
Coast. The time-table for independence was also speeded up against the 
will of the British. As is well known, the regaining of independence in 
Ghana was not just a local affair, but one that was highly significant for 
Africa as a whole ; and it therefore highlights the importance of at least 
one of the educational contradictions in bringing about political 
independence in Africa.
The Gold Coast colony was not the only one in which there appeared 
the problem of bottleneck, because of the shallowness of the 
educational pyramid. In the area that was once the colonial Federation 
of the Rhodesias and Nyasaland, educators in the 1950s were 
commenting on the primary school-leavers crisis. They claimed to have 
had a surplus of primary 6 leavers. A set of colonies that was educating 
an insignificant number of African school children had a surplus of 
primary school-leavers! All it meant is that colonialism was so bankrupt 
and had so underdeveloped Africa that it had no use for more than a 
handful of educated. Furthermore, the colonialists had assured every 
struggling African that, if he endured missionary education, he would 
be given a white-collar job and a passport to civilisation; but, on leaving 
school, African youth found the promises to be false. One Standard 6 
leaver in the Central African Federation wrote the following letter to a 
magazine in 1960:
After I had passed Standard 6, I spent the whole year at home because I 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (107 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 428 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
could not get a place anywhere to further my education. At the beginning 
of this year I went to look for work but failed to get it again, from January 
until now. If I had known that my education would have been useless, I 
would have told my father not to waste his money in educating me from 
the beginning to Standard 6.
It would be fairly reasonable to assume that the writer of that letter 
opposed the white settler Central African Federation. Whether or not he 
consciously rationalised the matter, he was bound to act as a product of 
the deep contradictory forces within colonialism — forces which had 
produced the discrepancy between promise and fulfilment, in terms of 
his own personal life.
Occasionally, the frustrated school-leavers might vent their sentiments 
in a non-constructive manner. For instance, the problem of the 
bottleneck in education and employment arose in Ivory Coast by 1958; 
and, in a context of confused African leadership, the youth of Ivory 
Coast decided that their enemy was the group of Dahomians and 
Senegalese who were employed in Ivory Coast. However, on the whole, 
the situation of frustration aided Africans to perceive more clearly that 
the enemy was the colonial power, and it therefore added another 
platform to the movement for regaining African independence.
Africans clashed with the colonial structure not just over the quantity of 
education, but also over the quality. One of the key topics for 
disagreement was colonial agricultural education, to which reference 
has already been made. The colonialists seemed surprised that a 
continent of agriculturalists should reject education which was 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (108 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 429 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
supposedly intended to raise the level of their agriculture. Indeed, some 
Africans carne out against agricultural education and other reforms to 
‘Africanise’ curricula, for what appears to have been selfish elitist 
reasons. For instance, one Guinean demanded that there should not be a 
single change from the teaching programme as used in metropolitan 
France. ‘We want a metropolitan curriculum and the same diplomas as 
in France, for we are as French as the French of the metropoles’, he 
declared. In Tanganyika, during German days, there were also protests 
against changing the formal and literary educational programme, as it 
had been introduced body and soul from Europe. A prominent 
Tanganyikan African, Martin Kayamba, asserted that:
those who think that literary education is unsuitable for Africans ignore 
the fact of its importance and indispensability to any sort of education, and 
therefore deny the Africans the very means of progress.
Statements such as the above have to be seen in their correct context to 
understand that the African response was perfectly justified. The 
colonialist value system assigned a low value to manual activity and a 
high value to white-collar bureaucratic work. Even more important, the 
colonial economy offered discriminating compensation to those who 
had literary or ‘bookish’ education, as opposed to those with manual 
skills. It was extremely difficult to convince any sane African that 
education which would send him to dig the soil to get 100/- at the end 
of the year was more appropriate than education which qualified him to 
work in the civil service for 100/- per month. When Europeans 
preached that brand of wisdom, Africans were suspicious.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (109 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 430 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Africans were very suspicious about taxes in the colonial era. They 
never wanted to be counted, nor did they want their chickens to be 
counted, because bitter experience had shown them that that was how 
the colonialists assessed taxes. Similarly, on educational issues, there 
was no confidence in colonial plans to provide different versions of 
education, because such plans almost invariably meant an even more 
inferior education, and one that was more blatantly intended to be 
education for underdevelopment. The most extreme example of a 
colonial education system designed to train Africans to fill their 
‘natural’ role of manual labourers was that in South Africa, after the 
introduction of the Bantu Education Act in 1953. However, the earlier 
attempts by the British and French to set up what they called ‘farm 
schools’ or ‘initiation schools’ were along the same lines as have since 
been ruthlessly pursued by the racists in South Africa. The non-literary 
education had the superficial appearance of being more relevant to 
Africa, but it was really inferior education for a people who were 
supposedly inferior in order to make them accept their own exploitation 
and oppression. As Abdou Moumini put it, ‘colonial education was “cut-
rate” education’. It offered, by European standards low-quality 
substitutes to suit what was described as the limited intellectual capacity 
of Africans. In French colonial Africa, the diplomas were seldom equal 
to those in the metropoles at comparable levels, and in British East 
Africa one official asked educators to bear in mind the gap between 
themselves and the ‘grubby savages’ whom Britain was attempting to 
civilise. It is in this context that agricultural education in particular 
revealed itself as an exercise in deception.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (110 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 431 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Consequently, the struggle against agricultural or rural schools was one 
of the most bitter struggles waged by African nationalists, and helped 
heighten consciousness at all levels of African society, with regard to 
the fundamentally exploitative and racist nature of colonialism. In 
French West Africa, for example, the farm schools were determinedly 
opposed after the last war, and the French colonial government had to 
abolish them. In Tanganyika and Nyasa, the confrontation between the 
colonialists and the African people was much bigger, because 
opposition to agricultural education was associated with opposition to 
colonial agricultural innovations (such as terracing) which were forced 
upon people without consultation and without taking into account the 
varying conditions in different localities.
In East Africa the British made a few determined efforts to introduce 
what they considered as relevant agricultural education. One pilot 
scheme was at Nyakato in Tanganyika, which involved transforming a 
secondary school into an agricultural school in 1930. It lasted for nine 
years with tutors recruited from Britain and South Africa, but in the end 
the attempt failed because of protest by students and the population of 
the region. Although the school claimed to be offering new agricultural 
skills, it was readily recognised that it was part of a programme 
defining the ‘correct attitudes’ and ‘natural place’ which Europeans 
thought fit for the natives.
In the 1940s, as Africans sought to change features of the educational 
system, they naturally had to demand a voice in councils that 
formulated educational policy. That was in itself a revolutionary 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (111 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 432 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
demand, because colonial people are supposed to be ruled, not to 
participate in decision-making. Besides, on the issue of educational 
policy-making, Africans not only alarmed the administrators, but they 
trod on the corns of the missionaries, who generally felt that they 
inherited education at the Partition of Africa. All of those clashes were 
pointing in the direction of freedom for colonial peoples, because in the 
background there was always the question of political power.
It would be erroneous to suggest that educated Africans foresightedly 
moved with the intention of regaining African independence. There 
would have been very few indeed who, as early as 1939, would have 
joined Chief Essien of Calabar in asserting that:
Without education it will be impossible for us to get to our destination, 
which is Nigeria’s economic independence and Nigeria’s political 
independence.
However, education (both formal and informal) was a powerful force 
which transformed the situation in post-war Africa in such a way as to 
bring political independence to most of colonised Africa within two 
decades.
There were also a few Europeans who foresaw what were called the 
‘dangers’ of giving Africans a modern education: namely, the 
possibility of its leading towards freedom. Certainly, Europeans were 
not at all happy with any schools which were of the European type, but 
which were not under direct colonialist control. For example, the 
Independent schools of Kenya were disliked by white settlers in that 
colony and by other Europeans outside Kenya. One Catholic mission 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (112 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 433 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
report from nearby Tanganyika in 1933 warned against allowing 
Tanganyika Africans to set up schools controlled by themselves. It 
noted that :
Independent schools are causing difficulties in Kenya. Such schools may 
easily become hot-beds of sedition. 
When the Mau Mau war for land and liberation broke out in Kenya, one 
of the first things the British government did was to close the 149 
schools of the Kikuyu Independent Schools Association, 21 schools of 
the Kikuyu Karinga Education Association, and 14 other Independent 
schools. They were considered ‘training grounds for rebellion’ — a 
term which essentially captures the fear expressed in the Catholic 
mission report just cited. Europeans knew well enough that if they did 
not control the minds of Africans, they would soon cease to control the 
people physically and politically.
Similarly, in North Africa, the French colonial power and the white 
colons or settlers did not take kindly to the self-help schools of the 
colonised Algerians and Tunisians. The purpose of the schools set up by 
the Society of Reformist Ulema in Algeria was that they should be 
modern and scientific, but at the same time present learning in the 
context of Arab and Algerian culture. Pupils at the Ulema schools 
began their lessons by singing together: 
Arabic is my language, Algeria is my country, Islam is my religion. 
It was no wonder, therefore, that the colonialists victimised pupils and 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (113 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 434 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
parents, and took repressive measures on the grounds that those schools 
were also hotbeds of sedition.
The missionaries asked for control of schools, because that was one of 
their drawing cards for the church itself and because they considered 
themselves as experts on the side of cultural imperialism (which they 
called ‘civilising’). However, there were other Europeans both within 
and without the colonies who were absolutely opposed to schools-be 
they Christian, Independent, Government or Islamic. Starting from a 
racist position, they asserted that offering education to Africans was 
like throwing pearls before swine. Some of the most violent expressions 
of racism were directed, against educated Africans. Starting from the 
time of individuals like Lord Lugard and through to the days of the last 
colonial administrators like Sir Alan Burns, many colonialists 
demonstrated hostility to educated Africans. Educated Africans made 
colonialists extremely uneasy, because they did not conform to the 
image which Europeans liked to harbour of the ‘unspoilt African 
savage’.
But, if one goes to the heart of the matter, it can be discerned that the 
white racists. did not seriously believe that Africans could not master 
knowledge then in the possession of Europeans. On the contrary, the 
evidence of educated Africans was before their eyes; and the white 
settlers especially feared that, given an opportunity, far too many 
Africans would master white bourgeois knowledge too thoroughly. 
Such Africans would, therefore, refuse to work as agricultural labourers 
for 12/- per month; they would compete with Europeans in semi-skilled 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (114 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 435 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
and skilled categories; and above all they would want to govern 
themselves.
In the records of colonialism, it is not uncommon to encounter the 
following type of remark:
What need is there to educate the natives?
You will give them the weapons to destroy you! 
In one sense, those Europeans were simply dreamers, because giving 
education to Africans was not an option which could have been 
avoided; it was an objective necessity to keep colonialism functioning. 
P. E. Mitchell, who later became Governor of Uganda, remarked in 
1928 that ‘regret it ay he may, no Director of Education can resist the 
demand for clerks, carpenters, shoemakers and so on-trained in 
European methods to meet European needs. These men are not being 
trained to fit into any place in the life of their own people, but to meet 
the economic needs of a foreign race.’ At the same time, the available 
education was also a consequence of the irrepressible actions of the 
African people, who hoped to move forward within the alien system. 
So, those Europeans who were absolutely opposed to giving education 
to Africans did not understand the contradictions of their own colonial 
society. But in another sense they were defending the interests of 
colonialism. Firstly, however much the colonialists tried, they could not 
succeed in shaping the minds of all Africans whom they educated in 
schools. The exceptions were the ones who were going to prove most 
dangerous to colonialism, capitalism and imperialism. And secondly, 
the most timid and the most brainwashed of educated Africans 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (115 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 436 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
harboured some form of disagreement with the colonialists; and, in the 
pursuit of their own group or individual interests, the educated elite 
helped to expose and undermine the structure of colonial rule.
Keeping the above distinction in mind, one can consider both those 
contradictions which arose between the colonisers and the African 
educated as a whole, and those which arose between the colonisers and 
particular individuals among the African educated.
As already noted, insufficient educational facilities and inadequate jobs 
were the complaints raised by the lower echelons of those who were 
educated in Africa during the colonial period. Those who went to 
secondary school or institutions of higher learning found little access to 
remunerative and responsible posts, because they were destined to fill 
the lower ranks of the civil and business administration. After working 
for twenty years, an African in the civil service would have been 
extremely lucky to have become ‘head clerk’, or in the police to have 
become a sergeant. Meanwhile, to add insult to injury, any European 
doing the same job as an African got higher pay; and whites who were 
less qualified and experienced were placed above Africans, who did the 
jobs their superiors were paid to do. In the colonial civil service to be a 
European was enough. It did not matter whether the white person was 
ignorant and stupid, he would be assured of drawing a fat salary and 
enjoying wide privileges. The Guinea-Bissau leader, Amilcar Cabral, 
gave an example of that type:
I was an agronomist working under a European who everybody knew was 
one of the biggest idiots in Guinea; I could have taught him his job with 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (116 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 437 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
my eyes shut but he was the boss: this is something which counts a lot, 
this is the confrontation which really matters.
Questions such as salaries, promotions, leave, allowances, etc., were 
ones which were of paramount interest to most African civil servant 
associations and Welfare or ‘Improvement’ Associations. There should 
be no illusions concerning the factor of self-interest. But, their 
complaints were justified in terms of the discrepancy between their 
living standards and those of white expatriates or settlers, as well as in 
terms of the ideology of the very bourgeoisie who had colonised Africa. 
The educational process had equipped a few Africans with a grasp of 
the international community and of bourgeois democracy, and there was 
a most unsatisfactory credibility gap between the ideals of bourgeois 
democracy and the existence of colonialism as a system which negated 
freedom. Inevitably, the educated started gravitating in the direction of 
claims for national independence, just as educated Indians had done 
much earlier on the Indian sub-continent.
According to official Spanish sources, it is said that the school system 
in Spanish Guinea achieved all that the colonisers expected of it. It 
produced the required Africans who loved Spaniards more than the 
Spaniards loved themselves, but it produced no opponents of the 
colonial regime. Ii is difficult to believe the truth of such an assertion; 
and the Spanish took good care that no one from outside got wind of 
what things were like in the small Spanish colonies in Africa. However, 
if it were true that the colonial educational system in Spanish Guinea 
created only whitewashed Africans according to plan, then that would 
represent an outstanding exception to the general rule. Wherever 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (117 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 438 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
adequate evidence is available, it shows that the cultural imperialism of 
colonial education was successful in large measure, but was never 
entirely successful. It produced according to plan many ‘loyal Kikuyu’, 
‘Capicornists’, ‘Anglophiles’, ‘Francophiles’, M.B.E.s, etc.; but it also 
produced in spite of itself those Africans whom the colonialists called 
‘upstarts’, ‘malcontents’, ‘agitators’, ‘communists’, ‘terrorists’, etc.
From the viewpoint of the colonialists, trouble often started with 
African students before they had completed studies. The Sudan, for 
example, has a history of nationalist student protests; and Madagascar 
was outstanding in that respect. From the early years of this century, a 
politicised student movement was growing in Madagascar, in spite of 
specific steps taken by two French governors. By 1816, Malagasy 
students had organised the Vy Vato society, seeking to kick out the 
French. When the Vy Vato was discovered, students were brutally 
suppressed. However, as so often happens, students gained inspiration 
from the martyrdom of their fellows, and they re-surfaced at a later date 
on the nationalist scene.
Students who were taken to universities in the metropoles were the 
most favoured and the most pampered of the Africans selected by the 
white colonial overlords to become Europeanised; and yet they were 
among the first to argue vocally and logically that the liberty, equality, 
and fraternity about which they were taught should apply to Africa. 
African students in France in the post-war years were placed carefully 
within the ranks of the then conservative French national student body, 
but they soon rebelled and formed the Federation of Students of Black 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (118 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 439 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
Africa (FEANF), which became affiliated to the communist 
International Union of Students. In Britain, African students formed a 
variety of ethnic and nationalist organisations, and participated in the 
Pan-African movement. After all, most of them were sent there to study 
British Constitution and Constitutional Law, and (for what it is worth) 
the word ‘freedom’ appears in those contexts rather often!
The fascists who ruled Africans at some points during the colonial 
epoch tried to avoid bourgeois democratic ideals altogether. For 
example, while the Italian fascists were in charge of Somalia between 
1922 and 1941, they took away from history text-books all references to 
Mazzini and Garibaldi, two key leaders of the democratic wing of the 
Italian nationalist movement of the 19th century. Yet, the clerks and 
NCOs who received that education nevertheless went into the Somali 
Youth League and fought for Independence at the head of popular 
forces.
The fact of the matter is that it was not really necessary to get the idea 
of freedom from a European book. What the educated African extracted 
from European schooling was a particular formulation of the concept of 
political freedom. But, it did not take much to elicit a response from 
their own instinctive tendency for freedom; and, as has just been noted 
in the Somali instance, that universal tendency to seek freedom 
manifested itself among Africans even when the most careful steps 
were taken to extinguish it.
There was no sector of colonial life in which educated Africans 
appeared and remained wholly loyal to the colonialists. Teachers were 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (119 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 440 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
supposed to have been steeped in the culture of domination, so as to 
pass it on to other Africans; but, in the end, many of them stood in the 
vanguard of the national independence movements. African priests and 
pastors were supposed to have been the loyal servants of God and bis 
European lieutenants, but the church gave birth in Nyasaland to John 
Chilembwe, as early as the first World War. Shortly afterwards, in 
Congo, when Simon Kimbangu started his Independent church, he 
actually threatened the colonialists that he would introduce 
Bolshevikism!
It is particularly interesting to notice that the colonialists could not be 
sure of the loyalty of their African troops. It has already been argued 
that the army and police were educational and socialising institutions to 
perpetuate colonialist and capitalist power and values. How 
successfully they served that function can be seen in the number of 
veterans of Burma and Indo-China who returned to the continent to 
loyally carry out policies of Britain and France, respectively. Colonel 
Bokassa of the Central African Republic and Colonel Lamizana of 
Upper Volta provide two outstanding examples, both of them having 
graduated from fighting the Vietnamese to a point where they are 
prepared to dialogue with the fascist apartheid state of South Africa. 
However, returned soldiers also played a very positive role in the 
national independence struggles after both wars. And, occasionally, 
towards the end of colonial rule, African troops and police mutinied, as 
in Nyasaland in 1959.
African trade unionists also went to ‘school’ under colonialism. To 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (120 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 441 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
begin with, the organisation and activity of the small wage-earning 
sector in Africa bothered the colonialists a great deal. Their initial 
desire was to crush worker dissent, and (when that appeared unlikely to 
succeed) to co-opt it and guide it along ‘acceptable’ channels.
The British Trade Union Council sponsored a number of African trade 
unions, and tried to get them to accept a rigid separation between 
industrial matters (such as wages and working hours) and political 
matters. But, the T.U.C. was in that context acting on behalf of the 
British bourgeoisie, and they did not succeed in holding back the 
working class in Africa. African workers were able to appreciate that 
there was no difference between the private employers and the colonial 
administration. Indeed, the colonial administration was itself one of the 
biggest employers, against whom workers had many charges. 
Consequently, in the 1940s and 1950s, it was common to have strikes 
that were specifically connected with the struggle for independence, 
notably in Gold Coast, Nigeria and Sudan.
The contradiction between French workers and African workers in 
French colonies emerged in a very acute form. The French trade union 
movement (and notably the Communist Union, the C.G.T.) insisted that 
Africans should not have separate unions, but should be members of 
French labour unions — just like any other French workers. That 
arrangement gave support to the juridicial political fiction that places 
like Dahomey and Comoro Islands were not colonies, but merely the 
overseas section of France. Sekou Touré of Guinea was one of the first 
to break with the patronage of French trade unions and to establish an 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (121 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 442 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
independent African trade union. In so doing, Sekou Touré made it 
clear that the principal contradiction of the colonial situation was that 
between colonised peoples on the one hand and the colonising nation on 
the other. So long as African workers remain colonised, they had to 
think of themselves firstly as African workers, rather than members of 
an international proletariat. That interpretation, which was entirely in 
accordance with reality, led to the trade union movement taking on a 
highly politicised and nationalist role in French West Africa. It was an 
achievement which defeated the chauvinism of white French workers as 
well as the class interests of the French bourgeoisie.
The attitude of the white metropolitan working class towards their 
African counterparts was influenced by the prevailing racist values of 
capitalist society. Indeed, the racist factor heightened the principal 
contradiction between the colonisers and the colonised. Discriminatory 
racist methods and measures were found in every colony — with 
varying degrees of openness or hypocrisy. Sometimes, white racism 
was vicious and at other times it was paternalist. Nor did it necessarily 
reflect Europe’s desire to exploit Africans economically. In Southern 
Rhodesia, racial discrimination was very much tied up with the white 
settlers maintaining their jobs and the stolen land; but when some semi-
literate white inspector insulted an educated Sierra Leonean that may be 
referred to as ‘gratuitous’. Racism in such a context actually 
jeopardised economic exploitation, and it was merely the manifestation 
of prejudices that had grown over the centuries.
The racial contradiction extended far beyond the shores of Africa, 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (122 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 443 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
because of the historical antecedence of the slave trade. It is not in the 
least surprising that Pan-African ideas should have been most forcefully 
expressed by West Indians like Garvey and Padmore and North 
Americans like W.E.B. Dubois and Alpheus Hunton. Those individuals 
had all been educated within the international capitalist structure of 
exploitation on the basis of class and race. Having realised that their 
inferior status in the societies of America was conditioned by the fact of 
being black and the weakness of Africa, the Pan-Africanists were 
forced to deal with the central problem of Europe’s exploitation and 
oppression of the African continent. Needless to say, the metropolitan 
powers could never have foreseen that their humiliation of millions of 
Africans in the New World would ultimately rebound and help Africa 
to emancipate itself.
The process by which Africa produced thirty-odd sovereign states was 
an extremely complex one, characterised by an interplay of forces and 
calculations on the part of various groups of Africans, on the part of the 
colonial powers, and on the part of interest groups inside the 
metropoles. African independence was affected by international events 
such as the second World War, the rise of the Soviet Union, the 
independence of India and China, the people’s liberation movement in 
Indochina, and the Bandung Conference. On the African continent 
itself, the ‘domino theory’ operated, so that the re-emergence of Egypt 
under Nasser, the early independence of Ghana, Sudan and Guinea, and 
the nationalist wars in Kenya and Algeria all helped to knock down the 
colonies which remained standing. However, it must be stressed that the 
move for the regaining of independence was initiated by the African 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (123 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 444 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
people; and, to whatever extent that objective was realised, the motor 
force of the people must be taken into account.
In a conference held by the French in Brazzaville in 1948 (and chaired 
by General de Gaulle), it was explicitly stated that ‘the establishment, 
even in the distant future, of self-government in the colonies is to be 
avoided’. As is well known, the French eventually considered the idea 
of conceding independence to African peoples after being taught a 
salutary lesson by the Algerian people. Moreover, when Guinea chose 
independence in 1958 rather than accept to be permanently a footstool 
for France, the French administrators literally went crazy and behaved 
like wild pigs before sailing from Guinea. They just could not cope with 
the idea of African independence.
Apart from the Portuguese, the Belgians were the colonialists who were 
the most reluctant in withdrawing in the face of African nationalism. In 
1955, a Belgian professor suggested independence for the Congo in 
thirty years, and he was regarded as a radical! Of course, Congo turned 
out to be one of the places where imperialism was successful in 
hijacking the African revolution. But, the order of events must still be 
considered. Firstly, it was the intensity of the Congolese and African 
demands that made independence thinkable, as far as the Belgians were 
concerned; and, secondly, it was precisely the strength and potential of 
the nationalist movement under Lumumba which forced the imperialists 
to resort to murder and invasion.
The British make much of the fact that they conceded the idea of self-
government immediately after the last war; but self-government was a 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (124 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 445 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
long cry from independence, and the notion of training people for 
independence was nothing but a political gimmick. Lady Margery 
Perham, a true voice of patronising colonialism, admitted that the 
Colonial Office’s timetable for independence had to be scrapped in the 
face of the mobilised African people. For that matter, even African 
leaders never hoped to achieve national sovereignty as rapidly as they 
did, until the mass parties began to roll like boulders down a hillside.
The fact that this analysis has been focussed on the role of the educated 
Africans in the independence movements is not intended to detract from 
the vital activity of the broad African masses, including the sacrifice of 
life and limb. In brief, it is enough to say that the African people as a 
collective had upset the plans of the colonialists, and had surged 
forward to freedom. Such a position may seem to be a mere revival of a 
certain rosy and romantic view of African independence which was 
popular in the early 1960s, but, on the contrary, it is fully cognisant of 
the shabby reality of neo-colonial Africa. It needs to be affirmed (from 
a revolutionary, socialist, and people-centred perspective) that even 
‘flag independence’ represented a positive development out of 
colonialism.
Securing the attributes of sovereignty is but one stage in the process of 
regaining African independence. By 1885, when Africa was politically 
and juridically partitioned, the peoples and polities had already lost a 
great deal of freedom. In its relations with the external world, Africa 
had lost a considerable amount of control over its own economy, ever 
since the 15th century. However, the loss of political sovereignty at the 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (125 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 446 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
time of the Scramble was decisive. By the same reasoning, it is clear 
that the regaining of political sovereignty by the 1960s constitutes an 
inescapable first step in regaining maximum freedom to choose and to 
develop in all spheres.
Furthermore, the period of nationalist revolution gave rise to certain 
minority ideological trends, which represent the roots of future African 
development. Most African leaders of the intelligentsia and even of the 
labour movement were frankly capitalist, and shared fully the ideology 
of their bourgeois masters. Houphouet Boigny was at one time called a 
‘Communist’ by the French colonisers! He defended himself vigorously 
against that false charge in 1948:
We have good relations with the (French) Communist Party, that is true. 
But ü is obvious that that does not mean that we ourselves are 
communists. Can it be said that I, Houphouet-Boigny — a traditional 
chief, a doctor of medicine, a big property owner, a catholic — can it be 
said that I am a communist?
Houphouet-Boigny’s reasoning applied to so many more African 
leaders of the independence epoch. The exceptions were those who 
either completely rejected the world-view of capitalism or at least stuck 
honestly to those idealistic tenets of bourgeois ideology such as 
individual freedom-and, through experience, they could come to realise 
that the ideals remained myths in a society based on the exploitation of 
man by man. Clearly, all leaders of the non-conformist type had 
developed in direct contradiction to the aims of formal and informal 
colonial education; and their differences with the colonisers were too 
profound to have been resolved merely by ‘flag-independence’.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (126 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 447 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
African independence was greeted with pomp, ceremony and a 
resurgence of traditional African music and dance. ‘A new day has 
dawned’, ‘we are on the threshold of a new era’, ‘we have now entered 
into the political kingdom’ — those were the phrases of the day, and 
they were repeated until they became clichés. But, all the to-ing and fro-
ing from Cotonou to Paris and from London to Lusaka and all the 
lowering and raising of flags cannot be said to have been devoid of 
meaning. Withdrawal of the directly-controlled military and juridical 
apparatus of the colonisers was essential before any new alternatives 
could be posed with regard to poetical organisation, social structure, 
economic development, etc.
The above issues were raised most seriously by the minority of African 
leaders who had individually embarked on a non-capitalist path of 
development in their mode of thought; and the problems were 
considered within the context of inequalities and contradictions not just 
between Africa and Europe but also inside Africa, as a refection of four 
centuries of slavery and one century of colonialism. As far as the mass 
of peasants and workers were concerned, the removal of overt foreign 
rule actually cleared the way towards a more fundamental appreciation 
of exploitation and imperialism. Even in territories such as Cameroon, 
where the imperialists brutally crushed peasants and workers and 
installed their own tried and tested puppet, advance had been made in 
so far as the masses had already participated in trying to determine their 
own destiny. That is the element of conscious activity that signifies the 
ability to make history, by grappling with the heritage of objective 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (127 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 448 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
material conditions and social relations.
Brief Guide to Reading
Colonial rule generated a great deal of written material which can serve 
as one of the bases for historical reconstruction. Even the non-specialist 
in African history would be well advised to look at some original 
sources, such as the data compiled by Lard Hailey. Approached with 
care, several of the anthropological texts also yield information and 
insights with regard to detailed changes in African social structures.
Above all, however, the generations who suffered under colonialism are 
still living repositories of the continent’s history. The collective 
knowledge of the African people derived from experience is the most 
authentic basis of the history of the colonial period. Unfortunately, 
much of that experience is not yet written down, but glimpses can be 
got from biographies of prominent Africans such as Namdi Azikiwe, 
Kwame Nkrumah, Oginga Odinga and Kenneth Kaunda, as well as 
from the political writings of these and other leaders — notably 
Mwalimu Nyerere and Sekou Toure. The books by Padmore and 
Hunton mentioned in the literature for Chapter 5 are even more relevant 
in this context.
Jack Woddis, Africa, the Roots of Revolt. 
Jack Woddis, Africa, the Lion Awakes.
Gann and Duignan, The Burden of Empire.
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (128 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 449 ---
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. Walter Rodney 1973
The first author and his works are well known for supporting the 
African anti-colonial stand. The second example is a colonialist 
interpretation which offers a contrast.
Sloan and Kitchen, The Educated African. 
Abdou Moumini, Education in Africa.
For data, the first book is useful. From the viewpoint of analysis, 
Moumini’s book is superb.
Franz Fanon, Black Skins, White Masks. 
Franz Fanon, The Wretched of the Earth. 
Franz Fanon, Towards the African Revolution.
These studies are unique in revealing the psychological aspects of 
enslavement and colonisation as far as Africans are concerned, whether 
in the Americas or on the African continent. Fanon does not have any 
equal in analysing the last stages of African colonialism and the advent 
of neo-colonialism.
 
Table of Contents 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/how-europe/ch06.htm (129 of 129) [8/22/05 11:14:33 AM]


--- PAGE 450 ---
Marxism and Anti-Imperialism in Africa
MIA: Subjects: Africa: Walter Rodney:
 
Walter Rodney
1942-1980
Biography
Works
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa, 1973
 
Marxism and Anti-Imperialism in Africa
 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/rodney-walter/index.htm [8/22/05 11:14:41 AM]


--- PAGE 451 ---
Marxism and Anti-Imperialism in Africa
MIA: Subjects: Africa:
 
Marxism and Anti-
Imperialism in Africa
Kwame Nkrumah (1909-1972)
Biography
African Socialism Revisited, 1967
Archive of Works
Govan Mbeki (1910-2001)
Biography
Archive of Works
Brian Bunting (1920- )
Biography
Archive of Works
Baruch Hirson (1921-1999)
Biography
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/index.htm (1 of 4) [8/22/05 11:14:49 AM]


--- PAGE 452 ---
Marxism and Anti-Imperialism in Africa
Archive of Works
Julius Nyerere (1922-1999)
Biography
Archive of Works
Amilcar Cabral (1924-1973)
Biography
The Weapon of Theory, October 1966
Frantz Fanon (1925-1961)
Biography
Archive of Works
Patrice Lumumba (1925-1961)
Biography
Archive of Works
Joe Slovo (1926-1995)
Biography
Archive of Works
Walter Rodney (1942-1980)
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/index.htm (2 of 4) [8/22/05 11:14:49 AM]


--- PAGE 453 ---
Marxism and Anti-Imperialism in Africa
Biography
Archive of Works
African National Congress
Documents
South African Communist Party
Documents
COSATU
Documents
— Works by Other Writers —
Colin Leys. Underdevelopment in Kenya, 1975 
“Dialego”. Philosophy and Class Struggle, c. 1975 
Mahmood Mamdani. Linking the Urban and the Rural 
Issa Shivji. The Struggle for Democracy 
H.J. and R.E. Simons. Class Struggle & National 
Liberation 
Zwelinzima Vavi. Democracy has by-passed the poor 
Paulo Freire. Pedagogy of the Oppressed 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/index.htm (3 of 4) [8/22/05 11:14:49 AM]


--- PAGE 454 ---
Marxism and Anti-Imperialism in Africa
Christopher Saunders. The Making of the South 
African Past 
Kenan Malik. All cultures are not equal 
Allister Sparks. Rulers selling out the rural poor 
 
For comments, contributions or questions, contact 
Dominic Tweedie.
Algeria History Archive | Subject Archive | M.I.A.
 
http://www.marxists.org/subject/africa/index.htm (4 of 4) [8/22/05 11:14:49 AM]

