=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Walter-Rodney-an-Pan-AfricanIsm-Today.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 37
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:35:46.000176
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Walter Rodney and Pan-Africanism Today 
 
By 
 
Horace G. Campbell 
Professor of African American Studies and Political Science 
Syracuse University 
 
 
 
 
Presentation at the Africana Studies Research Center  
Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 
 
Africana Colloquium Series, September 28, 2005 
 
 
 
Copyright Horace G. Campbell 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This document can be reproduced only with the permission of the copyright owner.  
Further reproduction is prohibited without permission. 
 
Lecture transcribed and edited by: Rosalina Edwards


--- PAGE 2 ---
2 
Welcoming Remarks: Professor Salah Hassan, Director, Africana Studies and 
Research Center, Cornell University  
  
Salah Hassan 
:  
It is with pleasure that I welcome Horace Campbell and also welcome my 
colleague Professor Locksley Edmondson, who will be introducing Horace 
Campbell. Both of them were part of the latest conference on Walter Rodney, 
which, actually proved to be very fruitful in terms of altering the investigation on 
the life and work of Walter Rodney. I guess we will hear about that from both of 
them. Professor Edmondson will now introduce Dr. Horace Campbell, Professor 
Edmondson … 
 
Introduction of Dr. Campbell: Professor Locksley Edmondson, Professor, 
Africana Studies and Research Center, Cornell University 
 
 
Locksley Edmondson 
:  
In introducing Horace, my good friend for many years; we had connected in 
Africa, here in the United States, and original connections were discovered, in 
that we were both born in the same country of Jamaica, and is, therefore, a 
personal privilege and honor to introduce him, as it is personally and 
professionally to be at this symposium celebrating the life of a distinguished 
political activist, a distinguished scholar, thinker, a committed person named 
Walter Rodney, who was assassinated at a very young age of thirty-eight, back 
in 1980, in his native land Guyana, in the Caribbean. It was also my personal 
privilege to have met Walter. 
 
A number of times over the years, he stayed at my home in Uganda when I was 
teaching there. I stayed at his home in Tanzania when he was there. We 
connected in the United States, the Caribbean and other places. We also have to 
mention to our audience that Ali Mazrui is here, because, Ali too knew Walter, 
very, very, well.


--- PAGE 3 ---
3  
There was a major debate which took place back in East Africa, back in the late 
sixties. When I taught there, Ali happened to be the Head of the Department of 
Political Science of Makerere University in Kampala at that time. There was a 
very famous debate between Ali Mazrui and Walter Rodney. You can imagine 
these two intellectual giants coming from very different ideological perspectives, 
but, enriching the academic lives of students and colleagues in East Africa.  
Horace is going to deal with an analysis of Walter’s life and impact on the Pan 
African world. He has agreed that I should give a very brief biographic 
background snapshot, to situate Walter for those who may not know that much 
about him. 
 
Walter Rodney was born in Guyana in 1942. He was assassinated in Guyana in 
1980, at the age of thirty-eight and remarkably, he accomplished so much in so 
little time. It is a very central feat that Martin Luther King, Malcolm X, Bob Marley, 
Frantz Fanon, none of whom reached the age of forty. If you look at it _ at what 
they accomplished before the age of forty, to some of us is remarkable. To some 
of us the age of forty is very young, to some students it may seem a little old, but, 
believe me when you get up to that age, I think you will understand how come so 
much remains lessons for the age, is in itself remarkable. 
 
A distinguished scholar-activist in the tradition of W.E.B.Dubois, C. L. R. James, 
Marcus Garvey, or, George Padmore; he is a very important figure in the context 
of the Caribbean contribution to Pan-Africanism. I want to say one more thing 
about some of his work: the library has put on a display of some of his major 
work and I would like you to go visit it. They have a sign-up sheet, a spread sheet 
with information about their web-site where you can gain access to his work.  
His first major publication, actually, was: The Groundings With My Brothers , 
which he published in 1969, while he was an academic in Jamaica. It was based 
on a number of speeches and statements he made, when grounding with the 
working class and the underprivileged in Jamaica; so much so that he became a 
threat to the Jamaican government. They eventually banned him from returning


--- PAGE 4 ---
4  
to Jamaica. He could not go back there for many years, because, they saw his 
activities as subversive and dangerous and you know that in certain polities, if 
you hook-up too much to the underprivileged, the oppressed and the working-
class, your identification becomes ‘a subversive’. 
 
His first major academic work was: The History of the Upper Guinea Coas t, 
which was published in 1970. It was the outcome of his PhD thesis from the 
University of London. He completed his education at the age of twenty-four _he 
had no time to waste at all. 
 
A third major work he did was: How Europe Underdeveloped Africa , which was 
published by Howard University Press, in 1974. I saw on a web-site recently that 
it remains Howard University’s best seller over the years _ no book has sold 
more copies from Howard University Press as has Walter Rodney’s How Europe 
Underdeveloped Africa .  
 
A fourth publication I want to mention briefly is a monograph which was 
published by the Africana Studies Department at Cornell University. This, as part 
of the Research Publication Monograph Series, when he was a distinguished 
visiting professor, in the mid 1970s. It is called: World War II and the Tanzanian 
Economy . 
 
A fifth important book was: A History of the Guyanese Working People , which 
was published after his death. So, you can see where Walter Rodney stood in 
terms of the research that he did. 
 
I can say that a lot of things has been written about Walter, which is another 
example of his importance as a scholar, as a Pan-African activist, who 
transcended the black world and also lived in so many other parts of the white 
dominant world of North America, Europe and elsewhere.


--- PAGE 5 ---
5 
We, therefore, want to welcome Horace Campbell. He is a professor of Political 
Science at Syracuse University. He has been a friend of Walter for many, many 
years. He is the Chair of the Walter Rodney Commemorative Committee. It was 
my pleasure, as it was Horace’s pleasure to interact with Walter Rodney, in 
Guyana, in June, celebrating or commemorating the twenty-fifth anniversary of 
his assassination and I know he will have something more to say about that.  
Horace’s most recent book is, Reclaiming Zimbabwe: The Exhaustion of the 
Patriarchal Model of Liberation . He is working on a book called: War Against 
the Angolan Peoples . Another work he is working on is: Seeing Through 
Terror: The Caribbean After 911 . He has also completed sections on a book: 
Reconceptualizing Peace in the 21st Century . His most important book, 
undoubtedly is, his: Rasta and Resistance: From Marcus Garvey to Walter 
Rodney . This book is going through its sixth edition, as of now. 
Professor Campbell will now make a presentation on Walter Rodney and Pan-
Africanism today. 
 
Dr. Horace Campbell 
:  
Good afternoon everybody. I would like to first make a request, for those in the 
back, if they could come a bit forward so we could make this a more friendly 
audience … 
 
I want to thank the Africana family and I call it family, because, we go through 
family issues … up and down … in and out, so I want to thank the Africana family 
for providing this opportunity to reflect on the life and work of Walter Rodney. We, 
in the Syracuse Department of African American Studies, share with you the pain 
and the loss of our brother and colleague Professor Don Ohadike. I want to 
communicate from Syracuse, that, although many of us were not here for the 
ceremonies to say goodbye to Professor Ohadike, that we share with you the 
loss and we mourn with you. We want you to continue to, as you have done on 
your web-site, to celebrate his work and to promote the kind of scholarship that 
he stood for. I want to thank Professor Salah Hassan and the Africana Center, for


--- PAGE 6 ---
6 
making this, one of the events in the series of international celebrations of the life 
and work of Walter Rodney. 
 
Professor Hassan, Professor Mazrui, Professor Locksley Edmondson, helped us 
when we were (and still are) in the fund-raising mode to raise funds for holding 
this commemoration. The commemoration, basically, has been to end the silence 
relating to the ideas and work of Walter Rodney, and, not only to end the silence, 
but, to regenerate interest in the life and work of Walter Rodney. Professor 
Mazrui was the patron of our international committee and as we speak, he is 
working with Professor Abdalla Bujra for another major conference on Walter 
Rodney, in Africa. 
 
There have been many commemorative events all over the world, centered on 
Walter Rodney. Tomorrow, there is going to be a conference on Walter Rodney 
at Howard University and they will bring together scholars from the Caribbean 
and from the United States. For those who can make it, on October 21 
st , there 
will be another commemorative event at the Schomburg [Schomburg Center for 
Research in Black Culture Library ], which is part of the New York Library System. 
Howard Dodson, who was associated with Walter Rodney and the Institute of the 
Black World , (Previously of Atlanta), will be hosting that event. What we are 
hoping you will do here, is to consider how you can carry forward the work of 
Walter Rodney, in terms of a scholarly agenda. 
 
Those of us, who are associated with a section of the Pan-African movement, 
would like to focus on the question of Walter Rodney and Pan-Africanism today. 
To consider the question of, what is Pan-Africanism today? And, how would 
Walter Rodney relate to Pan-Africanism at this juncture? Already, Professor 
Locksley Edmondson has given us a biographical sketch of Walter Rodney, 
telling us where he was born, where he studied, where he worked and what he 
published, hence, we will not go through all the details of his life, here. Instead, 
we want to be able to look at how one would conceptualize a different Pan-


--- PAGE 7 ---
7  
Africanism in the Twenty-first Century, and for you, as students in the academy, 
what does it mean to you, in terms of a new research agenda? We want to 
consider, how did Walter Rodney intervene in the Pan-African discussions and 
debates? 
 
In these Pan-African discussions, one of the important essays that Walter 
Rodney wrote was, "Toward the Sixth Pan-African Congress: Aspects of 
International Class Struggle in Africa, the United States and the Caribbean." 
Professor James Turner was one of the leaders of the 6 
th  Pan African Congress 
movement in the 1970s. And thirty years ago, in the spring of 1975, Professor 
Turner, who is here today, facilitated Walter Rodney as a visiting professor here 
at the Africana Center.  As Professor Edmondson already said, the publication of 
"World War II and the Tanzanian Economy," was a monograph that Walter 
Rodney produced and was published by the Africana Center. I would encourage 
all of you to read this monograph, in so far as; this monograph locates the impact 
of wars on African peoples. In so far as there is a major war being prosecuted at 
this very moment. The leaders of the United States call this a war on terror, they 
say that this is a war without borders; how does the Pan-African movement relate 
to the present war? What are the issues of Pan-Africanism today relative to this 
war? How do we define Pan-Africanism? _What are the research agendas? Is 
the Pan Africanism of today the same as the Pan-Africanism of the Nineteen-
hundred _the Pan-Africanism of states, or is there a re-definition of Pan-
Africanism? What lessons can we learn from the history of the Pan-African 
movement? 
 
In my writings, I have a major monograph on Pan-Africanism of the 21 
st  Century. 
(Pan-Africanism, Pan Africanists, and African Liberation in the 21st 
Century ). 1 We are beginning to speak about Pan-Africanism from above, that is, 
Pan-Africanism of the intellectuals, the Pan-Africanism of Congresses. Pan-
                                                 
1  Horace G. Campbell, Pan-Africanism, Pan Africanists, and African Liberation in the 21st Century:  
Two Lectures by Horace Campbell, Rodney Worrell, New Academia Publishing, Washington DC 2006


--- PAGE 8 ---
8  
Africanism from bellow is a Pan-Africanism that manifest itself in the daily lives of 
the people, and that Pan-Africanism from below goes back to the simple 
definition of Pan-Africanism. 
 
Pan-Africanism is a search for dignity by African peoples. That search for dignity 
has gone through many different iterations in the past five-hundred years. It had 
many different meanings for the enslaved, who were one of the first articulators 
of Pan-Africanism in the new world. The enslaved wanted to elevate their 
humanity on a plane which used their spiritual essence, their spiritual being, to 
maintain their humanity. That spiritual essence, that spiritual being manifested 
itself in the diversity of religious observances, religious reflections, and it erupted 
from time to time in an emotional and spiritual voice, which is what is called the 
music of the African people. At any moment that the enslaved wanted to rebel, 
that spiritual essence was manifested in spiritual-religious movements, whether it 
was Candomble or Voodoo, or the uprisings in Jamaica, or the uprisings in the 
United States of America, whether Hoodoo, Voodoo or Rastafari. The spiritual 
essence of the people meant that the enslaved were asserting that aspect of the 
Pan-African movement which dealt with the question of the cultural, 
psychological and historical unity of the African peoples. It is Cheikh Anta Diop 
who dealt with this question of cultural unity. Cheikh Anta Diop went into three 
aspects of this cultural unity, that is: historic unity, cultural unity and 
psychological unity. 
2 
 
What Patrice Malidoma Some has brought to the Western world, was an 
understanding of the importance of the relationship between spirit and matter and 
the way in which the African spirit was at the foundation of the life and the 
consciousness of the people. 
3This ideation system serves to illustrate how, while 
the bodies of the enslaved was captured, they never captured the spirit of the 
                                                                                                                                                 
 
2 Cheik Anta Diop, The Cultural Unity of Black Africa: The Domains of Patriarchy and of Matriarchy in 
Classical Antiquity,  Karnak House, London 1989


--- PAGE 9 ---
9 
enslaved. So, our conception of Pan-Africanism goes back to the enslaved 
person having their spiritual essence to validate their dignity. Pan-Africanism has 
been through many iterations. At the time of enslavement, Pan-Africanism meant 
freedom from slavery, freedom from bondage. And at the time of colonialism and 
the partitioning of Africa and the Pan-African Congress, Pan-Africanism meant 
independence, the struggle against Jim Crow discrimination. At the time of 
apartheid, Pan-Africanism was the struggle for the dignity of the African people. 
And at that moment, the leaders of Africa articulated a vision of Pan-Africanism 
leading to the unification of the continent of Africa. But, that vision of the leaders 
of Africa was different than the vision of the people. So, within Pan-Africanism 
today, we have accomplished one major task of the Twentieth Century, that is, 
the task of ending apartheid, the task of having African unity. But, that was Pan-
Africanism from above, the Pan-Africanism of states. 
How do we look at Pan-Africanism today _that is, the Pan-Africanism of the 
people?  
 
What are the lessons to be learnt of how the people manifest their dignity in the 
era of bio-technology, the era of the war on terrorism, the era of stem cell 
technology and AIDS? What is the meaning of Pan-Africanism in the era of 
global warming and the era of Katrina? These questions are being posed at a 
moment when the tools that are available to us in the academy, cannot explain 
fully what is happening to us, because, societies have been mobilized around a 
concept of greed and a concept of human beings organized around profits. So, 
what happens to the environment, what happens to human beings is not the 
major priority. 
 
The African ideation system, the knowledge system of Africa, helps us to retreat 
from the dominant ideas that are reproduced in the universities. And, the reason 
we are having this discussion, this colloquium, is not only to remember Walter 
                                                                                                                                                
 
3  Patrice Malidoma Some, The Healing Wisdom of Africa,  Finding Life Purpose through Nature, Ritual, 
and Community, Tarcher, 1999


--- PAGE 10 ---
10  
Rodney, but, for us to assess where we as human beings can liberate our 
humanity at the moment when there is the devaluation of the lives of the majority 
of the peoples of the planet. If there are six billion people on the planet, the way 
that wealth is produced and organized, is for the benefit of ten percent of 
humanity, if that many. In reality, we have the one percent principle in operation. 
That is, in reality, the one percent that dominates the global economy; this 
dominant one percent uses the Neo-Liberal ideas to justify their hold on 
economic and political power. What Hurricane Katrina has taught us is the 
limitation of Neo-Liberalism when it comes to nature and the reality that, 
questions of the environment, health and disasters cannot be left to the private 
sector. So, our discussion on Walter Rodney today and Pan-Africanism is to be 
able to, not only venerate Walter Rodney as an icon and to canonize him. We 
need to remember his life to end the silence around Rodney, but, also, so that we 
can understand what he fought for and to introduce him to a new generation, that 
is, the generation of people who were born after 1980, which are not associated 
with the struggles against colonialism and the struggles against apartheid.  
I remember walking on the University of Dar es Salaam, campus in the 1990s 
and I asked a high school student who was Samora Machel. This student had no 
clue about who Samora Machel was, because, this new generation has not been 
taught and not been trained in the issues of the liberation movement. So, the 
objectives of the commemoration are, to promote and extend Rodney’s ideas, 
the methods of inquiry that shaped them and their application, tactics and 
strategy for creating another world. The notion of creating another world is not 
just a slogan from the World Social Forum; it is the requirement of the majority of 
the peoples of the planet _that is, to find a way to go beyond the present forms of 
human economic and political organization. How can we draw out the 
implications for current politics, from the direction Rodney took over twenty-five 
years ago? These are the questions I want us to raise in our work, in terms of 
how we define the research questions and the issues before us today.


--- PAGE 11 ---
11  
Groundings : 
Why do we call the events groundings? Why do we call them Groundings? 
Walter Rodney himself called them groundings, when he was in Jamaica in the 
1960s and he spent his time among the Rastafari... This is how he sought to 
distinguish himself from his colleagues at the University of the West Indies…..  
"There is no continuity in my life in respect of old acquaintances. We meet; 
I try to be pleasant; and I move on. For our generation too is adding its 
quota to the frightening sterility of the society. Living off campus is a great 
boon, for it reduces my contact with rum-sipping soul selling intellectuals 
of Mona..." I doubt whether the situation is explosive, and I doubt whether 
I will be here long enough to witness the explosion; but as a matter of 
integrity I must address myself to that question so long as I am here. 
Otherwise, what will distinguish me from the Philistines?" 4  
 
I am sure that if he was writing now, he would be clearer about the need for 
groundings with the brothers and sisters, and would emphasize the need for the 
black intellectual to attach himself or herself to the activity of the masses. 
Because, grounding was that activity where, as an intellectual, you go into the 
community, you are part of the community, you have an organic link with those 
who are producing knowledge and that knowledge must have a direct impact on 
strengthening the dignity of the masses of the people. Walter Rodney was 
assassinated for extending that grounding in Guyana among the Indian and 
African working people. As Professor Edmondson said, he was assassinated on 
June 13, 1980, and what many intellectuals have been doing is to assassinate 
him intellectually.  
 
There is a pamphlet that has been written by C. L. R. James about Walter 
Rodney called "Walter Rodney and the Question of Power." 
5C. L. R. James 
would write in this pamphlet as a father who lost a child. But, intellectuals who 
have time to say this or that about Rodney, have been saying that Rodney was 
adventurous, or, that he was a romantic. What we would like them to do is to be 
                                                 
4  Quoted from Nigel Westmass as commentary from what Rodney told fellow Guyanese , Gordon Rohlehr 
of his disgust with academic life at the Mona campus in the 1960s. 
5 C.L. R James, Walter Rodney and the Question of Power  ( London : Race Today Publications, 1983


--- PAGE 12 ---
12  
able to read the work of Walter Rodney much closer and to find a way that we 
can use his life as an example of what is possible. 
 
Because, Walter Rodney was a member of the working peoples, he was from the 
working class, like the person depicted in the picture in the back __ (points to 
pictures mounted on the wall in the back- a picture of Indian and African workers 
marching behind the cortege of Walter Rodney) he would be happy to be 
identified with someone from the cane field. His spirits were with the working 
people in Guyana, which brings me to the question of, who were the nurturers of 
Walter Rodney? 
 
Nurturers of Walter Rodney 
: 
How was Walter Rodney nurtured? What kind of society was he nurtured in? The 
major influence on Walter Rodney came from the traditions of the enslaved, who 
not only fought against slavery, but, set up free villages and emancipated 
spaces. At the end of the period of enslavement, they wanted to move away from 
the racialized spaces of the colonial plantation, and so, the planters brought in 
Indian indentured workers in order to create a cleavage between the Indian and 
African workers. Walter Rodney’s influence came from that attempt by the people 
to move away from racialized spaces, to establish emancipated spaces. As you 
can see in his small monograph that he did on the Guyanese Plantations in the 
Nineteenth Century , from how he laid-out the organization of the plantation, how 
the villages were structured, how the lives of the people was organized, it is clear 
that the impulse of the formerly enslaved, was to create free spaces _spaces 
where humans could flourish with their children. 6 
 
Walter Rodney’s father was a tailor, his mother was a homemaker and both of 
them were involved in a political party called the People’s Progressive Party. The 
                                                
 
6 Walter Rodney, Guyanese Sugar Plantations in the Late Nineteenth Century: A Contemporary 
Description from the "Argosy" . Georgetown, Guyana: Release Publishers, 1979.


--- PAGE 13 ---
13  
People’s Progressive Party (PPP) was led by Cheddi Jagan. Cheddi Jagan was 
an Indian Marxist who was dedicated to organizing the Guyanese peoples, (both 
Indian and African), to end colonialism. But, the British government intervened in 
1953. When Walter Rodney was eleven years old, the British government landed 
troops in Guyana to derail the independence process and since 1953; external 
forces have intervened to insure that the working peoples, the Africans and the 
Indians were not organized independently. 
 
Locksley Edmonson has already outlined the academic career of Walter Rodney 
and the fact that he graduated with his doctoral degree at the age of twenty four. 
As a member of the working peoples, he received a scholarship to Queens 
College. He did very well in Queens College _it is where we held the principal 
commemorative events, held in June. He then received a scholarship to the 
University of the West Indies, in Jamaica. It was when he went to the University 
of the West Indies in Jamaica that he came face to face with the Rastafari. Eusi 
Kwayana informs me that it was the influence of the Rastafari that influenced the 
topic of his PhD thesis, which was the study of the Upper Guinea Coast, which 
we will say something more about.  
 
Those who nurtured Walter Rodney were the members of his community, his 
immediate parents, his teachers, his comrades and his own family, Pat, Shaka, 
Asha and Kanini. If you read about his life, you will find over the years, Walter 
Rodney speaking at Hyde Park as a student in London, speaking in the gullies in 
Jamaica, speaking in Tanzania. If you read the history of Pan-Africanists, if you 
read the history of Blyden or the history of Henry Sylvester Williams, you will see 
that they all assigned themselves the task of educating the people, working with 
the people. You also saw that tendency in Malcolm X, who wherever he was, 
spent his time educating, organizing, and speaking with people. Walter Rodney 
spoke to working peoples, both black and Indians. Therefore, we want to raise 
the question, what does Pan-Africanism mean in multiracial and multiethnic 
societies? _because, Walter Rodney was a champion of multiracial working


--- PAGE 14 ---
14  
peoples.  
 
How do you develop the concept of Pan-Africanism in societies such as Guyana, 
such as South America, the United States of America? Because, all over the 
world, human beings live in societies that are multiethnic. It is only a few 
societies that think that they can maintain a homogeneous society _the Japanese 
are trying to do it. But, in all parts of the world, we have to come together as 
human beings. In the commemorative events, we tried to focus on this issue, but 
it was one of the issues with which we had great difficulty. When the question 
was brought up of whether we could discuss Pan-Africanism in the 
commemoration, we could not have this on the agenda, because, in the 
Caribbean, at this moment, Pan-Africanism has been high jacked by the ruling 
classes. Pan-Africanism is being used as a vehicle to advance the agenda of a 
small section of the ruling class, to the point where, there are people who say, we 
must maintain power to the exclusion of the Indian working peoples. It was said 
to us (in the planning stages of the commemorative events), if you are going to 
discuss Pan-Africanism, you are going to discuss Pan-Indianism. 
 
We know that Pan-Africanism, historically, was part of a worldwide movement for 
change. What is promoted as Pan-Indianism today has no root in the historic 
movement of anti-imperialism in India. The idea of Pan-Indianism in the 
Caribbean comes from elements that are part of the fundamentalists in India 
today. And so, what we faced within Guyana is how you discuss Pan-Africanism 
where it does not become a divisive tool between the Indian and African workers. 
I think the same goes for many parts of the world _ the same goes for this 
country and the Sudan and all parts of Africa. So, the commemoration was very 
sensitive (to the question of Pan Africanism). 
 
Last week I was in Cairo. I was at a conference of the African Political Science 
Association. One of the leading African scholars was making a testament about 
Walter Rodney. He said people focus on Walter Rodney’s intellectual work, but,


--- PAGE 15 ---
15  
it’s a mistake, because, you have to focus on Walter Rodney as a human being. 
He spoke about the humility of Walter Rodney at the University of Dar es 
Salaam, when all of the people who were Marxist were walking around with 
Marxism on their sleeves. He had graduated from Stanford University, and as a 
Political Scientist, worked with the ideas modernization theorists(of (David) Apter 
and James Coleman and (Sidney) Verba)  And yet, as a Political Scientist who 
graduated from one of the most prestigious institutions of higher education, he 
could not explain what was going on in his native Nigeria. After graduating from 
Stanford he was offered a job at the University of Chicago, even without applying 
for the post, because he was such a brilliant student. He said he had no interest 
in joining David Apter, Sidney Verba, Gabriel Almond and the luminaries of 
American Political Science. 
  
Those of you in Political Science know how influential these people were. He 
then heard that people were going to Tanzania and he went to Tanzania. When 
he went to Tanzania, he was afraid to open his mouth, because, in the United 
States, universities such as Stanford provide at best, only two weeks of exposure 
to Marxist theory, because they don’t teach Marxism in the United States of 
America. It is one country where they think you can block a body of knowledge. 
When he was in Dar es Salaam, he heard all of these people debating, but, when 
Walter Rodney spoke, Walter Rodney was always willing to teach. The point he 
made about Walter Rodney was: more important than his teaching, was Walter 
Rodney’s relations to his family. He was devoted to his family and his children. 
This scholar noted that what many people do not know was that Patricia Rodney, 
the wife of Walter Rodney, was even more profoundly revolutionary than Walter 
Rodney, because, she had a direct relationship with the Tanzanian people, with 
the workers and what was going on in Tanzania with the people. Patricia Rodney 
has now joined the area of academia. She has developed and carried forth the 
ideas of Walter Rodney and is working with Morehouse Medical School. She has 
developed and carried forth the ideas and work of revolutionary politics in her


--- PAGE 16 ---
16  
own right, coming out of the struggles that came out of the life and works, since 
the assassination of Walter Rodney. 
 
Walter Rodney and Pan-Africanism 
: 
We want to be able to see how this human being reflected on Pan-Africanism. In 
my view, one of the most important essays on Pan-Africanism is the one that was 
written for the Sixth Pan-African Congress in 1974. The title is: "Toward the Sixth 
Pan-African Congress: Aspects of the International Class Struggles in Africa, the 
Caribbean and America." You will find it reproduced in the Black Scholar , in the 
Institute of the Black World and in the book I edited entitled: "Pan-Africanism: 
The Struggle Against Imperialism," which is in your library under Pan-African 
Congress. 7In it is outlined, how the Sixth Pan-African Congress could distinguish 
itself from former Pan-African Congresses. Just to give you an idea, one of the 
leading Pan-Africanist of the nineteen-thirties and forties, was George Padmore, 
from the Caribbean. George Padmore, who had differences with the Communist 
Party, had written a book called "Pan-Africanism or Communism". In this book, 
he made the sharp distinction between Pan-Africanism and Communism. Now, 
these distinctions at the theoretical level had great meaning on the ground. When 
Walter Rodney was in Tanzania, you will see that the African National Congress 
of South Africa, (which is itself a Pan-African movement that came out of the 
Pan-Africanism of the 20 th  Century), also sought to distinguish itself by stating 
that it is very different from the Pan-Africanist Congress of Azania or PAC. (This 
division between Marxists and Pan-Africanists), plagued the movement 
throughout the nineteen fifties and sixties. What Walter Rodney was doing in his 
essay, is saying that we should not be involved in these differences.  
As Howard Dodson says in his book "Walter Rodney Speaks", some people call 
Walter Rodney a Marxist, some people call Walter Rodney Pan-Africanist, some 
people call him a simple black power nationalist, but, Walter Rodney’s life defied 
                                                 
7  Walter Rodney, "Toward the Sixth Pan-African Congress : Aspects of International Class Struggles in 
Africa, the United States and the Caribbean" in Horace Campbell, ed, Pan Africansim: the Struggles 
Against Imperialism , AfroCarib Publications, Toronto , 1975


--- PAGE 17 ---
17  
simple definitions, because, he was above all, a human being more concerned 
with the dignity of African peoples. The book "Groundings With My Brothers” has, 
in my view, one of the clear Pan-African statements, especially the chapter which 
he presented at the Black Writers Conference in Montréal, in 1968, before he 
was banned from Kingston. The lecture is entitled "African History in Service of 
Black Revolution." 8 If you want to really get into that chapter, you must go back 
to see what Cheikh Anta Diop would say about the need for historical continuity. 
He states that the people have to be given that spiritual security about their 
history in order for them to be able to act in politics. I would encourage you to 
read the book Groundings With My Brothers . 
 
The other book which most of you know is How Europe Underdeveloped 
Africa . This is a classic, which, I was told last week in Cairo, has been translated 
into Arabic and that more than fifty-thousand copies have sold in the Arab World. 
How many of you here have read it? I am told that it is the most pirated book in 
Nigeria and that many copies have been printed and reproduced. It has been 
translated into Spanish, into Portuguese, but, the Portuguese copy was 
translated in 1975 during the period of the Portuguese revolution. There is now 
an interest to have it re-published, so that it can get into Brazil, into Angola and 
Mozambique. Similarly, the Spanish translation was translated in Mexico, but, we 
are seeking ways now, with our relationship with the Venezuelans, to get it re-
published.  
 
How Europe Underdeveloped Africa  brought to the fore the relationships 
between Europe and Africa and the legacies of exploitation and racism. It was 
this book that popularized a new brand of committed Pan African scholarship). 
The work on Pan-Africanism is voluminous. But, what I want to look at is what is 
it that we mean by Pan-Africanism today? The book by Philippe Wamba entitled 
"Kinship", captures the essence of what is meant by Pan-Africanism today. As 
                                                                                                                                                
 
 
8  Walter Rodney, The Groundings With My Brothers , Bogle L’Overture Publications, London 1969


--- PAGE 18 ---
18  
the title implies, the book looks at what is meant by kinship _ and what Philippe 
Wamba does, is to deal with African people, ordinary people everywhere, such 
as Amadou Diallo and begins to give contour to the notion of Pan-Africanism of 
the streets. 9Pan-Africanism of the streets views AIDS as the particular 
responsibility of human beings all over the world and considers how do we 
understand the human body, life and health? How do we organize healthcare? 
The AIDS pandemic is the number one issue for all of humanity, but, more 
importantly, for African people, if we have twenty million people dying of AIDS. 
Therefore, any agenda that we have for research, must be very different from the 
agenda of the pharmaceutical companies whose interest in the development of 
drugs is based on making profits and not to find a cure for AIDS. So, we must 
address what Professor Micere Mugo has said in her essay on Pan-Africanism. 
Professor Mugo has addressed the issue of women, youth and the masses in the 
redefinition of Pan-Africanism and this is how we move from the Pan-Africanism 
of yesterday_ a Pan-Africanism of Congresses and leaders, of yesterday. 10  
How do we go to the Pan-Africanism that is needed today? To do this we must 
turn to Walter Rodney for inspiration and to see what he said. In his book "Walter 
Rodney Speaks", it was written that; 
 
"To talk about Pan-Africanism, to talk about international solidarity with the black 
world, with every center of the black world where we live, there is a series of 
responsibilities attached. One of the most important responsibilities is to define 
our own situation _ that is the first responsibility. A second responsibility is to 
present that definition to other parts of the black world, indeed, the whole of the 
progressive world."  
 
So, we define our selves if we are in the United States and if we are in New 
Orleans. We define ourselves to other people in Brazil, or Cuba, or elsewhere.  
                                                
 
9 Philippe Wamba, Kinship : a family’s journey in Africa and America  , Dutton, New York 1999 
 
10  Micere Mugo , " Re-envisioning Pan Africanism,: What is the Role of Gender, Youth and the Masses?" in 
Pan Africanism and Integration in Africa , edited by Ibbo Mandaza and Dan Nabudere Micere Mugo


--- PAGE 19 ---
19  
"A third responsibility is to help others in different sections of the black world to 
reflect on their own specific experience." 
 
How do we help the people of Haiti, or the Sudan, to reflect on their experiences?  
This is Walter Rodney’s definition of Pan-Africanism:  
"Any pan-concept is an exercise in self-definition by the people, in the 
establishment of a broader re-definition of themselves than that which has so far 
been permitted by those in power. Invariably, however, this exercise is 
undertaken by a specific social group or class which speaks on behalf of the 
population as a whole." 
11  
 
So, let us look at the different experiences of Pan-movements to discern their 
articulation of a Pan-movement. 
 
The two Pan-movements, after the Second World War, that we need to look at to 
see how it is when we speak of Pan-movements are: The Pan-Slavic movement 
and the Pan-Arab movement. When we speak of pan-movements, we speak 
simultaneously of unity and diversity. When we speak of the Pan-Slavic 
movement, for example, there is unity and diversity between the Slavic people as 
a whole and the diversity between someone who is in Yugoslavia and someone 
who is in Romania, and, someone who is in the Ukraine. Similarly, Pan-Arabism 
deals with Arab peoples as a whole, whether those Arab people are in Saudi 
Arabia, or, Morocco, or Yemen. We have to look at the particularities of that Pan-
Arabism to discern how that Arab identity manifests itself in different locations. 
Similarly with Pan-Africanism. Pan-Africanism speaks to the condition of Africans 
in Brazil, in Colombia and Beaumont, Texas, in Chicago and Madrid, Spain. But, 
we have to look at the particular context of the struggle of the African in these 
particular spaces. So, what Walter Rodney is asking is: which class leads the 
                                                
 
11  Walter Rodney,. Walter Rodney Speaks: The Making of an African Intellectual . Trenton: Africa World 
Press, 1990.


--- PAGE 20 ---
20  
national movement? In the United States today, when we speak of Pan-African 
movements, we must know to ask ourselves to consider who are the 
spokespersons for Pan-Africanism in the midst of the conditions of black people. 
Who are the spokespersons in South Africa, or in Brazil, or in Cuba? And, who 
are the silent classes on whose behalf national claims are being articulated? 
What Rodney wrote in his chapter for the Sixth Pan-African Congress is that we 
need to look at the experience of Slavic nationalism and Pan-Slavism at the end 
of World War I. We need to examine the relationship between the intelligentsia 
and the peasantry and the way in which the Slavic people faced Balkanization 
and the divisions among the Slavic people after the collapse of the Ottoman 
Empire. The concept of Balkanization came out of that experience. There was a 
time when there was an attempt made to build a socialist alternative in 
Yugoslavia, but, recently, that socialist alternative shattered in the face of 
chauvinism and ethnic rivalry and that breakdown led to genocide. So, when we 
look at pan-movements like this and see which class is leading it, we have to see 
the inherent dangers; we see the same thing in Pan-Arabism. 
 
Pan-Arabism has a direct relationship to the Pan-African movement and the Pan-
African world. A society such as Egypt stands at the crossroads of both the Pan 
African and Pan Arab world. There are many lessons for Pan-Africanists to learn 
and to see how they relate to this part of the world. Because, there are sections 
of the Pan-African movement that says _we don’t deal with Arabs, because, 
Arabs took Africans in slavery. I would argue that they are embracing a simplistic 
notion about Africans in all parts of the world, related to all Arabs. There are 
some black intellectuals who collapse Islam with Arabism, and so, make no 
distinction between someone who is Islamic and African in Morocco and 
someone who is Islamic and Arab in Yemen or in another part of the Arab world. 
We have to, as the colleagues in the Afro-Arab unity is doing, look at the 
specificity of the history of the relationship between Africans and Arabs, the spirit 
of the Arab Islamic Empires and the impact it had on Africans.


--- PAGE 21 ---
21  
What we do know is that at a certain moment at the end of World War II, the 
progressive wing of the Arab Nationalist movement had the same interests as the 
progressive Pan-African movement and we saw that in the Algerian Revolution. 
We also saw that with Nasser (the former President of Egypt). We saw the way in 
which Nasser supported the African Liberation movements throughout the 
African world. Where is Pan-Africanism and Pan-Arabism after Nasser? Where 
do Africans stand on the number one question of North Africa and the Middle-
East _the question of Palestine? I know that in some universities, we cannot 
even discuss Palestine, because, Zionism is such an important force within the 
university. And now in the war against terrorism, people collapse people who are 
Islamic with terrorism, so, we cannot really discuss the issues of the Arab world. 
What I am saying is, for the Pan-Africanist, the level of analysis has to be a bit 
more sophisticated than the simplistic differences between black and white, Arab 
and African, Slavs and Jew. We have to be able to grasp the class context of 
these things, so we can begin to understand the history of oppression, the history 
of genocide, the tradition of genocide and rise above the European ideation 
system. 
 
Eurocentrism celebrates genocide as progress, so that the killing of the First 
Nations Peoples in North America was considered progressive. David Stannard, 
in his book "The American Holocaust", claims that over one hundred million first 
nation peoples were killed, from North America to South America; we do not 
study this as genocide. 
12  We have to be able to see how this genocide is part of 
the history of what we are dealing with today. Today we are told of another 
genocide that is going on in Darfur. How do Pan-Africanist relate to the genocide 
in Darfur? How did we organize against the genocide of yesterday? Why was 
there a silence when it was maintained that Jews were inferior and vermin, and 
therefore, should be liquidated. Who spoke out when the Eugenics movement 
that grew out of the United States became a worldwide movement? Where is the 
eugenics movement today? There is a movie that I recommend you see, called: 
                                                 
12  David Stannard, American Holocaust . Oxford University Press, 1992


--- PAGE 22 ---
22  
"The Constant Gardener." The movie is adapted from the book by the same 
name. It is a movie about eugenics in which John Le Carre uses the metaphor 
gardener to explain a manifestation of eugenics toady. 13 The movie depicts how 
the pharmaceutical interests in Africa wield power and the economic dynamics of 
the AIDS pandemic relative to how Africans are devalued. This is a very 
sophisticated movie and I would recommend it very strongly. In the relatively 
recent past, a similar mind set prevailed _Do you know who the gardener was in 
World War II? Hitler was the Gardener. In his way of thinking, Hitler was keeping 
the world free of the "vermin" who were the Jews. Hitler was metaphorically, 
cleaning the world. So, genocide was cleansing.  
 
How do we respond to the AIDS pandemic? We cannot respond by the old 
responses of Pan-Africanism from above. For, however important the leaders of 
the Pan-African movement were, we have to look at the different forms of Pan-
Africanism as social movements, to see which class leads the social movement. 
We have to see Pan-Africanism from below as coming from the masses of the 
people, and not by making distinctions between the leaders, because, leaders 
such as Kwame Nkrumah learnt from the movement of the people. The Universal 
Negro Improvement Association, in the 1920s, was a coming together of Africans 
from Costa Rica, Africans from Jamaica, Africans from Guyana, Africans from 
Barbados, Africans from the South, coming together in Harlem, resisting against 
the Jim Crow of the 1920s. The Negro World, (the newspaper of the U.N.I.A) was 
a tool for mobilizing black people; and, the Universal Negro Improvement 
Association continued to be one of the foremost movements among the Pan-
Africanist of the 1920s.  
 
As a giant of the Pan-African movement, Dubois was involved in four or five of 
the major Pan-African Congresses from 1912 through 1945. What those of us 
who came along later have done, is fallen into a trap of creating profound 
distinctions between the Pan-Africanism of Garvey and the Pan-Africanism of 
                                                
 
13  John Le Carre, The Constant Gardener , Hodder & Stoughton, New York  2001


--- PAGE 23 ---
23  
Dubois. What many scholars have done is to dwell on these divisions. We have 
to be able to appreciate, celebrate and learn from the positive lessons of both the 
Garvey movement and Dubois, or we are doomed to reap the harvest that results 
from divisions. When we become too focused on the differences between the 
various leaders or movements, we create opportunities for outside forces to 
exploit the resulting fractures. The political leadership of the United States, for 
example, exploited the differences between Dubois and Garvey _these forces, 
led by J. Edgar Hoover exploited the differences within the Harlem Renaissance 
movement. And we can see today, how the United State government is seeking 
to exploit differences between Christian and Muslim in the so-called war on 
terror. 
 
 So, we have to see Pan-Africanism and African liberation as coming from the 
masses of the people. And the voices of the masses of the people are different 
from the voices of leaders. (Music is played – The song “One Love” is played and 
the audience joins in) 
One love! One heart! 
Let’s get together and feel all right. 
Hear the children cryin (one love!); 
Hear the children cryin (one heart!), 
Sayin: give thanks and praise to the lord and I will feel all right; 
Sayin: let’s get together and feel all right. 
 
Let them all pass all their dirty remarks (one love!); 
There is one question Id really love to ask (one heart!): 
Is there a place for the hopeless sinner? 
Who has hurt all mankind just to save his own beliefs? 
Is there a place? ... Let’s stand together ... to see the unification of Africa ... 
  
(these words are voiced over Bob Marley’s "One Love" playing in the 
background.) 
 
Bob Marley was speaking for the majority of African peoples. The Pan-Africanism 
Marley was speaking to, was a Pan-Africanism from bellow. The unification of 
Africa was for the unification of the people of Africa, to end apartheid. So, how do 
we talk about Pan-Africanism in the era after apartheid?


--- PAGE 24 ---
24  
Nelson Mandela, after becoming president of South Africa, challenged the 
Organization of African Unity on: How could the Organization of African Unity 
have a clause in its charter about non-interference in the internal affairs of 
African states? We have moved from the era of non-interference to the era of the 
African Union _ Linked in the spirit of an African Renaissance, that is, the spirit 
who wants Pan-Africanism for the twenty-first Century to be different. 
I would suggest to you that one of the major tasks of research is to study the 
question of integration of the African peoples in the era of the African Union. This 
would be a major task for research, because, the African Union is a reality that 
we must celebrate. We must celebrate the African Union because it came out of 
the hard work by African people. It came out of the spirit of love, the spirit of joy, 
the spirit of perseverance. How do we bring that spirit that is at the base of the 
African Union to the level of policy, to the level of intellectual engagement, so that 
the African Union move beyond what some people want it to be, today _ that is, 
Neo-Liberal-Pan-Africanism.  
 
I am, in my work using the concept of UBUNTU _UBUNTU as a philosophical 
concept to guide the growth of the Pan-African Union. – (Song of One Love is 
played and audience sings the words of one love- speaker then voices over the 
following words) 
Lets get together ... let me hear you 
One Love ... 
One question I want to ask... 
Is there a place? ... 
Let’s get together... 
Come on... 
Thank you... 
One more time... 
That’s the spirit 
 
Let me go through the last few points about where we are in the Twenty-first 
Century.


--- PAGE 25 ---
25  
 
The twenty-first Century calls for a rebirth of Africa, through what we call, 
UBUNTU.UBUNTU is the philosophical concept, which, is in all parts of Africa. In 
every African language, there is a word for this concept. In East African Kiswahili, 
it is called utu. There is no translation for this word, but, you can variously call it 
reconciliation, willingness to share, truth and love. We can distinguish between 
UBUNTU that is coming from the people and the New African Partnership for 
Development, which is coming from the African leaders, which is called NEPAD. 
Some of us call it kneepad, because, they go begging on their knees from 
Europe. We call that begging: Neo-Liberal-Pan-Africansism, because, it is not 
Pan-Africanism that is coming from the people. But, out of this struggle (to create 
the African Union) , we have the voices of the African people being raised, where 
we have the struggles of the African Union to ratify the clause aimed at ending 
discrimination against women. 
 
Pan-Africanism and Women Today 
: 
For the first time, we have the Pan-African Parliament that was convened last 
year and we have Gertrude Mongella, who was part of the Beijing process as the 
head of it, as the president of the Pan-African Parliament. Our task now, is to 
popularize the African Union, but, to popularize it as a union of the people. Walter 
Rodney said: "one of the cardinal principles of Pan-Africanism is that the people 
from one part of Africa are responsible for their brothers and sisters in other parts 
of Africa, indeed, black people in all parts of the world are to share in this 
responsibility." 
 
I want to show you this map, to show you an example of Neo-Liberal-Pan-
Africanism in action (speaker points to map of the planned grid to sell electricity 
from the Inga Dam in the Congo to Western Europe). This map is symbolic of 
Neo-Liberal-Pan-Africanism as expressed through the plans of the South African 
government. The South African government plans to harness the resources at a 
place called the Inga Dam, which is located on the Congo River. Within this dam


--- PAGE 26 ---
26  
is located more than thirty percent of the world’s hydroelectric resource. The 
South African government plan to sell the hydroelectric power from the Congo, 
using power lines that goes right over the heads of the African people, into 
Europe. This plan of capital shows that they are more concerned with how to 
make profits, than planning for the people. We would say that from our point of 
view, Pan-Africanism in the twenty-first Century is equal to peace and the 
electrification of the African continent.  
 
But, as Walter Rodney said, "Pan-Africanism must involve transformation of the 
environment, while making a break with imperialism and forming African political 
and economic unity." These are all dialectically related and as far as Rodney is 
concerned, "can only be carried out through the leadership of the working 
classes." African women are taking the leadership on the question of Pan-
Africanism. African women are taking the lead in critiquing male centered Pan-
Africanism. As one of my sisters in Guyana said when we mentioned that we 
were Pan-Africanist __where have you been when we are talking about the 
struggles and the violation of women? Where have you been when we talk about 
rape and the other aspects of gender oppression? So when we said hello, that’s 
how she started her article __ where have you been?  
14 So, how do you implicate 
masculinity, patriarchy and Dodaism in the Pan-African movement? 
In the interest of time, I am going to have to skip some of these slides, to deal 
with two topics that I think are important to deal with at this juncture. I would like 
to mention John Garang _ and it’s not only because of my brother Salah Hassan 
that I am bringing him up, but, because, this is one person that I think we don’t 
speak enough about. In July of this year, John Garang, the leader of the 
Sudanese Peoples Liberation movement was killed in a plane crash. John 
Garang was associated with Walter Rodney, because, he was a member of the 
Dar es Salaam school. In many senses, Garang is the last of those leaders that 
came out of Dar es Salaam, with a tradition of fighting for liberation. Not only 
                                                 
14  Bonita Harris, "Pan Africanism and Caribbean Women" in African Journal of Political Science  Vol 1, 
No 1, 1996


--- PAGE 27 ---
27  
fighting for liberation, but, the unity of Africa and the unity of the Sudan. Within 
the Sudanese People’s Liberation Movement (S.P.L.M) and the Sudanese 
People’s Liberation Army (S.P.L.A), Garang was opposed by members of the 
Southern Sudanese moment, who felt that the only way to go forward in the 
Sudan was through a division of the North from the South. This matter is now an 
open question, whether in the referendum in six years time, there will be a vote 
for a South that is separated from the North.  
 
This question of the Sudan is important for the Pan-African world, because, the 
danger is that there is an intense campaign by sections of the imperialist world 
about Arab slave trade and Islamic domination of Africa. This imperialist initiative 
will prevent the kind of discussion that we should have about how Pan-Africanism 
should relate to the questions of peace in the Sudan and ending genocide in 
Darfur.  
 
The African women of the Sudan are charting a different course. They are saying 
that whether we are from Darfur, whether from the Nuba Mountains, whether 
from Khartoum or from the South, we have the same interest in ending violence, 
in ensuring that we have basic dignity and the right to life. And we can share the 
documents that came out of the meeting in Kampala, where these statements 
were made with you. 
15  One of the lessons that we can learn in the Pan-African 
struggles for liberation can be taken from the struggles of the women of the 
Sudan. 
 
The tape skips at this point. 
 
                                                                                                                                                
 
 
15  "Second Kampala Declaration on Human Rights, Democracy and Development in  
Sudan " http://www.africaaction.org/docs00/sud0007.htm  
See also, "Sudanese Women's Declaration and Plan of Action 
Civil Forum of Sudan Conference, Women’s Rights in the Sudan : Agenda for the Future, Kampala ," 
Uganda , 11-15 March 2002 http://www.peacewomen.org/resources/Sudan/Kampala2002.html


--- PAGE 28 ---
28  
The Haitian situation is very militarized, and so, we have to ask: what are the 
tasks of the Pan-African movement in terms of the relationship to Haiti and the 
movement in Haiti today. Yesterday, Condoleezza Rice was in Haiti. She was in 
Haiti yesterday for the question of the Haitian elections _elections without the 
people. I say elections without the people, when we call to mind the coup d’etat 
that took place in 2004, when Jean-Bertrand Aristide was removed from office. 
Let me conclude by reading from the poem by Martin Carter. In this poem, Martin 
Carter was talking about the silence in relationship to Walter Rodney. The poem 
is called Assassins of Conversation.  
 
Assassins of Conversation 
Assassins of conversation, they bury the voice, 
They assassinate in the beloved grave of the voice, 
Never to be silent,  
I sit in the presence of rain in the sky’s wild noise of the feet 
of some who not only, but also, kill the origin of rain, the ankle of the whore 
as fastidious as the great fight, the wife of water. 
Risker, risk. I intend to turn a sky of tears for you 
 
This is a poem by Martin Carter that was written after the assassination of Walter 
Rodney. We are going to shed tears for Walter Rodney. We are going to 
remember him. We are going to continue to struggle for justice. We are also 
going to struggle to end the verbal assassination of Walter Rodney. We are going 
to campaign to insure that there is an investigation into the assassination of 
Walter Rodney and we are going to insure that we struggle to bring Walter 
Rodney to the young people. 
 
Thank you very much!


--- PAGE 29 ---
29  
Question and Answer Segment : 
 
Question 
: Why did you make such a sharp distinction between Pan-Africanism 
from bellow and Pan-African leaders? 
 
Answer 
: Clearly, I did not want to present a sharp dichotomy (between Pan-
Africanism from bellow and African leaders), because, if you look at Lumumba, or 
Nkrumah, or Nasser, or Nyerere, all of these people were part of what you call all 
class movements. As an all class movement, they combined the best of the anti-
colonial struggles. So, you are correct to say that at certain historical moments 
these movements combined the best of the African liberation struggles, whether 
it was in the Algerian liberation struggle or the struggles in Southern Africa. But, 
the emergence of the African intelligentsia, the African elite, from the 1970s and 
the way they have been appropriating the Pan-African discourse to serve the 
interest of the state, means, that we have to draw this line. 
If I think today of South Africa, where the South African leadership when it was in 
exile never wanted to discuss Pan-Africanism. But today, these leaders want to 
have debates on the African Diaspora and Pan-Africanism, because, they face 
the challenge of attracting African investments. I was going to mention the case 
of Amadou Diallo in my presentation, but, did not have enough time. The South 
African government never raised the issue of the killing of Amadou Diallo. 16  
There is not one African government that raised the matter of his killing. The only 
government in the world that raised a question about his brutal murder at the 
hand of New York City police officers, was the Malaysian President.  
 
The African governments want those Africans who live in the West to send 
remittances to Africa. Currently, the remittances that go back to Africa from 
Africans living in the Diaspora, collectively, is more than the amount of money 
coming from Western aid donors. But, they are not doing anything to support the 
                                                
 
16  African immigrant, shot 41 times by New York City police officer


--- PAGE 30 ---
30  
struggles against racism in these host countries. So, we will rejoin this, so we can 
tease it out.  
 
Similarly, in South Africa, South African capital is all across the African continent, 
but, South African immigration policies is most restrictive against Mozambicans, 
Zimbabweans and people from other African countries. We have to speak about 
this, and when we speak about an African Union, we emphasize that the African 
Union is not just for governments, but, that it is also for the people.  
 
I accept your point, that the distinctions should not be drawn so sharply. But, we 
need to today, draw these distinctions until we push the Pan-African Parliament 
to be responsive to the needs of the people; until the Pan-African Union shows 
support for the people in the Diaspora, to help them claim their personal dignity. 
And on the point about AIDS, it was part of the presentation that I rushed 
through. But, among the responsibilities that must be addressed by Pan-
Africanism, is the responsibility of creating health centers and Pan-African 
monitoring centers, and training methods which makes a breaks from the Neo-
liberal agenda.  
 
I completely agree with you about the research agenda, because, the research 
agenda could only become clear when we know what has gone before. We don’t 
know enough about what has gone on before, because, as you say, how many of 
our students know about the relationship between Ben Bella and Nasser and 
Fanon and Che Guevara? In this period, how many people know about the 
relationship between Garang and Rodney? We don’t have that basic information. 
In this period, when we have the World Conference Against Racism in Durban, 
the program of action for a new educational system which should have kicked in 
after Durban, the West do not want to hear anything about (the WCA - and the 
Program of Action) So, it’s up to us, to places like the Africana Center at Cornell 
University that should implement the programs that grew out of the Durban 
agenda.


--- PAGE 31 ---
31  
They (meaning the leading powers of the United Nations and the Security 
Council) talk about being at the United Nations Conference ( and ensuring follow 
up).  They had Beijing plus Five in 2000 and last year they had a big conference 
called Beijing plus Ten. When are we going to have discussions on the World’s 
Conference against Racism and discussions on reparations? So, the research 
agenda must include raising these questions that have been put forward by Pan-
Africanism. 
 
Question 
: Can you elaborate on the issues of Pan-Africanism in Guyana today? 
 
Answer : Yes, it is very delicate, very delicate and the way to deal with it is to 
have a conversation about it, to be open about it. Let us look at the specific 
contradictions of Guyana. Walter Rodney was an African in Guyana. There are 
African workers in Guyana. But, the Guyanese African middle class is very 
developed. It is one of the most developed middle classes. Forbes Burnham who 
was the President of Guyana and an African, was in control of the government 
that is responsible for the assassination of Walter Rodney. Walter Rodney was 
assassinated because he wanted to bring African and Indian workers together 
with a new politics. In Guyana, there are Indian workers and there are also Indian 
capitalists.  
 
The African middle class has begun a campaign to organize the African working 
class to say, we must not be under the power of the coolie (Indian). In other 
words, they collapse the Indian workers with the Indian capitalists and they have 
gone to the point of mobilizing African workers in a certain city in Guyana, called 
Buxton, to say, they are waging armed struggle against Indians and they are 
going around killing Indians. It is a very serious situation.  
We are very worried about it, because Guyana is next to Venezuela, and it is our 
belief that there are external forces that have an interest in destabilization and 
violence. So, the Indian-African inter-ethnic violence could serve to destabilize 
Guyana, so that elements could intervene to destabilize Venezuela. I don’t know


--- PAGE 32 ---
32  
if you know that Venezuela is now asserted itself as a leader in what is called the 
Bolivarian Alternative for Latin America (ALBA). What progressive Pan-
Africanists are saying is that there can be no liberation of Africans in Guyana that 
involves the killing of Indian workers.  17 It is in the interest of Pan-Africanists to 
see that their dignity is respected.   As Africans it is in our interest to be 
supportive of the dignity of Indian workers. And so, we are not silent in Pan-
Africanism. That is why it is so important to draw the line between conservative 
elements in the movement called ACDA __ the African Cultural and Development 
Association (and the more progressive elements.) The conservative elements of 
ACDA say that Walter Rodney was foolish to talk about Indian and African unity. 
We want to be able to raise the issue of Pan-Africanism in the 21 st  Century and 
do what Professor Mugo has said and what Rodney has said _move Pan-
Africanism beyond Pan-Africanist leaders, toward a pan-Africanism of women, 
youth and the masses. In that sense, we know that there are  (historical and 
cultural) differences between us and Indians, but, you have to look at the point of 
convergence. Let’s look at one point of convergence of the Guyanese people. In 
chapter one of "The History of the Guyanese Working Peoples", Walter Rodney 
laid out the geographical location of Guyana and the fact that the enslaved 
people built (the city of ) Georgetown. They built the polders, the dams … In 
January of this year, Guyana was threatened by flood. They were about to move 
two-hundred thousand people out of the city. I mention this event to illustrate how 
nature does not participate in these human constructs around differences. The 
flood threatened Indian and African alike, even those who built the town. This 
teaches us that we have to have a vision of how we rehabilitate society for 
everyone. Hurricane Katrina has shown us that we cannot be organized as a 
society around the interests of capital. We have to be particularly vigilant in the 
case of what is happening in New Orleans, because, the capitalist class has a 
vision of reconstruction which does not include the masses of poor, working 
                                                 
17  For an elaboration of the killings in Buxton and the targeting of Indians by the ‘so –called Black 
Liberation Army, see Eusi Kwayana, The Morning After , Guyana Caribbean Politics Publication, 
Georgetown Guyana, 2005


--- PAGE 33 ---
33  
peoples of New Orleans. That is why our research work, whether it be in law, 
engineering, economics, or business, has to focus on how we strengthen our 
people in New Orleans, to insure that this administration does not use the 
hurricane to dis-empower the people. 
 
Question 
: Not recorded  
Answer : Relative to Walter Rodney’s assassination and its similarity to the 
assassination of Martin Luther King, Patrice Lumumba and Malcolm X, I have an 
article which draws a parallel between all three of these assassinations. 18  
 
We are not just having these celebrations because we want to celebrate Walter 
Rodney’s life. Walter Rodney was assassinated physically, there are others who 
are assassinating him intellectually. These detractors say that he shouldn’t have 
been there, that he was adventurous and therefore, there is a disinclination to 
raise the matter of his assassination. In fact, Professor Mazrui was one of the 
boldest ones who before the Guyanese government said we must end the 
silence around the assassination of Walter Rodney, in Guyana, he stated that 
there should be a complete investigation. Professor Mazrui and Walter Rodney 
did not agree politically, but we must recognize the decency of Professor Mazrui 
who said, we must insure that we end the silence around the question of Walter 
Rodney.  
 
There are two examples that we want to uses in clarifying the question [that was 
posed], that of Patrice Lumumba and Malcolm X. Everywhere you go, people 
have pictures of Malcolm X, people talk about Malcolm X, they celebrate Malcolm 
X, but, forty years after the assassination of Malcolm X, we still do not know who 
was responsible for his assassination. We still have not had a proper 
investigation into the assassination of Malcolm X. So, for all the black studies 
                                                
 
18  Horace Campbell, "On Precedents of Investigating Assassinations and Murders: Lessons from Malcolm 
X, Patrice Lumumba for the Walter Rodney Inquiry."


--- PAGE 34 ---
34  
departments across the country and all the celebrations for Malcolm X, we still 
have not delved into the conspiracy that led to the assassination of Malcolm X. 
We still don’t know who was on the inside with Malcolm X and who the forces are 
that are still alive, who participated in this conspiracy.  
Similarly, with Patrice Lumumba; Patrice Lumumba was killed in January of 1961 
and still, we celebrate Lumumba; but, the Belgian government do not want us to 
talk about Lumumba’s assassination, because, they want to have assassination 
with impunity. We are raising the question of the assassination of Walter Rodney 
in the same light as the assassination of Lumumba and Malcolm X. That is, we 
believe that it is our scholarly and political duty, not only to talk about Walter 
Rodney as a great scholar and academic, but to continuously talk about the 
manner of his death, because if we don‘t, the tradition of violence and killing with 
impunity, will continue.  
  
The Chilean people are dogged about September 11 
th . They say, their 
September 11 th  will not go away until there is justice. On September 11, 1973, 
there was a coup de’tat in Chile. They killed Salvador Allende and General 
Agustino Pinochet was held up as a great liberator to free the country from 
Socialism. He went around the world and was celebrated by the United States of 
America. But, the people of Chile was determined that this man was a war 
criminal and he should be arrested and stand trial. Ultimately, they were so 
effective that a Spanish judge brought charges against Pinochet and had him 
arrested. He was arrested in the British court and he was tried in Chile. That’s 
another kind of globalization, where we have a sharing of knowledge and 
movement around the world to bring justice. So, we want people to do the same 
kind of work around Walter Rodney. We were hoping that we can have five or six 
thesis coming from MAs and PhDs on Walter Rodney, to investigate every 
aspect of his life. 
 
Question 
: Thanks Horace, I appreciate the investigation. I was just wondering a 
couple of things _ whether or not we need to approach the whole question of the


--- PAGE 35 ---
35  
study of Pan-Africanism in a more historic and periodized way. My particular 
reference is: if you take the period of the 1960s to just at the end of the 1970s, 
that was a period in which the situation presented itself for supporting the anti-
colonial movement, particularly, support for the liberation struggles that were 
taking place on the ground, that were mostly armed struggles inside Southern 
Africa.  
 
For instance, I think that enough work have not yet been done on the African 
liberation movements, that supported formulations and developed movements in 
Mozambique, in Angola, as well as in Zimbabwe and South Africa ... that’s one 
point … The period we are in now present different kinds of realities and 
challenges and I wonder what your feeling is about whether or not we ought to be 
talking more about Pan-African formations as a set of Pan-African movements, in 
some sort of global perspective, which I think is a much harder situation and 
perhaps not very realistic. 
Lastly, I wonder why you hadn’t mentioned the government of Barbados and its 
recent development in the Caribbean. It is quite unusual to expect that Barbados 
would be taking such a forward move on Pan-Africanism, even elevating it to the 
level of a state bureau. So, I was just wondering what you think. 
 
Answer 
: Thanks for the points that you made. Without being crude, I think that 
we have to have that periodizaton. At the beginning I attempted to draw that 
time-line. I talked about the Pan-Africanism of the enslaved and their struggles 
for dignity and the Pan-Africanist at the turn of the 19 th  Century: the era of 
Sylvester Williams, Robert Love and Dubois and we can even divide it more 
sharply, between 1900 and 1920.  
 
One high point of Pan-Africanism, without a doubt, was the point of the Garvey 
movement. I have just seen a translation in Spanish of the Garvey movement in 
Cuba and the impact that that movement had internationally. And again, as you 
said, the period of the struggle against colonialism in the International African


--- PAGE 36 ---
36  
Service Bureau, when Padmore and James were working with Nkrumah was 
another period which was different from the post independence period. So, you 
are right, periodization brings out the contradictions in a particular period at its 
high point. I think this comes up with the point that Professor Hassan is making _ 
that it is hard to make a sharp dichotomy of Pan-Africanism from above and Pan-
Africanism from below, especially in a period like the International African Service 
Bureau period. But, we do not have enough information on the periods, because, 
we have not done enough work. The Pan-African work that we have done so far 
have been about conferences and great individuals like Padmore, James, 
Dubois, Mandela, Nyerere, and other notables. What we are seeking to do, is to 
inspire a new kind of research work on Pan-Africanism. 
I would agree with you. I went to Barbados three times and there is a book that is 
coming out at the end of this year, by New Academia Publishing on Pan-
Africanism in the 21 st  Century. I am writing this book together with a young 
Barbadian scholar who has been writing about Barbados. The point that you are 
making is that we are going to be surprised where Pan-Africanism is going to 
come from in the next ten to fifteen years, and that is the point. We are going to 
be pleasantly surprised.  
 
In Venezuela, they have just established a ministry of African affairs. I met with 
representatives when I was there. They are very aggressive about this question 
of Pan-Africanism. The African Descendants Caucus of South America have 
been working very hard. Some of my brothers and sisters are going to Brazil 
tomorrow, because, we expect that one of the major upsurge in the Pan-African 
movement will come from South America, in the 21 
st  Century. So, how are we 
going to work with this movement and move it forward? That unity of Pan-
Africanism has to be a unity of the Diasporic African people _the cultural, historic, 
psychological, as well as the diversity; that is why I want to make that point. Pan-
Africanism has been sensitive to the unity and diversity, but, as Rodney said, "we 
have to define our interests at this particular moment." 
Professor Edmondson: That says it all, thank you Horace.


--- PAGE 37 ---
37  
Bibliography  
  
1. . Allen, Beverly. Rape Warfare: The Hidden Genocide in Bosnia-Herzegovina and 
Croatia,  University of Minnesota Press, 1997  
2. Burnett, Patrick.. Shereen Kamali and Firoze Manji, Grace, Tenacity and Eloquence: 
the Struggle for Women’s Rights in Africa , Fahamu Publications, Oxford, 20072. 
3. Campbell, Horace G. Pan-Africanism, Pan Africanists, and African Liberation in the 
21st Century:  Two Lectures by Horace Campbell, Rodney Worrell, New Academia 
Publishing, Washington DC 2006 
4. Campbell, Horace. "On Precedents of Investigating Assassinations and Murders: 
Lessons from Malcolm X, Patrice Lumumba for the Walter Rodney Inquiry." 
5. Le Carre, John. The Constant Gardener. Fernando Meirelles, director, The Constant 
Gardener 
6. Diop, Cheikh Anta. The Cultural Unity of Black Africa: The Domains of Patriarchy and 
of Matriarchy in Classical Antiquity , Karnak House, London 1989. 
7. Harris, Bonita. "Pan Africanism and Caribbean Women" in African Journal of Political 
Science Vol 1, No 1, 1996 
8. James, C.L. R. Walter Rodney and the Question of Power  ( London : Race Today 
Publications, 1983 
9. Kwayana, Eusi. The Morning After , Guyana Caribbean Politics Publication, 
Georgetown Guyana, 2005 
10. . "Toward the Sixth Pan-African Congress : Aspects of International Class Struggles 
in Africa, the United States and the Caribbean" in Horace Campbell, ed, Pan Africansim: 
the Struggles Against Imperialism , Afro-Carib Publications, Toronto , 1975 
11. Mugo , Micere.  " Re-envisioning Pan Africanism,: What is the Role of Gender, Youth 
and the Masses?" in Pan Africanism and Integration in Africa , edited by Ibbo Mandaza 
and Dan Nabudere 
12. Rodney, Walter. The Groundings With My Brothers , Bogle L’Overture Publications, 
London 1969 
13. Some, Patrice Malidoma. The Healing Wisdom of Africa , Tarcher, 1998 
14 . Stannard, David. The American Holocaust Columbus and the Conquest of the New 
World, . Oxford University Press, 1992 
15.  Wamba, Philippe. Kinship : a family’s journey in Africa and America  , Dutton, New 
York 1999  
14 "Second Kampala Declaration on Human Rights, Democracy and Development in  
Sudan " 
http://www.africaaction.org/docs00/sud0007.htm  
See also, "Sudanese Women's Declaration and Plan of Action 
Civil Forum of Sudan Conference, Women’s Rights in the Sudan : Agenda for the 
Future, Kampala ," Uganda , 11-15 March 2002 
http://www.peacewomen.org/resources/Sudan/Kampala2002.html  
15 Note: African immigrant, shot 41 times by New York City police officers. 
Quote on UWI Senior Common Room - from Nigel as commentary from what Rodney 
told fellow Guyanese, Rohlehr, Gordon.

