=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Webster Tarpley Venetian Concpiracy.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 24
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:15:57.223697
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
-----------------------------------
by Webster Tarpley
THE VENETIAN CONSPIRACY
Address delivered to the ICLC Conference near Wiesbaden, Germany, Easter Sunday, 
1981; (appeared in Campaigner, September, 1981)
Periods of history marked, like the one we are living through, by the convulsive 
instability of human institutions pose a special challenge for those who seek to 
base their actions on adequate and authentic knowledge of historical process. Such 
knowledge can come only through viewing history as the lawful interplay of 
contending conspiracies pitting Platonists against their epistemological and 
political adversaries.
There is no better way to gain insight into such matters than through the study of 
the history of the Venetian oligarchy, the classic example of oligarchical 
despotism and evil outside of the Far East.
Venice called itself the Serenissima Republica (Serene Republic), but it was no 
republic in any sense comprehensible to an American, as James Fenimore Cooper 
points out in the preface to his novel The Bravo. But its sinister institutions do 
provide an unmatched continuity of the most hideous oligarchical rule for fifteen 
centuries and more, from the years of the moribund Roman Empire in the West to the 
Napoleonic Wars, only yesterday in historical terms. Venice can best be thought of 
as a kind of conveyor belt, transporting the Babylonian contagions of decadent 
antiquity smack dab into the world of modern states.
The more than one and one-half millennia of Venetian continuity is first of all 
that of the oligarchical families and the government that was their stooge, but it 
is even more the relentless application of a characteristic method of statecraft 
and political intelligence. Venice, never exceeding a few hundred thousand in 
population, rose to the status of Great Power in the thirteenth century, and kept 
that status until the Peace of Westphalia in 1648, thanks to the most highly 
developed system of embassies, of domestic and foreign intelligence, and related 
operational potentials.
As the following story details, Venice was at the center of the efforts to destroy 
the advanced European civilization of the eleventh and twelfth centuries, and 
bears a crushing burden of guilt for the ascendancy of the Black Guelphs and the 
coming of the black plague. The Venetians were the intelligencers for the Mongol 
army of Ghengis Khan and his heirs, and had a hand in guiding them to the sack of 
Baghdad and the obliteration of its renaissance in the thirteenth century.
The Venetians were the mortal enemies of the humanist Paleologue dynasty in 
Byzantium. They were the implacable foes of Gemisthos Plethon, Cosimo de' Medici, 
Leonardo da Vinci, Niccolo Machiavelli, and the entirety of the Florentine Golden 
Renaissance, which they conspired - successfully - to destroy. Venetian influence 
was decisive in cutting off the Elizabethan epoch in England, and in opening the 
door to the lugubrious Jacobean era.
Venetian public relations specialists were responsible for picking up the small-
time German provincial heretic Martin Luther and raising him to the big-time 
status of heresiarch among a whole herd of total- predestination divines. Not 
content with this wrecking operation against the Church, Venice was thereafter the 
"mother" for the unsavory, itinerant Ignatius of Loyola and his Jesuit order. 
After the Council of Trent, Venice was also the matrix for the Philosophe-


--- PAGE 2 ---
Libertin ferment of the delphic, anti-Leibniz Enlightenment. Venice beat Thomas 
Malthus and Jeremy Bentham to the punch in inflicting British political economy 
and philosophical radicalism on the whole world.
Although Napoleon Bonaparte had the merit of forcing the formal liquidation of 
this loathsome organism during his Italian campaign of 1797, his action did not 
have the effect we would have desired. The cancer, so to speak, had already had 
ample time for metastasis - into Geneva, Amsterdam, London, and elsewhere. Thus, 
though the sovereign political power of Venice had been extinguished, its 
characteristic method lived on, serving as the incubator of what the twentieth 
century knows as fascism, first in its role as a breeding ground for the 
protofascist productions of Wagner and Nietzsche, later in the sponsorship of 
fascist politicians like Gabriele D'Annunzio and Benito Mussolini. The Venetians 
ran a large chunk of the action associated with the Parvus Plan to dismember 
Russia, and may well have been the ones who surprised everyone, including London, 
by unleashing World War 1 in the Balkans.
Most important, Venice is today through its Cini Foundation and its Societ� 
Europeenne de Culture the think tank and staging area for the Club of Rome and 
related deployments. Venice is the supranational homeland of the New Dark Ages 
gang, the unifying symbol for the most extreme Utopian lunatic fringe in the 
international intelligence community today.
Get to know Venice. Then look back to the monetarist imbecility of Paul Volker, at 
the ideological fanaticism that radiates forth from the Bank of America, Chase 
Manhattan, the Bank for International Settlements and the rest. You will recognize 
the unmistakable putrid stench of a Venetian canal, where the rotting marble 
palaces of generations of parasites are corroded by the greatest cynicism and 
cruelty the world has ever known.
THE ORIGINS
In the Middle Ages the Venetians were known as the archetypes of the parasite, the 
people who "neither sow nor reap." For the Greeks, they were the hated "frogs of 
the marshes." In Germany, a folk tale describes the merchant of Venice as an aged 
Pantaloon who makes his rounds robbing men of their human hearts and leaving a 
cold stone in their place.
Closer to the essence of Venice is the city's symbol, the winged lion of St. Mark, 
bearing the misleading inscription, Pax Tibi Marce, Evangelista Meus ("Peace be 
with you Mark, my evangelist.") The chimerical winged lion comes out of the East, 
either from Persia or from China. The symbol is thus blatantly pagan, with St. 
Mark being added as an afterthought because of his alleged visit to the Venetian 
lagoons. To buttress the story, the Venetians stole St. Mark's body from 
Alexandria in Egypt, and Tintoretto has a painting celebrating this feat.
The point is that Venice looks East, toward the Levant, Asia Minor, central Asia, 
and the Far East, toward its allies among the Asian and especially Chinese 
oligarchies which were its partners in trade and war. This is reflected in a whole 
range of weird, semi-oriental features of Venetian life, most notably the 
secluded, oriental status of women, with Doges like Mocenigo proudly exhibiting a 
personal harem well into modern times.
Venice today sits close to the line from Lubeck to Trieste, the demarcation 
between NATO and Warsaw Pact Europe, roughly corresponding to the boundary between 
Turks in the East and Christians in the West, and still earlier between the Holy 
Roman and Byzantine Empires. Into this part of the northern Adriatic flow the 
rivers of the southern side of the Dolomites and the Julian Alps. The greatest of


--- PAGE 3 ---
these is the Po. These rivers, around 300 A.D., made the northern Adriatic a 
continuous belt of marshes and lagoons about fifteen kilometers wide, and 
extending from the city of Ravenna around to the base of the Istrian Peninsula, 
where the Italian- Yugoslavian border lies today.
In the center of this system was Aquileia, starting point of an important north-
south trade route across the Brenner Pass to the Danube Valley and Bohemia. 
Aquileia was the seat of a patriarch of the Christian Church, but its tradition 
was overwhelmingly pagan, and typified by rituals of the Ancient Egyptian Isis 
cult. For a time after the year 404, Ravenna and not Rome was the capital of the 
Roman Empire in the West. After the extinction of the western empire, Ravenna was 
the seat of government of Theodoric the Ostrogoth, the court visited by Boethius. 
Later Ravenna was the capital of a part of Italy ruled by the Byzantines.
The islands of the lagoons provided an invulnerable refuge, comparable to 
Switzerland during World War II, for Roman aristocrats and others fleeing the 
paths of Goth, Hun, and Langobard armies. Already between 300 and 400 A.D. there 
are traces of families whose names will later become infamous: Candiano, Faliero, 
Dandolo. Legend has it that the big influx of refugees came during the raids of 
Attila the Hun in 452 A.D. Various areas of the lagoons were colonized, including 
the present site of Torcello, before the seat of administration was fixed at a 
group of islands known as Rivus Altus ("the highest bank"), later the Rialto, the 
present location of the city of Venice. The official Ab Urbe Condita is March 25, 
721 A.D. Paoluccio Anafesto, the first ruler of the lagoon communities, called the 
doge (the Venetian equivalent of Latin dux or Florentine duca/duce, meaning leader 
or duke), is said to have been elected in the year 697.
The most significant fact of this entire period is that the whelp of what was 
later to become Venice survived and grew thanks to its close alliance with the 
evil Emperor Justinian in Constantinople, an alliance that was underlined in later 
years by intermarriage of doge and other leading Venetian oligarchs with the 
nobility of Byzantium, where a faction embodying the sinister traditions of the 
Roman Senate lived on for a thousand years after the fall of Rome in 476.
Venetian families are divided into two categories. First come the oldest families, 
or Longhi, who can claim to prove their nobility substantially before the year 
1000. The Longhi include many names that are sadly familiar to the student of 
European history: Dandolo, Michiel, Morosini, Contarini, Giustinian (perhaps 
related to the just- mentioned Byzantine emperor), Zeno, Corner (or Cornaro), 
Gradenigo, Tiepolo, and Falier. These old families held a monopoly of the dogeship 
until 1382, at which time they were forced to admit the parvenu newcomers, or 
Curti, to the highest honor of the state. After this time new families like 
Mocenigo, Foscari, Malipiero, Vendramin, Loredano, Gritti, Dona, and Trevisan came 
into the ascendancy.
These families and the state they built grew rich through their parasitizing of 
trade, especially East-West trade, which came to flow overwhelmingly through the 
Rialto markets. But there is a deeper reality, one which even derogatory stories 
about spice merchants are designed to mask. The primary basis for Venetian 
opulence was slavery. This slavery was practiced as a matter of course against 
Saracens, Mongols, Turks, and other non-Christians. In addition, it is 
conclusively documented that it was a matter of standard Venetian practice to sell 
Christians into slavery. This included Italians and Greeks, who were most highly 
valued as galley slaves. It included Germans and Russians, the latter being 
shipped in from Tana, the Venetian outpost at the mouth of the Don, in the 
farthest corner of the Sea of Azov. At a later time, black Africans were added to 
the list and rapidly became a fad among the nobility of the republic.


--- PAGE 4 ---
THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF SLAVERY
During the years of the Venetian overseas empire, islands like Crete, Cyprus, 
Corfu, Naxos, and smaller holdings in the Aegean were routinely worked by slave 
labor, either directly under the Venetian regime, or under the private 
administration of a Venetian oligarchical clan like the Corner, who owed their 
riches to such slavery. In later centuries, the harems of the entire Ottoman 
Empire, from the Balkans to Morocco, were stocked by Venetian slaves. The shock 
troops of the Ottoman Turkish armies, the Janissaries, were also largely provided 
by Venetian merchants. A section of the Venetian waterfront is still called Riva 
Degli Schiavoni - slaves' dock.
Around 1500, the Venetian oligarch Cristofor da Canal, the leading admiral of the 
Serenissima Repubblica at that time, composed what he described as a Platonic 
dialogue concerning the relative merits of galley slaves: the Italians the worst, 
Dalmatians better, the Greeks the best and toughest of all, although personally 
filthy and repulsive. In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries Venice had 
treaty relations with other states, like Bavaria, by which convicts were delivered 
to the Serenissima to work as life-long galley slaves.
Indistinguishable from slave gathering operation were piracy and buccaneering, the 
other staples of the Venetian economy. Wars with Genoa or with other powers were 
eagerly sought-after opportunities to loot the enemy's shipping with clouds of 
corsairs, and victory or defeat usually depended more on the success of the 
privateering than on the direct combat of the galleys, cogs, and soldiers of the 
battle fleets.
Piracy shades over imperceptibly into routine commerce. Through decades of 
treachery and mayhem, the Venetians were able to establish themselves as the 
leading entrepot port of the Mediterranean world, where, as in London up to 1914, 
the vast bulk of the world's strategic commodities were brought for sale, 
warehousing, and transshipment. The most significant commodities were spices and 
silks from India and China, destined for markets in Central and Western Europe. 
Europe in turn produced textiles and metals, especially precious metals, for 
export to the East.
Venetian production from the earliest period until the end was essentially nil, 
apart from salt and the glass manufactures of Murano. The role of the Venetian 
merchant is that of the profiteering middleman who rooks both buyer and seller, 
backing up his monopolization of the distribution and transportation systems with 
the war galleys of the battle fleet.
The Venetian approach to trade was ironically dirigistic. Venice asserted a 
monopoly of all trade and shipping in the northern Adriatic. The Serenissima's own 
functionaries organized merchant galley fleets that were sent out one or two times 
a year to key ports. The galleys were built by the regime in its shipyards, known 
as the Arsenal, for many centuries the largest factory in the world. They were 
leased to oligarchs and consortia of oligarchs at a type of auction. Every detail 
of the operation of these galley fleets, including the obligation to travel in 
convoy, was stipulated by peremptory state regulation.
In the heyday of Venice, galley fleets were sent to Tana and to Trebizond in the 
Black Sea, to Crete, Rhodes, and Cyprus on the way to Beirut in the Levant, to 
Tunis, Tripoli, Algiers, Oran, and Alexandria in North Africa, as well as to 
Spanish, French, and west coast Italian cities. Especially well-served was 
"Romania," the area roughly corresponding to modern Greece. Another galley route 
passed through Gibraltar on the way to Southampton, London, Antwerp, and Bruges.


--- PAGE 5 ---
Many of these galley ports correspond to continuing Venetian influence today. In 
every instance the Venetians sought to skim the cream off the top of world trade. 
Their profit margins had to be sufficient to cover a "traditional" twenty percent 
interest rate, the financing of frequent wars, and maritime insurance premiums, in 
which they were pioneers.
THE VENETIAN STATE
The tremendous stability of the Venetian state has fascinated historians. How is 
it possible to maintain the great power of Venice for more than a millennium and a 
half without being conquered from the outside, and without significant upheavals 
from within?
Venice remained impervious to foreign invasion from the first settlement until 
1797. The monolithic iniquity of Venetian state institutions was seriously 
disturbed no more than a half dozen times from within the city, and such incidents 
were speedily terminated by bloodbaths that restored stability rather than 
spurring more violence. This feature of the Venetian oligarchical system contrasts 
sharply with that of its rival, Genoa, where each regime from 1300 to 1500 had the 
life expectancy of an Italian government today. It contrasts sharply with the 
papacy, where the highest office was up for grabs every dozen years or less, and 
where humanist factions could sometimes prevail.
In Venice, the bloody resolution of internal faction fights within the oligarchy 
was suppressed to a minimum, and these energies were effectively sublimated in the 
depredation of the outside world. The raging heteronomy of each oligarch was 
directed outward, not at his factional rivals. In the typology of Plato's 
Republic, Venice is an oligarchy, "a constitution according to property, in which 
the rich govern and the poor man has no share in government," "the rule of the 
few, constitution full of many evils." This oligarchy has a residue of timocracy, 
of rule based on honor. But at the same time the Venetian regime was perversely 
aware of Plato's description of the swift transition from oligarchy to democracy 
and thence to tyranny, and against this evolution the patriciate took measures.
Plato notes in Book VIII of The Republic that a "change in a constitution always 
begins from the governing class when there is a faction within; but so long as 
they are of one mind, even if they be a very small class, it is impossible to 
disturb them." The threat of factionalization is located in the "storehouse full 
of gold, which every man has," and which "destroys such a constitution." The 
oligarchs "lay a sum of money, greater or less, according as the oligarchy is more 
or less complete, and proclaim that no one may share in the government unless his 
property comes up to the assessment. This they carry out by force of arms, or they 
have used terror before this to establish such a constitution."
Venice lasted as long as it did because of the effective subordination of the 
oligarchs and families to the needs of the oligarchy as a whole, by the ironclad 
delimitation of noble status to those already noble in 1297 and their male 
descendants, and by continuous terror against the masses and against the nobility 
itself.
All male members of the approximately one hundred fifty noble families had the 
permanent right to a seat in the Gran Consiglio, or Great Council, which grew to 
2000 members around 1500 and thereafter slowly declined. The seat in the Gran 
Consiglio and the vote it brought were thus independent of which faction happened 
to be calling the shots at a given moment. The ins might be in, but the outs were 
sure of their place in the Gran Consiglio, and this body elected the key governing 
bodies of the regime.


--- PAGE 6 ---
The first of these were the one hundred twenty members, or Pregadi, of the Senate, 
the upper house which oversaw foreign affairs by choosing the Venetian 
ambassadors. In the middle of the fifteenth century, Venice was the first and only 
power which regularly maintained permanent legations in all principal courts and 
capitals. The Senate also chose five war ministers, five naval ministers (all 
called Savi), and six Savii Grandi, ministers of still higher rank.
The Gran Consiglio elected a Council of Forty, which was first devoted to budget 
and finance matters, later more to criminal prosecution. The Gran Consiglio chose 
three state prosecutors, who could and did sue any official of the state for 
malfeasance, although the doge was accorded the privilege of being tried after his 
death, with his family paying any fines levied. The Gran Consiglio also elected 
the doge himself, through an incredible Byzantine procedure designed to assure a 
representative choice. First, thirty members of the Gran Consiglio were chosen at 
random, using colored balls whose Venetian name is the origin of the American word 
ballot. These thirty drew lots to cut their number down to nine, who then 
nominated and elected a new group of forty electors. These were then cut down by 
drawing lots to a group of twelve. This procedure was repeated several times, 
terminating with a group of forty-one electors of whom twenty-five could nominate 
a doge for the approval of the Gran Consiglio. Somewhat less complicated 
procedures were used to select a group of six advisors for the doge.
Most typical of the Venetian system is the Council of Ten, established in 1310 as 
the coordinating body for foreign and domestic political intelligence operations. 
Meeting in secret session together with the doge and his six advisors, the Ten had 
the power to issue a bill of capital attainder against any person inside Venetian 
jurisdiction, or abroad. If in Venice, that person was generally strangled the 
same night and the body thrown into the Canale degli Orfani.
The Ten had at their disposal a very extensive foreign intelligence network, but 
it was inside Venetian territory that their surveillance powers became pervasive: 
the contents of any discussion among oligarchs or citizens was routinely known to 
the Ten within twenty- four hours or less, thanks to the ubiquity of its informers 
and spies. Visitors to the Doge's Palace today can see mail slots around the 
outside of the building in the shape of lion's mouths marked Per Denontie Segrete 
("For Secret Denunciations") for those who wished to call to the attention of the 
Ten and their monstrous bureaucracy individuals stealing from the state or 
otherwise violating the law. Death sentences from the Ten were without appeal, and 
their proceedings were never made public. Offenders simply disappeared from view.
The Venetian regime is a perverse example of the "checks and balances" theory of 
statecraft, and there were indeed a myriad of such feedback mechanisms. The Savii 
Grandi balanced the powers of the doge, who was also checked by his six advisors, 
while more and more power passed to the state inquisitors and the chiefs of the 
Ten. The state attorneys acted as watchdogs on most matters, as did the Senate, 
and in times of crises the Gran Consiglio would also assert its powers. The Ten 
were constantly lurking in the background.
Almost all officials except the doge were elected for terms averaging between six 
months and one year, with stringent provision against being reelected to an office 
until a number of months had passed equal to the oligarch's previous tenure in 
that post. This meant that leading oligarchs were constantly being rotated and 
shunted from one stop on the Cursus Honorum to another: to Savio Grande to ducal 
advisor to state inquisitor and so forth. There was no continuity of the 
population of Venice; the continuity was located only in the oligarchy. In fact, 
the population of the city seemed unable to reproduce itself. Venice suffered 
astronomical rates of mortality from malaria and the plague - its canals, it must 
be remembered, were first and foremost its sewer system. The decimated natives


--- PAGE 7 ---
were continually replenished by waves of immigration, so much so that the 
Frenchman Philippe de Comynes, an adversary of Machiavelli, could report that the 
population was mostly foreigners.
Internal order was entrusted to an intricate system of local control in each of 
the city's sixty parishes, meshing with an elaborate apparatus of corporatist 
guilds called the Scuole. This was supplemented by an unending parade of 
festivals, spectacles, and carnivals. Very few troops were usually stationed in 
the city.
So much for the phenomena. Reality was located in the fact that an elite of ten to 
fifteen families out of the one hundred fifty effectively ruled with an iron hand. 
Various Venetian diarists let the cat out of the bag in their descriptions of 
corruption and vote-buying, especially the bribery of the impoverished decadent 
nobility, called Barnabotti, who were increasingly numerous in the Gran Consiglio. 
The regime ran everything, and offices of all types were routinely sold.
This reality of graft was also known to Dante. The poetical geometry of Canto 21 
of the Inferno, the canto of the grafters or Barattieri, is established by a 
reference to the Venetian Arsenal and the pitch used to caulk the hulls of the 
galleys:
      As in the Arsenal of the Venetians
      Boils in the winter the tenacious pitch
      To smear their leaky vessels over again,
      For sail they cannot.
The souls of the grafters are immersed in the boiling pitch, where they are 
guarded by the Malebranche, grotesque winged monsters armed with spears and hooks: 
a fitting allegory for the souls of the Venetians.
Dante visited Venice in 1321, acting in his capacity as diplomatic representative 
of the nearby city of Ravenna, whose overlord was for a time his protector. He 
died shortly after leaving Venice. The two explanations of his death converge on 
murder: one version state that he was denied a boat in which to travel south 
across the lagoon. He was forced to follow a path through the swamps, caught 
malaria, and died. Another version says that a boat was available, but that to 
board it would have meant certain assassination. Venetian records regarding this 
matter have conveniently disappeared.
PETRARCH VERSUS ARISTOTLE
The Venetian method of statecraft is based on Aristotle - the deepest Aristotelian 
tradition in the West. Long before the era of Albertus Magnus (1193-1280) and St. 
Thomas Aquinas (1225-1274), Venice had established itself as the chief center for 
the translation and teaching of Aristotle's works.
In the year 1135, the Senate sent Giacomo da Venezia to Byzantium, where he was 
trained in post-Justinian Aristotelian orthodoxy, returning to Venice after two 
years to begin lectures on Aristotle and to prepare Latin versions of the Greek 
texts he had brought back with him. A school of Aristotelian doctrine was set up 
at the Rialto market, the heart of the business and commercial activity of the 
city. When Venice conquered Padua at the beginning of the fifteenth century, 
Aristotelian hegemony was imposed on the University of Padua, which became the 
only one where Venetian nobility were allowed international clientele, especially 
from Germany.
The inveterate Aristotelianism of Venice is the starting point for a major


--- PAGE 8 ---
literary attack on that city by Francesco Petrarch, son of Dante's personal 
secretary, who took up the responsibility of servicing Dante's humanist networks 
during the disastrous years around the middle of the fourteenth century. Although 
these were the years of the Black Death, Petrarch ("Fraunces Petrak the laureate 
poet" as Chaucer knew him) was the soul of a tenacious humanist rearguard action, 
with spirited counterattacks at every opportunity, that made the later Italian 
Renaissance possible.
Petrarch was a contemporary of the Ciompi revolt against oligarchical rule in 
Florence; he was certainly involved in Cola di Rienzo's seizure of power in Rome 
in May, 1347. The real story of Petrarch's literary and political achievements has 
yet to be told. Nonetheless, the fact that he was a determined foe of Venice and 
its ideology is abundantly clear.
In 1355 Venice had just passed through one of its infrequent internal crises, 
usually explained as the attempt of the Doge Marin Faliero to overthrow the regime 
and establish a Signoria, or personal dictatorship, of the type common in Italy at 
the time. Marin Faliero was publicly decapitated by the Council of Ten.
Petrarch might have had a hand in this operation; during this period he was a 
frequent guest at the court of the Da Carrara rulers of Padua, about thirty 
kilometers from the Venetian lagoon. Petrarch may have developed plans for 
injecting a dose of Platonism into the intellectual life of the Serenissima. 
Petrarch proposed that he be allowed to take up residence in Venice and locate his 
library there; the books would remain as a bequest to the city after his death, 
forming the nucleus of what would have been the first public library in Europe. 
The Venice authorities accepted, and Petrarch, the most celebrated intellectual of 
his times, took up his residence on the Riva degli Schiavoni.
Soon he began to receive the visits of four Venetian Aristotelians, whom he later 
referred to as "my four famous friends." These four oligarchs were Tommaso 
Talenti, Guido da Bagnolo, Leonardo Dandolo, and Zaccaria Contarini, the latter 
two of the most exalted lineage. After several discussions with Petrarch, these 
four began to circulate the slander that Petrarch was "a good man, but without any 
education."
Petrarch shortly abandoned the library project and soon thereafter left Venice 
permanently. His answer to the slanderers is contained in his treatise "De Sui 
Ipsius et Multorum Ignorantia" (1367) (with a swipe at Aristotle in the title), 
his most powerful piece of invective- polemical writing.
Petrarch scored Aristotelian scholastic philosophy as "a prostitute who delights 
to worry about vain questions of words." Real philosophy, with the clear purpose 
of advancing morality, he said, is to be found in St. Augustine. All that 
Aristotle is capable of doing is providing a delphic description of what the 
external attributes of morality might look like. To the authority of Aristotle, 
Petrarch counterposed the Platonism of the New Testament, saying that Christ, not 
Aristotle, was for him the decisive guide. His "four friends," he asserted, were 
not Christian, but preferred to follow their favorite philosopher in their 
sophistry, blasphemy, and impiety. They mocked Christ, and were so pretentious 
that they could not even understand their own arguments.
Petrarch pointed out that Aristotle provided his followers with all sorts of 
strange and curious lore, like the number of hairs on a lion's head or of feathers 
in a hawk's tail, how elephants copulate backwards, how the phoenix arises out of 
his own ashes, how the only animal that can move its upper jaw is the crocodile. 
But these facts are not only useless, he said, they are false. "How could 
Aristotle know such facts, since neither reason nor experience reveal them?


--- PAGE 9 ---
Concerning the ultimate objects of philosophy, Aristotle is more ignorant than an 
old peasant woman.
Venetian nominalism went hand in hand with the most vicious avarice. In a play 
written in Venetian dialect by Carlo Goldoni in the eighteenth century, a 
Pantalone-type miser comes home to find wife and daughter busily engaged in 
needlework. The two women look up briefly and say hello. The miser flies into a 
rage screaming "What? You quit working to pay me compliments!"
An eminent witness of this typical Venetian vice was Erasmus of Rotterdam, who was 
to the years after 1500 what Petrarch had been in his own time: Leader of the 
Platonic humanist faction. Erasmus came to Venice in 1508, on the eve, 
interestingly enough, of the attempt to annihilate Venice in the War of the League 
of Cambrai. Erasmus came to get in touch with Aldo Manunzio, the Aldus who owned 
what was at that time the largest and most famous publishing house in the world.
Venice had reacted to the invention of moveable-type printing by Johannes 
Gutenberg of Mainz in a way that foreshadowed the reaction of the British 
oligarchy in this century to radio, the movies, and television. They had 
immediately attempted to seize control of the new medium. Dozens of Gutenberg's 
apprentices from the Rhein-Main area were bought up and brought to Venice, where 
the production of books up to 1500 and beyond was frequently a multiple of the 
number of titles published in the rest of the world combined.
Aldus was the William Paley and Jack Warner of the industry. Martin Luther was one 
of that industry's later creations. Aldus brought out the works of Aristotle in 
Greek shortly after he began operations in 1495. Plato had to wait for almost 
twenty years.
One of Erasmus' goals in visiting Venice was to accelerate the publication of 
Plato. He stayed at the home of Aldus' brother-in-law. Erasmus writes about his 
Venetian sojourn some time later, in the dialogue titled "Opulentia Sordida" of 
the Colloquia Familiaria. The Urbs Opulenta referred to is of course the 
wealthiest of all cities, Venice. Aldus appears as Antronius ("the caveman"), 
described as a multi- millionaire in today's terms.
Erasmus had been away, and is asked by a friend how he got so skinny. Has he been 
working as a galley slave? Erasmus replies that he has undergone something far 
worse: ten months of starvation in the home of Antronius. Here people freeze in 
the winter because there is no wood to burn. Wine was a strategic commodity in 
Erasmus' opinion, as indeed it was in a time when water was often very unsafe to 
drink. To save money on wine, Antronius took water and faeces annorum decem 
miscebat (mixed it with ten year old shit), stirring it up so it would look like 
the real thing. His bread was made not with flour, but with clay, and was so hard 
it would break even a bear's teeth. A groaning board on the holidays for a 
houseful of people and servants was centered around three rotten eggs. There was 
never meat or fish, but the usual fare was sometimes supplemented by shellfish 
from a colony that Antronius cultivated in his latrine. When Erasmus consulted a 
physician, he was told that he was endangering his life by overeating. Erasmus' 
friend in the dialogue concludes that at this rate, all Germans, Englishmen, 
Danes, and Poles are about to die. Finally, Erasmus takes his leave, to head for 
the nearest French restaurant.
VENETIAN INTELLIGENCE
What was the Venetian political intelligence method? The classical Venetian 
predicament is that of the weaker power attempting to play off two or more major 
empires. This was the case when the Venetian power was in its very infancy, and


--- PAGE 10 ---
survival depended upon playing off the Langobard Kingdom of Italy against the 
Byzantines. This ploy was later replaced by the attempt to play the Byzantines off 
against the Carolingian Empire in the West, an attempt that almost misfired when 
the army of Charlemagne under Pippin laid siege to Venice inside its lagoons. That 
siege, however, was not successful.
In the eleventh century, the Venetians successfully incited the Norman barons 
operating out of Sicily under Robert Guiscard to attack Byzantium, and then moved 
in to offer the desperate Byzantines protection. The price for that protection was 
indicated by the famous Golden Bull of 1082, a decree of the Byzantine Emperor by 
which Venice acquired tax customs-free access to the whole of the eastern empire, 
where the Greeks themselves had to pay a tax of 10 percent on their own 
transactions. Thus began a hatred for Venice among the Greek population which 
persists down to the present day.
In the sixteenth century, Venetian strategic doctrine was to play the Ottoman 
Turks against the Spanish and Austrian Hapsburgs, and then to correct any residual 
strategic imbalance by playing the Hapsburgs off in their turn against the French. 
Sometimes Venice attempted to play the Portuguese rival power off against the 
Dutch. Later this was expanded to include playing the Dutch against the English, 
and the English against the French.
The Venetians also goaded forces out of the East to attack Christendom. Venice was 
the manipulator of Saracens, Mongols, and Turks, and got along with the slave-
trading factions in each of these groups about as well as a power like Venice 
could get along with anybody. In particular, the Venetians were more willing to 
see territory - excepting Venetian territory - be occupied by the Turks than any 
other power. Venice was thus the past master of the more exotic permutations of 
the stolid old British dividi et impera, "divide and conquer."
But the essence of their strategic doctrine was something more abstruse, something 
sometimes described as the "collapse of empires" scenario. Venice parasitized the 
decline of much larger states, a decline that Venice itself strove to organize, 
sometimes in a long and gradual descending curve, but sometimes in a quick bonanza 
of looting.
Venice was repeatedly confronted with the problem posed by a triumphant enemy, at 
the height of his power, who would be perfectly capable of crushing the 
Serenissima in short order. This enemy had to be manipulated into self-
destruction, not in any old way, but in the precise and specific way that served 
the Venetian interest. Does this sound impossible? What is astounding is how often 
it has succeeded. In fact, it is succeeding in a very real sense in the world 
today.
The most spectacular example of Venetian manipulation of the dumb giants of this 
world has gone down in history as the Fourth Crusade. At a tournament in the 
Champagne in 1201, the Duke of Champagne and numerous feudal barons collectively 
vowed to make a fighting pilgrimage to the sepulcher of Our Lord in Jerusalem. 
Here they were to reinforce a French garrison hard-pressed by the Turk Saladin. 
For many of them, this involved penance for certain misdeeds, not the least of 
which was a plot against their own sovereign liege, the king.
Reaching the Holy Land required transportation, and the French knights sent 
Geoffrey of Villehardouin to Venice to negotiate a convoy of merchant galleys with 
an appropriate escort of warships. Geoffrey closed the deal with the Doge Enrico 
Dandolo, blind and over eighty years old. Dandolo drove a hard bargain: for the 
convoy with escort to Jerusalem and back, the French knights would have to fork 
over the sum of 85,000 silver marks, equal to 20,000 kilograms of silver, or about


--- PAGE 11 ---
double the yearly income of the King of England or of France at that time.
When 10,000 French knights and infantry gathered on the Lido of Venice in the 
summer of 1202, it was found that the French, after pawning everything down to the 
family silver, still owed the Venetians 35,000 marks. The cunning Dandolo proposed 
that this debt could easily be canceled if the crusaders would join the Venetians 
in subjugating Zara, a Christian city in Dalmatia, across the Adriatic from 
Venice. To this the knights readily agreed, and the feudal army forced the 
capitulation of Zara, which had been in revolt against Venice.
At this point Dandolo made the crusaders a "geopolitical" proposal, pointing out 
that the emperor of Byzantium was suspected of being in alliance with the 
Saracens, and that an advance to the Holy Land would be foolhardy unless this 
problem were first dealt with. As it happened, the Venetians were supporting a 
pretender to the Byzantine throne, since the current emperor was seeking to deny 
them their trading privileges. The pretender was the young Alexios, who promised 
the knights that if they helped him gain power, he would join them on the crusade 
with an army of 10,000 Greek soldiers.
Thus, from 1203 to 1204, Constantinople was besieged by the joint Franco-Venetian 
expeditionary force, which finally succeeded in breaking through the 
fortifications along the Golden Horn, the bay on the north side of the city.
Byzantium was sacked in an orgy of violence and destruction, from which the 
Venetians brought back as booty the four bronze horses which generally stand on 
the Basilica of St. Mark, but which are often exhibited in other cities. Count 
Baudoin of Flanders was place on the throne of a new concoction titled the Latin 
Empire of Constantinople. The doge of Venice received a piece of the action in the 
form of the title Lord of Three Eighths of the Latin Empire. Venice took over 
three-eighths of Constantinople, a permanent Venetian colony with its own battle 
fleet. Lemnos and Gallipoli came into Venetian hands. Crete was annexed, and were 
Naxos and related islands, and the large island of Euboa, which the Venetians 
called Negroponte. On the Ionian side, the Venetians appropriated Modon and Koron 
and several islands up to and including Corfu. All Venetian trading privileges in 
Greece were restored.
The loot brought back from the sack of Constantinople was greater than anything 
Europe would see until the Spanish treasure fleets from the New World several 
centuries later. Venice had acquired a colonial empire of naval bases, and was 
hegemonic in the eastern Mediterranean. To top it all off, the sultan of Egypt had 
paid a substantial bribe to Dandolo to keep the Crusaders out of Palestine in the 
first place.
For the human race, the Fourth Crusade was an unmitigated tragedy. The hypertrophy 
of Venetian power in the Mediterranean was one of the decisive factors ensuring 
the later defeat of Emperor Federigo II of Hohenstaufen, King of Sicily. The 
Venetian puppet "Latin Empire" was overthrown by the Paleologues in 1261, but by 
that time Federigo was gone. By 1266-68, Federigo's two sons and their Ghibelline 
supporters were defeated by Charles of Anjou, and the last representative of the 
Hohenstaufen dynasty was beheaded in the public square of Naples. The triumph of 
the Black Guelphs had become irreversible.
A further contributing factor in this tragedy was doubtless the Mongol hordes. At 
about the time the Venetians were sacking Constantinople, Ghengis Khan ruled over 
an empire that extended from Korea all the way to Iran, and which was rapidly 
advancing to the West. Batu, a nephew of Ghengis, defeated the Bulgarians in 1236, 
captured Kiev in the Ukraine in 1240, and swept into Poland. In Silesia in 1241 
the German and Polish feudal army, including the Teutonic Knights, was


--- PAGE 12 ---
annihilated. Later in the same year the Mongols defeated the Hungarians. The 
Mongols did not, for reasons that are not clear, advance further westward, but the 
Mongol Golden Horde that imposed its hegemony over Russia was the beginning of 
Russia's economic and cultural backwardness. For some loosening of the Mongol 
yoke, the Russians would have to fight the titanic battle of Kulokovo Field on the 
Don in 1380.
In these Mongol victories, there was something more than mere numerical 
superiority at work. as one historian sums up the case:
      The Mongols did not sweep in wildly and suddenly, like reckless barbarians. 
No indeed, they advanced according to careful plan. At every stage, the Mongol 
generals informed themselves ahead of time about the state of European courts, and 
learned what feuds and disorders would be advantageous to their conquests. This 
valuable knowledge they obtained from Venetian merchants, men like Marco Polo's 
father. It was thus not without reason that Polo himself was made welcome at the 
court of Kublai, and became for a time administrator of the Great Khan.
So the great Marco Polo, and the Venetian family from which he came, was 
responsible for directing the destruction of Ghengis Khan against Europe. The 
omnipresent Venetian intelligence was also a factor in the Mongol destruction of 
the Arab cultural center of Baghdad in 1258.
Friedrich Schiller and William Shakespeare both analyze the manipulative methods 
employed by the Venetian secret intelligence establishment; both considered 
Venetian intelligence one of their most formidable enemies. Much of Schiller's 
writing is dedicated in various ways to fighting the Venice- Genoa- Geneva 
combination that had held the financial reins of King Philip II of Spain.
Schiller's direct treatment of Venice is a fragment of a novel titled Der 
Geisterseher ("The Ghost Seer"). Its central character is a Sicilian charlatan, 
expert at bringing the spirits of the departed back into the world for the thrill-
seeking nobility at seances. This Sicilian charlatan is a figure for a whole class 
of Venetian intelligence operatives, like Count Cagliostro, the mountebank who 
claimed to be the reincarnation of the leading Mason of ancient Egypt. Another of 
this breed was Emanuel Swedenborg. After Schiller's time, this category swelled 
considerably with theosophists like Madame Blavatsky, Annie Besant, Henry Steel 
Olcott, and with that archapparitionist Rudolph Steiner, founder of the 
Anthroposophy movement and the Waldorf schools.
In Schiller's tale, a young German prince in Venice for the grand tour is 
subjected to a series of manipulations by a sinister, masked Armenian, who informs 
him, before the fact, of the death of a close relative hundreds of miles away. At 
a gambling den, a young Venetian patrician picks a quarrel with the prince, who 
fears for his life until he is ushered into one of the chambers of the Council of 
Ten, where the offending patrician is strangled before his eyes. He comes into 
contact with the Sicilian mountebank, and then spends weeks attempting to 
ascertain the identity of a mysterious beauty he has seen at church.
He begins to frequent a semi-secret free-thinking club, called the Bucentoro after 
the golden ship used by the doge on occasions of state. At least one cardinal is 
also a member of the Bucentoro. He takes to gambling, loses heavily, and contracts 
immense debts. In the meantime, rumors are spread at his Protestant court that he 
has become a Catholic, which leads to his repudiation by his entire family. At the 
end of the fragment, his life has been ruined, and his death is imminent.
Shakespeare's "Othello, The Moor of Venice" is a more finished analysis of the 
same technique. It was written and performed shortly after 1603, when the


--- PAGE 13 ---
Venetians and Genoese had acquired vast powers in England through the accession of 
their puppet James I to the throne.
Othello is a Moor, hired out to Venice as a mercenary, and at the apex of his 
power, having just won a victory over the Turkish fleet attacking Cyprus. He 
enjoys the full confidence of the Senate, and has just married Desdemona, the 
daughter of a patrician. Othello, the "erring barbarian," is however something of 
a dumb giant: his proficiency in the arts of war is unmatched, but his emotional 
makeup tends decidedly toward the naive and infantile. He has no real insight into 
affairs of state, or into psychology. Above all, he is superstitious and has a 
propensity for jealousy.
All of these weaknesses are systematically exploited by "honest Iago," a member of 
Othello's staff who is determined to destroy him. Iago is the figure of the 
Venetian intelligence officer, an expert in what he calls "double knavery" - the 
art of manipulation. He sets out to destroy Othello using an accurate 
psychological profile of the Moor, and exploiting above all Othello's naive 
willingness to trust his "honest Iago." Iago's modus operandi is to:
      Make the Moor thank me, love me, and reward me,
      For making him egregiously an ass
      And practicing upon his peace and quit
      Even to madness.
Iago uses his throwaway agent, the dupe Roderigo, for financing and services. He 
sets up scenes where he cons one participant with one story, briefs another 
participant with a different story, brings them together in a controlled 
environment, and exploits the resulting fireworks for his overall strategy. He 
sets up a fight between Roderigo and the drunken Cassio that leads to the wounding 
of Montano by Cassio, who is ousted as chief lieutenant by Othello. After this, he 
manipulates Desdemona's naive desire to help Cassio regain his post into prima 
facie evidence that Desdemona is an adulteress. Iago is then able to goad Othello 
all the way to killing Desdemona and, finally, himself.
At the center of the play are epistemological questions of truth and proof. In Act 
3, Iago drives Othello wild with innuendoes about Desdemona's alleged adultery, 
and makes him commit to the murder of Cassio, all without the slightest shred of 
proof. What Othello then regards as definitive proof of adultery, sufficient to 
motivate the murder of Desdemona, is a handkerchief which Iago obtains and plants 
on Cassio. This handkerchief is an object of deep emotional and superstitious 
importance for Othello, as it had been given by his father to his mother. It had 
been his first love token for Desdemona. When he sees it in the hands of Cassio, 
he is ready to kill.
Iago is well aware of Othello's epistemological weakness. When he first obtains 
the handkerchief, he gloats:
      I will in Cassio's lodging lose this napkin,
      And let him find it. Trifles light as air
      Are to the jealous confirmations strong
      As proofs of holy writ; this may do something.
Shortly thereafter, Othello demands certainty that Desdemona is betraying him. 
What would be definitive proof, Iago asks?
      Would you, the supervisor, grossly gape upon -
      Behold her tupp'd?


--- PAGE 14 ---
This kind of certainty, he says, is impossible to obtain, but he offers an 
inductive- deductive substitute:
      But yet, I say,
      If imputation and strong circumstances,
      Which lead directly to the door of truth,
      Will give you satisfaction, you might have't.
In the final scene, we can agree with Iago's wife Emilia that Othello is a gull 
and a dolt, a "murderous coxcomb ... as ignorant as dirt." But the lesson is that 
not only Othello, but all those who love not wisely but too well, who, "being 
wrought" and "perplexed in the extreme," are potential victims of Venetian 
intelligence.
DESTRUCTION OF THE RENAISSANCE
Since the Venetian oligarchy relied for its survival on the secret weapon of 
political intelligence manipulation, its primary strategic targets were first and 
foremost dictated by epistemological rather than military criteria. Fleets and 
armies, even in the hands of a powerful and aggressive enemy state, could well 
redound to Venetian advantage. The real danger was a hostile power that developed 
epistemological defenses against manipulation and deceit. In the face of such a 
threat Venice did - and does - kill.
The Italian Renaissance of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, perhaps the 
greatest outpouring of human creativity in history, represented such a threat to 
the Serene Republic, and in a more concentrated form than it had ever faced 
before. The threat arose from the epistemological warfare and alliance system of 
the great Cosimo de' Medici of Florence and his successors. Venice mobilized every 
resource at its disposal to destroy the Renaissance. After decades of sabotage, 
going so far as to arrange the ravaging of Italy by foreign armies, Venice 
succeeded.
The potential political and epistemological power of the Italian Renaissance are 
best identified in the ecumenical council of the Church convened in Florence in 
the year 1438. The council, first convened in Ferrara, was moved to Florence at 
the urging of Cosimo de' Medici, who held power from 1434 to 1464. Cosimo was the 
major financial and political sponsor of the proceedings.
Cosimo was a self-declared enemy of Venice. On one occasion he wrote, "Association 
with the Venetians brings two things which have always been rejected by men of 
wisdom: certain perdition and disgrace."
The council had to deal with the ongoing crisis in the western church, which had 
been exacerbated by the struggle between the Council of Basel and Pope Eugene IV, 
who had been driven out of Rome by a revolt. In the East, the Ottoman Turks were 
beginning to recover from the crushing defeat that the Turkish Emperor Bajazet had 
suffered in 1402 at the battle of Ankara at the hand of Tamerlane the Great. The 
first, unsuccessful, Turkish siege of Constantinople had already been mounted in 
1422.
The hope held out by the Council of Florence was to implement Nicolas of Cusa's 
program of the Concordantia Catholica - a community of principle among humanist 
sovereign states for cultural and economic development, against Venetians, Turks, 
and all enemies of natural law. To Florence came the Emperor of Byzantium, John 
VIII Paleologue, accompanied by his advisor Gemisthos Plethon and Plethon's 
student, Archbishop Bessarion of Nicea. The Latin delegation was titularly headed 
by Pope Eugene IV, heavily dependent upon the support of Cosimo de' Medici at that


--- PAGE 15 ---
time. This delegation was dominated in outlook by men like Nicolas of Cusa, Leon 
Battista Alberti, Leonardo Bruni, Cardinal Capranica, and Aeneas Piccolomini of 
Siena, later Pope Pius II. The Greek and Latin delegations were each profoundly 
vitiated by powerful Aristotelian factions, but this was still one of the most 
impressive assemblies in history.
The culmination of the council was an impassioned oration by Plethon on the 
antithesis between Plato and Aristotle, a speech which went far beyond anything 
ever heard in the West. Marsilio Ficino, himself a participant at the council, 
tells the story of how Cosimo de' Medici, while listening to Plethon, made up his 
mind to create the Platonic Academy in Florence.
The most immediate question to be addressed was the reunification of the Roman and 
Greek churches, abrogating the mutual excommunications issued by the pope and the 
patriarch of Constantinople in 1054. The contending theologians debated the 
question of the "filioque" in the Latin credo, attempting to resolve the question 
of whether the Holy Spirit proceeds only from the Father, as the Greeks argued, or 
from the Son as well, according to the Roman view. The Greeks eventually agreed to 
recognize the correctness of the Latin position, although they declined to modify 
their own credo accordingly. The Paleologue emperor intervened repeatedly in these 
discussions, stressing that there were no real differences in doctrine, and that 
anyone who let nonexistent divergences stand in the way of common action against 
the Turks was a worse traitor than Judas. In the end a purely formal reunification 
of the two churches was attained, but it remained a dead letter.
Even so, Cosimo and his cothinkers came close several times to welding an alliance 
capable of dominating the world, and the first to pay the price of their success 
would have been the Venetians. Medici Florence was at the center of a network of 
trade and finance that was beginning to rival Venice, with the crucial difference 
that the Florentines were the producers, thanks to Cosimo's dirigism, of the 
textile products they offered for sale. The Duchy of Milan would shortly come 
under the domination of the condottiero (mercenary commander) Francesco Sforza, 
installed in power with the help of the Medici, and an enemy of Venice. In 1461 
the humanist Louis XI would take the throne of France. This new king was 
determined to apply the concepts of statecraft developed in Italy, and considered 
the Venetians "insolent merchants." In 1460, the humanist Aeneas Silvius 
Piccolomini would be elected Pope Pius II; in the meantime he was in a position to 
influence Frederick III of Hapsburg, the Holy Roman Emperor.
The Venetian reaction to this potential for the implementation of an ecumenical 
Grand Design on the platform of the Italian Renaissance humanists was, 
predictably, to bring on the Turks once again. During all these years the Turks 
possessed a combined warehouse- residence- safehouse in Venice, the Fondaco dei 
Turchi, which facilitated dealings between the doge and the sultan. Spurred on by 
Venetian financing and Venetian- procured artillery, the Sultan Mohammed the 
Conqueror laid siege to Constantinople and captured it in 1453. The Turks were 
aided by the Greek patriarch, who had pronounced the defense of the Paleologue 
dynasty a heretical cause. Finally, it was the Genoese troops who opened the gates 
of the city to the forces of the sultan. Hardly a coincidence was the burning of 
the library of Constantinople with its matchless collection of Ionian and Platonic 
codices, most unavailable anywhere else since the library of Alexandria had been 
destroyed some fifteen centuries earlier. In their own sack of Constantinople in 
1204, the Venetians had declined to appropriate these manuscripts.
The destruction of Byzantium by the Turks gave the Venetians a slogan with which 
to organize their war against the Renaissance. Since the Roman Empire had finally 
ended, it was left to the Venetians to arrogate to themselves the task of building 
a new Roman Empire. The foundation of a new Roman Empire became, in Venice, from


--- PAGE 16 ---
the middle of the fifteenth century on, the leading obsession of the oligarchs.
"The Venetians are called new Romans," confided the patrician Bernardo Bembo to 
his diary. Francesco Sforza of Milan wrote that the Venetians were:
      "obstinate and hardened, always keeping their mouths open to be able to bite 
off power and usurp the state of all their neighbors to fulfill the appetite of 
their souls to conquer Italy and then beyond, as did the Romans, thinking to 
compare themselves to the Romans when their power was at its apex."
Machiavelli wrote that the Venetians had "fixed in their souls the intention of 
creating a monarchy on the Roman model." This is corroborated by a dispatch of the 
ambassador of Louis XII of France at the court of the Emperor Maximilian I some 
years later, which described the Venetians as:
      "traders in human blood, traitors to the Christian faith who have tacitly 
divided up the world with the Turks, and who are already planning to throw 
bridgeheads across the Danube, the Rhine, the Seine, and Tagus, and the Ebro, 
attempting to reduce Europe to a province and to keep it subjugated to their 
armies."
These megalomaniac plans of the Venetians were no secret. In 1423, the Doge 
Tommaso Mocenigo had urged upon his fellow oligarchs a policy of expansionism 
which would make them the overlords "of all the gold and of Christendom."
The most penetrating indictments of the Venetians during this period were issued 
by Pope Pius II Piccolomino, who tried in vain to force Venice into joining a 
crusade against the Turks. A Venetian saying of this period was Prima son 
Vinizian, poi son Cristian. (I am a Venetian first, then a Christian.") In his 
Commentaries, Pius II excoriates the Venetians for their duplicitous treachery, 
and establishes the fact that they are a pagan, totalitarian state. The Venetians, 
he says, have acted in their diplomacy:
      "with the good faith characteristics of barbarians, or after the manner of 
traders whose nature it is to weigh everything by utility, paying no attention to 
honor. But what do fish care about law? As among the brute beasts aquatic 
creatures have the least intelligence, so among human beings the Venetians are the 
least just and the least capable of humanity, and naturally so, for they live on 
the sea and pass their lives in the water; they use ships instead of horses; they 
are not so much companions of men as of fish and comrades of marine monsters. They 
please only themselves, and while they talk they listen to and admire 
themselves.... They are hypocrites. They wish to appear as Christians before the 
world, but in reality they never think of God and, except for the state, which 
they regard as a deity, they hold nothing sacred, nothing holy. To a Venetian, 
that is just which is for the good of the state; that is pious which increases the 
empire.... What the senate approves is holy even though it is opposed to the 
gospel.... They are allowed to do anything that will bring them to supreme power. 
All law and right may be violated for the sake of power."
During many of these years Venetians were in a tacit alliance with the Turks. 
When, for example, a revolt against Venetian rule in Albania was started, 
threatening the Venetian naval base at Durazzo, the Venetians made a deal with the 
Turks to crush the revolt. On one occasion Pius II received the Venetian 
ambassador to the Roman court and condemned Venetian policy with these words:
      "Your cause is one with thieves and robbers.... No power was ever greater 
than the Roman empire and yet God overthrew it because it was impious, and He put 
in its place the priesthood because it respected divine law.... You think [your]


--- PAGE 17 ---
republic will last forever. It will not last long. Your population so wickedly 
gathered together will soon be scattered abroad. The offscourings of fishermen 
will be exterminated. A mad state cannot long stand."
In 1464 Pius II, despite a serious illness, traveled from Rome to Ancona to 
personally lead a crusade against the Turks. He wished to force the hand of the 
Venetians, who had promised him a battle fleet. He died shortly after the Venetian 
warships arrived, and Venice thereupon pulled out of any serious fighting against 
the Turks. But his attack on "the mad state" was on target, then and now.
During the first half of the fifteenth century, much Venetian energy was devoted 
to a rapid expansion up the Po Valley toward Milan. They seized Padua, Vicenza, 
Verona, Brescia, and Bergamo, reaching the Adda River, just a few miles from 
Milan. With Milan under Venetian control, the "new Romans" could bid fair to 
dominate northern Italy and then the entire peninsula.
Cosimo de' Medici, as we have seen, secured a Florence-Milan alliance by 
supporting the claims of Francesco Sforza, fighting a was against Venice to do it. 
Basing himself on this Florence-Milan axis, Cosimo then proceeded to create an 
uneasy peace in Italy that was to last forty years. This was the Italian League, 
formed at the Peace of Lodi in 1453, which united the leading powers of Italy, the 
pope, Naples, Milan, Florence, and Venice, ostensibly in an alliance against the 
Turks, who had for a time held a toe-hold in Apulia. In reality, the Italian 
League was a Florence- Milan- Naples combination designed to check Venetian 
expansionism. In this it proved effective, giving the Renaissance almost half a 
century of time to develop under the longa pax of the Medici.
During these years, stymied in Italy, the Venetians concentrated on overseas 
expansion, including the conquest of Cyprus. But on the death of Cosimo's 
successor, Lorenzo the Magnificent, they began their systematic campaign to 
destroy the civilization of the high renaissance. Their basic premise was that, 
given their own inability to devastate the centers of Renaissance culture and 
economic development, they must concentrate on duping the overwhelming military 
forces of European states like France, Spain, and the other Hapsburg dominions 
into accomplishing this task for them.
The most competent contemporary observer of these matters was Niccolo Machiavelli, 
active somewhat later in the post-Medici Florentine diplomatic service, and a 
factional ally of Cesare Borgia, Duke of Valentino. Machiavelli noted that the two 
most dangerous forces in Italy around the turn of the century were the Venetians 
and the pope. His own hatred was directed especially against Venice, firstly 
because of the stated Venetian intention to subjugate Italy in a new Roman Empire. 
Secondly, Venice more than any other state relied on armies of mercenaries, and 
thus embodied precisely that practice which Machiavelli knew had to be extirpated, 
in favor of citizen-soldiers, if Italy was to be saved from humiliating 
subjugation to the likes of the Hapsburgs.
Machiavelli pointed out that the disintegration of Italy began when the Venetians 
succeeded in turning Lodovico il Moro, successor of Francesco as Duke of Milan, 
making him their agent of influence. Lodovico was responsible for the first major 
invasion of Italy in many years when he agreed to support the claims of Charles 
VIII of France to the Kingdom of Naples. This was the French king whom his father, 
the great Louis XI, considered a hopeless imbecile. In 1494 the French army 
crossed the Alps, accompanied by a Genoese advisor we will meet again later: 
Giuliano della Rovere.
This was enough to bring about the fall of the Medici regime in Florence, to the 
advantage of the Pazzi, Albizi, and related oligarchs of that city. These


--- PAGE 18 ---
oligarchs immediately sought to crush the Florentine Renaissance using the regime 
of the demented Dominican monk Girolamo Savonarola, who set up a theocracy a la 
Khomeini. Savonarola proudly trumpeted that his rule was based on sound Venetian 
principles; his family was closely related to the Padua Aristotelian community. As 
for Charles VIII, he went on to establish a tenuous hold on Naples.
Several years later, in 1498, the Venetians repeated this maneuver, with the 
variation that this time it was they who blatantly invited the French to cross the 
Alps. This time the pretext was the French claim to the Milanese dukedom, and the 
dupe was a new French king, Louis XII. The French army knocked out Milan in 1500, 
a fatal blow to the Renaissance cultural ferment associated there with Leonardo da 
Vinci. Shortly thereafter, Louis XII decided to compensate the Hapsburgs with 
Naples. Naples accordingly became the first beachhead of what would shortly become 
a totally destructive Hapsburg hegemony in Italy.
VENICE AND GENOA COMBINE
For Venice, so far so good: Florence, Naples, and Milan had been ruined. But 
ironically, the same dumb Valois and Hapsburg giants which had taken out three 
dangerous rivals were now to turn like Frankenstein's monsters on the wily new 
Romans. Venetian manipulations were about to boomerang in the form of an alliance 
of all of Europe against Venice.
This was the famous crisis of the War of the League of Cambrai, which was 
assembled in 1508-1509. The opposing coalition was made up of the pope (by then 
the Genoese Giuliano della Rovere, as Julius II), the Holy Roman Emperor 
Maximilian I, France, Spain, Savoy, Mantua, and Ferrara. The announced purpose of 
this alliance was to expunge Venice from the face of the earth.
It nearly worked. At Agnadello, near the Adda River, the Venetian mercenary army 
was crushed by an army composed predominantly of Frenchmen. The Venetians were 
driven all the way down the Po Valley to Padua, and they soon lost that as well. 
Machiavelli exulted that on the day of Agnadello, the Venetians lost everything 
that they had conquered in more than 800 years. Machiavelli was himself engaged in 
operations against Venice, bringing a grant of Florentine cash to the aid of the 
Franco-Imperial forces holding Verona.
With nothing left but the lagoons, the Venetian position was desperate. The doge 
sent a message to the pope asking for mercy, and announcing that Venice would 
vacate territory taken in the past from the Papal States.
Inside Venice, Agnadello brought on an orgy of hysterical self-flagellation among 
the terrified patricians. The banker Girolamo Priuli wrote in his diary that 
Agnadello had been a punishment for the sins of the Venetian nobility, among which 
he numbered arrogance, violation of promises, lechery in nunneries, sodomy, 
effeminate dress, and luxurious and lascivious entertainments. Antonio Contarini, 
newly appointed patriarch of Venice, gave a speech to the Senate in which he 
characterized the Serenissima as a thoroughly amoral city. The defeat was a 
punishment for the city's sins, he said. Nunneries were catering to the sexual 
needs of the rich and powerful. Homosexuality was so widespread that female 
prostitutes had complained to him that they had earned so little during their 
youth that they had to keep working far into their old age.
But more significantly, the shock of Agnadello set into motion a strategic review 
in the Venetian intelligence community which led to very far-reaching conclusions, 
some of which were not obvious before several decades had gone by.
The first Venetian ploy was to attempt to dismember the Cambrai coalition. They


--- PAGE 19 ---
started with Pope Julius II. This pontiff was, as already noted, Genoese. Genoa 
and Venice had engaged in a series of highly destructive wars up till about the 
end of the fourteenth century, but after that, Genoa gravitated toward the status 
of junior partner and close associate of the Venetians. The Venetians had bested 
the Genoese by virtue of superior connections in the East, but otherwise their was 
a broad area of agreement.
The symbol of Genoa was St. George the dragon-slayer, in reality no saint at all 
but a thinly disguised version of Perseus saving Andromeda by slaying the sea 
monster, a legend that is centered on the coast of Lebanon. The "George" is said 
to come from the Gorgon Medusa, whose head Perseus was carrying.
Perseus is in turn nothing but a westernized variant of Marduk, the Syrian Apollo, 
a deity associated with the most evil forces of ancient Assyria and Babylon. The 
Venetians had their own Marduk cult, although subordinated to St. Mark, on the 
island of San Giorgio Maggiore, home of a Dominican monastery and today of the 
Cini Foundation, one of the highest level think tanks in the world. The modern 
British preference of Gorgons is too well known to need comment.
What probably accounted more directly for Julius II's decision to reverse his 
alliances was a deal mediated with the Venetians by Agostino Chigi, the Siena 
Black Guelph banker from whose financial empire the infamous Siena Group of today 
derives. He proposed that the Venetians stop buying alum, needed in textile and 
glass manufacture, from the Turks, but contract for a large shipment at higher 
prices from the alum mines at Tolfa in the Papal States - mines for which he, 
Chigi, was acting as agent. To sweeten the pot, Chigi offered the Venetians tens 
of thousands of ducats in much-needed loans.
The Venetians, fearing a rapid French offensive, accepted. Their own state 
finances were in total shambles. Only the Chigi loan allowed them to hire enough 
Swiss mercenaries to hold out against the French and the Imperial Landsknechte.
To provide a plausible cover for his move, Julius II suddenly discovered that the 
real issue was not Venice after all, but the need to expel the barbarians 
(primarily the French) from Italy. Julius stipulated an alliance with Venice. He 
then set up the slogan of Fuori Barbari! (Kick the Barbarians out!) which is still 
recorded by credulous writers of Italian school books as the beginning of the 
struggle to unify Italy. Even the Venetian mercenaries, mostly Swiss, began using 
the battle cry of "Italy and Freedom!"
Thus the post-Agnadello crisis was overcome. Some years later the Venetians tried 
the same tactic in reverse, this time with more lasting success. By 1525 the 
prevalent barbarians in Italy were the forces of Emperor Charles V, who had 
defeated the French at Pavia, capturing King Francis I. The French lost their hold 
on Naples and Milan. At this point Doge Andrea Gritti, whose portrait by Tiziano 
speaks volumes about his personality, decided to agitate once again the banner of 
Italian freedom. This took the form of the Holy League of Cognac "for the 
restoration of Italian liberty," uniting France, Venice, Milan, Florence, and the 
Papal States under Pope Clement VIII Medici. After having set up this alliance, 
designed to play the French against Charles V once again to destroy Medici-
controlled Rome, the last intact Renaissance center, the Venetians retired into 
defensive positions to await the outcome.
Venetian capacities to manipulate Charles V were formidable indeed. The emperor's 
bankers and intelligencers were the Fuggers of Augsburg, a banking house and a 
city that must be regarded as Venetian satellites, within a context of very heavy 
Venetian control of the cities of the Danube valley. Virtually every young male 
member of the Fugger family, and of their colleagues the Welsers as well, was sent


--- PAGE 20 ---
to Venice for a period of apprenticeship at the Fondaco dei Tedeschi. This was the 
case with Jacob Fugger the Rich. Venice was the pivot for Fugger metals trading, 
especially toward the East.
Thus, the Venetians stayed in their phony war posture against Charles V, while the 
imperial army of Lutheran Lanzi under Georg Frundsberg devastated Italy. The sack 
of Rome in 1527 was the direct outcome of this combined Venetian diplomacy and 
manipulation. To make Charles V's triumph complete, the Genoese Admiral Andrea 
Doria, commanding the French fleet, defected to the imperial side. A Doria coup in 
Genoa then established a permanent de facto alliance with Venice.
In 1530, Charles V was crowned as Holy Roman Emperor and King of Italy in a 
ceremony at Bologna. Garrisons of imperial troops were shortly stationed in every 
major city. Thanks to the tenacious policy of the Venetians, the main centers of 
the Renaissance had been subverted or destroyed. Venice was the only major Italian 
state which had retained real sovereignty. With the end of the Renaissance, Venice 
could feel free to start a delphic Renaissance among the throngs of intellectuals 
seeking asylum in the lagoons.
THE CREATION OF THE JESUITS
The "long autumn of the Italian Renaissance in Venice" during the rest of the 
sixteenth century was only one deployment among several. Another was the promotion 
of the Protestant Reformation. The more immediate controllers of Martin Luther 
have yet to be identified, but this is something of a secondary matter. Luther's 
agitation in Wittenberg was merely one more example of protests against the papacy 
and the Curia that had been chronic and endemic for decades. What gave Luther and 
the rest of the Protestant reformers real clout was a publicity and diffusion of 
their ideas that owed much to the Venetian publishing establishment. The Venetian 
presses quickly turned out 40,000 copies of the writings of Luther, Calvin, 
Melancthon, and the heresiarch Juan Valdes, especially popular in Italy.
Pope Leo X publicly denounced the University of Padua as the hotbed of inspiration 
of the German disease of Lutheranism. Clearly, Venetian interest was well-served 
by a schismatic movement that would embroil Germany, France, and the rest of 
Europe in a series of easily profiled conflicts. In addition, a conflict between 
reformers and counter- reformers, all owing allegiance to Aristotle, would 
severely undercut the influence of Erasmus and others like him.
Venetian influence on both Reformation and Counter- Reformation can be seen most 
clearly in the remarkable career of Gasparo Contarini, who did not let the fact 
that he was a Protestant in theology, well before Luther, prevent him from 
founding the Society of Jesus.
Contarini was the scion of one of Venice's most prestigious LONGHI families. The 
Contarinis had produced seven doges, and Gasparo had his sights set on being the 
eighth, before he was tapped to serve Venice as a member of the College of 
Cardinals. He served the Serene Republic as ambassador to the court of Charles V, 
and as ambassador to the Vatican, where he took a role in setting up the Medici 
Pope Clement VII for the 1527 sack of Rome. Toward the end of his life, Contarini 
was sent as papal legate to the Imperial Diet at Regenburg, where he represented 
the Roman point of view in debates with schismatics like Melancthon. There, he had 
a hand in destroying any compromise between the Lutherans and the Emperor Charles, 
which would have helped to end the bloodshed and dissension of the Reformation 
years.
What does this sublime Venetian patrician have to do with the founding of the 
Jesuit order by that itinerant and deranged mystic, Ignatius of Loyola? Ignatius


--- PAGE 21 ---
was the creature of Venice, and of Contarini in particular.
In 1521, Ignatius was wounded while fighting the French in one of the wars of 
Charles V. During his convalescence, he underwent his much-touted mystical crisis, 
after which he took up the life of a hobo. Making his way around Europe seeking 
funding for a pilgrimage to the holy land, Ignatius found his way to Venice, where 
he camped out in St. Mark's Square and lived by begging.
One evening the Venetian oligarch Marcantonio Trevisan was sleeping in his golden 
palace, and had a vision. An angel came to him asking, "Why are you sleeping so 
soundly in your warm bed, while in the square there is a holy man, a poor pilgrim 
who needs your help?" Trevisan rushed downstairs to find Ignatius, who became his 
house guest, fleas and all.
After that, Ignatius was given an audience with the doge, Andrea Gritti, who 
offered him passage to Cyprus on a Venetian warship as first leg of his pilgrimage 
to Jerusalem. Ignatius continued his travels, but soon returned to Venice to 
develop relationships with other members of the oligarchy. These included Gasparo 
Contarini's nephew Pietro, who became a recipient of Ignatius' patented 
brainwashing treatment, the Exercitationes Spirituales.
Then Ignatius made his way to Rome. Here he became the prot g  of Gasparo� �  
Contarini, who had been appointed to the College of Cardinals by Pope Paul III 
Farnese. The cardinal took the Exercitationes Spirituales, and appointed Ignatius 
his personal confessor and spiritual advisor. By 1540, Contarini had personally 
interceded with the pope against Ignatius' enemies within the church hierarchy to 
ensure the founding of the Society of Jesus as a new Church order. In June 1539, 
Contarini personally traveled to the pope's summer residence at Tivoli, and 
prevailed on the pontiff to let him read aloud the statutes of the new order 
composed by Ignatius. The pope must have been favorably impressed by something. 
His approving comment Hic est digitus Dei, ("Here is the finger of God"), has 
become a feature of the turgid Jesuit homiletics.
BIRTH OF THE ENLIGHTENMENT
An ironic postscript to this story is that later the Venetian oligarchy decided 
that it simply would not do to be too closely identified with the benighted 
excesses of the Spanish and the papacy they so thoroughly dominated. In the years 
around 1570, accordingly, Venice became the site of the first example in Europe of 
what the French later termed "salons" for socializing and literary discussion: the 
Ridotto Morosini, sponsored by the ancient family of the same name. Here the seeds 
were sown that would later produce free-thinking, l'esprit libertin and the 
Philosophes - in a word, the Enlightenment. The Ridotto Morosini salon was in 
favor of tolerance and science, against everything doctrinaire and narrow. They 
sheltered Galileo against the Inquisition. Out of the Morosini salon came one of 
the rare public factions in Venetian political history, the so-called Giovani.
The Giovani, in contrast to their rivals, the Vecchi, were in favor of profound 
innovations in Venetian foreign policy. They wished above all to cement alliances 
with the countries to whom they felt the future belonged: France, England, and the 
Netherlands. The Vecchi, they said, were paralyzed by too much fear of Spanish 
power, and not ready enough to tangle with the people.
The Giovani were able to implement their program in 1606, when the Pope (now Paul 
V, Camillo Borghese) strenuously objected to the arrest by Venice of several 
ecclesiastics in its territory. The Borghese pope placed Venice under the 
interdict, and proceeded to excommunicate government officials. The main supporter 
of Venice internationally was James I, the Stuart ruler of England.


--- PAGE 22 ---
At the same time, the powerful Venetian propaganda apparatus swung into action, 
under the leadership of a Servite monk named Paolo Sarpi, whose lack of noble 
birth kept him from public office. Sarpi was the Venetian contact man for Sir 
Francis Bacon.
Sarpi had been in Rome, where he had been associated with Nicholas Bobadilla, one 
of St. Ignatius' original hard core. He had been a friend of Bellarmino, later the 
Jesuit-general, and his direct adversary during the Interdict affair. He was close 
to Galileo, who called him "my father." Sarpi had lent a hand in the construction 
of Galileo's telescope. Sarpi was lavish in his praise of Gilbert's treatise on 
magnetism. He was also the author of an Arte di Ben Pensare, which is curiously 
similar to the writings of John Locke. Sarpi admitted in private to being "a 
Protestant."
He engaged in a long pamphlet war with Bellarmino, and topped this off with a 
muck-raking History of the Council of Trent, which needless to say whitewashed the 
role of Venetian intelligence in the Counter- Reformation. The noise created 
around the whole affair was so great that some people forgot that it had after all 
been the Venetians, specifically Zuane Mocenigo, who had consigned Giordano Bruno 
- also of Ridotto Morosini - into the hands of the Inquisition just a few years 
before.
METASTASIS
The policies of the Giovani, propagandized by Sarpi and Doge Leonardo Dona' during 
the struggle around the Interdict, corresponded to a metastasis of Venice's power 
and influence through the world. The Venetians and their Genoese Doria-faction 
associates were busily shifting their family fortunes into more profitable 
locations, not tied to the fate of what was rapidly becoming a third-rate naval 
power.
The Venice-Genoa partnership is in evidence first of all in the banking side of 
the Spanish looting of the New World. Venice got control of the silver coming from 
the Americas, shifting to a silver standard from the previous gold standard in the 
middle of the sixteenth century. This silver was used to pay for the spices and 
other products from the East.
Venice was extremely liquid at this time, with about 14 million ducats in coins in 
reserve around 1600. At about the same time, incredibly, the Venetian regime had 
completed the process of paying off its entire public debt, leaving the state with 
no outstanding obligations of any type. This overall highly liquid situation is a 
sure sign that flights of capital are underway, in the direction of the countries 
singled out by the Giovani as future partners or victims: France, England, and the 
Netherlands.
The Genoese around the St. George's Bank received virtually the entire world's 
circulating gold stocks. The two cities teamed up starting around 1579 at the 
Piacenza Fair, a prototype of a clearing house for European banks, which soon had 
a turnover of 20 million ducats a year. This fair was a precursor of the post-
Versailles Bank for International Settlements.
In 1603, Venice and Genoa assumed direction of the finances of Stuart England, and 
imparted their characteristic method to the British East India Company. It is also 
this tandem that was present at the creation of the great Amsterdam Bank, the 
financial hinge of the seventeenth century, and of the Dutch East India Company. 
Venice and Genoa were also the midwives for the great financial power growing up 
in Geneva, which specialized in controlling the French public debt and in


--- PAGE 23 ---
fostering the delphic spirits of the Enlightenment.
The Venetians, in cooperation with the restored - that is, degenerated - Medici 
interests, began a major move into maritime and other types of insurance. These 
ventures live on today in the biggest business enterprise associated with Venice, 
the Assicurazioni Generali Venezia, one of the biggest if not the biggest 
insurance and real estate holdings in the world.
On May 12, 1797, the Gran Consiglio obeyed Napoleon's ultimatum and voted itself 
out of existence. Four thousand French infantrymen paraded on St. Mark's Square, 
where foreign troops had never before in history been seen. The golden Bucentoro 
was burned and the gold carted off. The Venetian "Republic" was finished, but it 
continued most emphatically to exist in less visible but highly effective forms.
One particular of the last years of Venice is of special interest to us: During 
the American Revolution about 3000 Venetian naval personnel, corresponding to 
about one-third of the total available strength, were serving with the British 
Royal Navy.
Commenting on the liquidation of Venice, the great Neapolitan Neoplatonic Giuseppe 
Cuoco wrote:
      "I don't know what will happen to Italy, but the fulfillment of the 
Florentine secretary's prophecy in the destruction of the old, imbecilic Venetian 
oligarchy will be a great boon for Italy always."
The reference, of course, is to Machiavelli.
On the other side, William Wordsworth lamented the demise of "a maiden city," the 
"eldest child of liberty."
POST MORTEM
Unfortunately, all the obituaries were premature: Venice has continued to be very 
much alive. During the nineteenth century and up to our own time it has been the 
most important single incubator for fascist movements. With its military and 
financial power largely emigrated elsewhere, Venice's importance for political 
culture is now greater than ever.
Examples of this are inexhaustible. Richard Wagner wrote part of Tristan und 
Isolde while living in the Palazzo Giustinian on the Grand Canal. One story has it 
that the leitmotif of the Liebestod was inspired by the mournful call of a 
gondolier. At the end of his life Wagner moved to Palazzo Vendramin Callergi, 
where he died. This building, presently a gambling casino, was also the home of 
Count Coudenhove- Kalergi, the founder of the Pan-European Union. Friedrich 
Nietzsche loved Venice, returned there incessantly, and dedicated certain poems to 
the city which today can still be used in lieu of a powerful emetic. Venice was an 
inspiration for Lord Byron, for Thomas Mann, and so on.
Other examples abound of how the Venetian oligarchy's cultural and political 
influence has reached down into the modern era:
      * When British East India Company retainer Thomas Malthus published his 
Essay on Population he was plagiarizing from the Venetian Giammaria Ortes, who 
produced, around 1750, a fully developed version of the argument that geometric 
population growth outstrips the much slower arithmetric progress of food 
production.


--- PAGE 24 ---
* John Ruskin, the leading ideologue of the British Dark Ages faction, began 
his career with a raving treatise on architecture, The Stones of Venice (1851). 
This volume popularized the notion that a "Venetian Gothic" style had been 
developed in the better times of the city's history (which for Ruskin ended in 
1418) and it was used systematically to discredit the Golden Renaissance.
      * A turn-of-the-century new Roman Empire faction led by Venetian Count Volpi 
di Misurata, who was known as the doge of his era, sponsored the fascist Mussolini 
supporter Gabriele D'Annunzio to drum up enthusiasm for a new crusade into the 
Balkans and the East. Volpi became finance minister in Mussolini's cabinet, along 
with a very large number of other Venetians. D'Annunzio incited the Italians to 
take back Trieste, the rest of Italia Irredenta, and the Dardanelles, bringing on 
to center stage the so-called Parvus Plan for dismemberment of the Ottoman and 
Russian empires, which is generally recognized as the detonator of World War I. It 
is possible that the turn-of-the- century super spook Alexander Parvus was 
ultimately employed by Venice.
      * The Societe Europeenne de Culture, a think tank created in 1950 through 
the efforts of Venetian intelligence operative Umberto Campagnolo, has for the 
past three decades pulled intellectuals from both East and West into organizing 
for an "international culture," based on rejecting the existence of sovereign 
nations. The SEC counted among its members the cream of the postwar intelligencia: 
Adam Schaff of Poland, Bertolt Brecht of East Germany, Georg Lukas of Hungary, and 
Boris Paternak of the Soviet Union, as well as Stephen Spender and Arnold Toynbee, 
Benedetto Croce and Norberto Bobbio, Julian Huxley and Thomas Mann, Francois 
Mauriac, and Jean Cocteau. Later, the SEC launched the Third World national 
liberation ideology.
Today, the Club of Rome is the institution that represents the most concentrated 
essence of Venetian influence and the Venetian method. The Club of Rome wants to 
convince the great powers and peoples of the world to commit collective suicide by 
accepting the genocidal doctrine of zero growth. It also hopes to abolish the 
sovereign nation as a vehicle for economic growth and scientific progress.
Club of Rome founder Aurelio Peccei has just written a new book titled One Hundred 
Pages For the Future, a global review of the impact of the Club of Rome, and 
particularly since its 1972 release of the zero-growth model Limits to Growth was 
published, a series of social movements has sprung up under the sponsorship of the 
ideas in the book. These - the women's movement, the peace movement, Third World 
national liberation movements, gay rights, civil liberties, ecologists, consumer 
and minority rights, etc. - must now be welded together into one movement for a 
single strategic goal: the implementation of a zero-growth international order.
The Venetian problem remains with us today. Truly, the most urgent task of this 
generation of mankind is to definitively liquidate the horror that is Venice.
END

