=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: welsingpart2.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 68
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:16:07.515234
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
13 
The Concept and the Color of God 
and Black Mental Health 
(November 1979) 
Agnostics doubt and question the existence of God. Atheists deny the 
existence of God. These two groups combined constitute a tiny minority 
of the world's people. The vast and overwhelming majority of the peoples 
on Earth have a conceptualizati'on of, and a belief in, the existence of God 
(no matter how named or defmed) as the supreme force or supreme being 
responsible for the creation of the universe. Therefore, this supreme being 
constitutes the highest and ultimate focus of their worship, devotion and 
obedience. 
In all but the agnostic and atheistic groups, the training and teaching 
of children about the concept of God, in a given culture, begin at the 
earliest possible age of comprehension and understanding. Customarily, 
long before children are capable of understanding any philosophical and 
abstract consideration of God, they are exposed to the system of rituals 
that the given people have evolved over thousands of years. The rituals 
form a part of their recognition of, worship of and obedience to their 
concepts of God. Thus, long before there is true cognitive understanding, 
• there is participation in the practice of recognizing God. This participa­
tion and practice becomes a part of children's (and ultimately adults') 
concept and image of self in relationship to the total environment, but also 
in relationship to the highest and ultimate focus of their worship, devotion 
and obedience to the God of the people. 
For it is the totality of experience in the environment from the moment 
ofbirth that forms the self-image and self-concept in the brain-computer 
163


--- PAGE 2 ---
The Isis Papers 
ofeach hwnan being. From this self-image and self-concept, all patterns 
of behavior evolve. Likewise, from the entire constellation of behavior 
in the individual, the determination of mental health or mental illness is 
made. 
As a practicing general and child psychiatrist, my defmition of mental 
health is as follows: patterns of logic, thought, speech, action and emo­
tional response, in all areas of people activity, that simultaneously reflect 
self-· and group-respect and respect for harmony in the universe. The 
critical question that arises now is, "What does the 'concept and color of 
God' have to do with Black 'self- and group-respect and respect for 
harmony in the universe'?" 
The oppression of Black and other non-white people means that there 
is no non-white self-determination. It also means, most fundamentally, 
that there can be no true and junctional Black self-respect. More specifi­
cally, this means that the existing levels of non-white functional self­
respect, as manifested in all areas of people activity, are extremely low. 
These low levels of functional self-respect imply that the self-image and 
self-concept are more negative than positive. Likewise, the impact of 
non-white individual and collective behavior in and on the total environ­
ment is more negative than positive. 
To have a negative impact on the total environment is a manifestation 
of behavioral powerlessness. To have a negative impact on the total 
environment is a manifestation of the self-image and self-concept as 
powerless. To have a negative impact on the total environment is a 
manifestation of having been shaped and molded by the total environment 
into a functional inferior through the process of i!iferiorization. (See 
Chapter 20.) The process of oppression is to mold the victims of oppres­
sion into functional inferiors. (See Diagrams I and II.) 
164 
Child's Brain­
Computer 
Child's Brain­
Computer 
Total En · Vli'Onment: economics educati' enteraainm t, labo • on sex, war en r, law, politics, religio~. 
r----.. Self.~ 
=-~ . Behavior "-'Uncept (neganve or positive) 
Diagram #I 
hig.Im~e and concept of God as the 
uest ~d ultimate foeus 
of worship, devotion and obedi ence. 
r----.. SeJf-~ 
=~e ---•Behavior ;concept (negative or poaitive} 
Diagram #U


--- PAGE 3 ---
The Isis Papers 
As previously stated, the global system of white supremacy oppression 
functions through all areas of people activity. The ultimate thrust 
(towards the victims of oppression), in all of the nine areas of people 
activity, is to cause and affect their universalizing. This is achieved 
equally in the area of religion as in sex. It is achieved equally in the area 
of war as in economics. It is achieved equally in entertainment as in labor. 
It is achieved equally in politics as in law. In other words, all nine areas 
of people activity are used equally in the system of non-white oppression 
to achieve the ultimate goal of non-white iriferiorization. 
The concept and the color of God are focused on most strongly in the 
area of religion, although all areas of people activity overlap, influence 
and fuse with one another. The global white supremacy system evolved 
a religion referred to as Christianity. However, it is referred to most 
appropriately as the dominant pattern of religious thought generated by 
the white supremacy system. Similarly, all fonns of economics within 
the global white supremacy system - whether referred to as capitalism, 
multi-nationalism, communism or socialism - are identified more ap­
propriately as the patterns of economic thought and practice generated 
by that system. Further, all forms of political organization within the 
global white supremacy system- whether referred to as democracy, 
nazism, Soviet hegemony ,fascism or nationalism-are referred to more 
appropriately as the various patterns of power relationships generated by 
that system. 
Absolutely critical to the white supremacy system of religious thought 
was the formation of the image of a white man as the "son" of God. This 
white male image then was referred to as "Christ" - no matter that the 
prophet Jesus was a Black man. Because the brain-computer functions 
most fundamentally on logic circuits, at deep unconscious levels it auto­
matically computes that God, the father, is also a white male. If God is 
other than white, he would have produced a Black (or other non-white) 
son. (See Diagram III.) 
Thus, any person programmed to accept the Christian religion, whether 
conscious of it or not, has the image and concept of God as a white man 
in the logic network of his/her brain-computer. 
166 
White Supremacy 
White Supremacy 
White Supremacy 
Politics 
White Supremacy


--- PAGE 4 ---
The Isis Papers 
Couple this image and concept of God as a white man with the white 
supremacy system's formal definition of God as 
"the supreme or ultimate 
reality; the Being perfect in power, wisdom and goodness whom ~en 
worship as creator and ruler of the universe." Then of absolute necessity, 
the logic circuits of the human brain-computer have to print out "The 
white man (as God, the father of the white male Christ) is the supreme or 
ultimate reality; the white man is the Being, perfect in power, wisdom 
and goodness whom all men should worship ~ creator and ruler of the 
universe." 
With this unconscious logic circuit of "God is a white man" flriDly in 
place, white domination over non-white people could last for one trill~on 
years. This would be true if this critical and essential logic connec~on 
could be implanted and plugged into the brain-computers of a sufficient 
number of black, brown, red and yellow peoples, who constitute the vast 
majority of the peoples on the planet With the wllite'man as God, the 
non-white global collective would be obedient to the white man always. 
It was the necessary duty of the vast army of white supremacy 
(Christian) missionaries sent out around the world, following the guns ~f 
white supremacy conquest, to implant- deep within the unconscious logic 
networks of non-white brain-computers- the critical image and concept 
of God as a white man. This unconscious implantation has been success­
ful to the extent that many non-white people on the planet conceive of 
themselves as members of the Christian (white supremacy) religion. In 
the U.S., the overwhelming majority of Black people, as well as a large 
portion of other non-white peoples, consider themselves Christian. 
Thus, all Black and other non-white peoples who profess to be 
members of the Christian (white supremacy) religion, whether they are 
conscious of it or not, worship the white man as God (not as "a" god, but 
as "the" God). And, in the unconscious logic networks of their individual 
brain-computers lies the logic that the white man is the supreme or 
ultimate reality- the Being perfect in power, wisdom and goodness whom 
men worship as creator and ruler of the universe. Although Black and 
other non-white peoples may understand that they are oppressed by the 
global white collective, of which the white males are the dominant 
168 
The Concept and the Color of God 
members, the brain-computer's cold logic circuits also unconsciously 
infonn the non-white (Christian) victim that it is impossible to free or 
liberate one's self from the supreme being who has created the universe! 
In other words, if in the deep, unconscious recesses of my brain-com­
puterrests the fundamental logic that God is a white man and that! should 
worship "God," all of my attempts at liberation will move me only in a 
circle. Indeed, the circumference of my "liberation movement circle" 
could be so wide that it really appears to me that I am moving in a straight 
line of progress. But moving in a circle, no matter how big the circle, is 
tantamount to standing absolutely still, marking time. Many Black people 
in the U.S. now are beginning to feel as though our liberation efforts (in 
spite of loss of life and whipped heads) have left us still standing on the 
same spot of white oppression. 
For the vast majority of Black and other non-white peoples today, the 
arrival of these ice cold facts of brain-computer logic at the conscious 
level will be experienced initially as shattering and self-disintegrating­
primarily because it is God the protector and the creator upon whom the 
self is taught (programmed) ultimately to depend. If the concept of God 
is removed from my brain-computer, upon whom or what am I to lean, 
especially ifl am feeling oppressed, depressed and overwhelmed? If there 
is nothing or no one to provide support, then I believe that I will collapse 
,and disintegrate. 
Nonetheless, as a general and child psychiatrist, I am fully aware of 
the destruction spawned by the unconscious logic implant "God is a white 
man." However, no matter what the level of initial trauma felt when this 
logic circuit is brought to conscious awareness, it must come fully to light 
··and be yanked out. Indeed, there can be no mental health, self-respect or 
· . positive self-concept for Black or other non-white peoples as long as this 
specious and destructive logic circuit remains in place. 
c It might be instructive at this juncture to recall that Christianity was 
based upon the life and activity of an African (Black) prophet named 
Jesus. That the white Romans recognized this fact is reflected in the early 
portrayals of Jesus and his mother as the Black madonna and Black child. 
Jo this day, a picture of the Black madonna and Black child secretly is 
169


--- PAGE 5 ---
The Isis Papers 
cherished as one of the most holy icons of the original Christian church, 
the Catholic church. 
What then necessitated changing the image of Black Jesus and Black 
Mary to white Christ and white Mary? To answer this question, we m~st 
return to the most fundamental fact in the existence of the global white 
collective: White-skinned peoples initially were the mutant albino of 
Black peoples in Africa. These white-skinned peoples were recognized 
as having a disease, just as today's modem science of genetics refers~ 
the condition of albinism (the lack of melanin pigmentation) as a genetic 
deficiency disease. The white-skinned early albinos were rejected by the 
normal pigmented majority. They were chased out and isolated fro~ the 
normal Black genetic groupings. Eventually, they had to m1grate 
northward to remove themselves from the intense African sun rays. 
Migrating northward fr,om Africa, the albino populations eventually set­
tled in the area of the world now referred to as Europe. There, they 
increased in n~ber and eventually returned to conquer the peoples of 
color in Africa, Asia and the rest of the world. They returned with the 
idea that they would conquer and no longer think of themselves as the 
rejected and diseased population; instead, they would think of themselves, 
in compensation, as the superior and supreme supermen and look upon 
all skin-pigmented peoples as the "genetic inferiors." 
With the necessity for such a compensatory ideology and concept of 
self as superior, the white psyche could tolerate no concept of anything 
higher than the white self- not even God. Thus, when the concept of the 
son of God was formulated, in their thinking, the "son" eventually took 
the form of a white man, which by brain-computer logic would mean that 
God himself had to be a white man. Thus, the white collective, in logical 
reality, is not in worship of any force beyond itself. 
Further, it is apparent that the collective white psyche felt ang~r 
towards God for bequeathing them what is now understood as a geneuc 
defect_ namely, white skin. In tum, they have spawned the thinking that 
doubts and denies the existence of God. Thus, they have conceived of ·· 
themselves as being at war with nature, which is the reflection of God. 
They function as though they are in a contest with God and try to 
170 
The Concept and the Color of God 
out-create God. Presently they are in a quest to produce genes and life 
itself. In fact, their dominant occupation is the destruction of the 
universe. And it is no accident that within the language system of the most 
highly evolved white supremacy unit, the word God is the exact mirror 
image of the word dog, and within the same language system, the dog -
not God- is said to be man's best friend. 
Blacks and all other non-white peoples who have operated under the 
concept of God as a white man for the past 2,000 years, should begin an 
immediate return to the fundamental concept of God as originally under­
stood in Africa before the input of the albino (white) collective. The 
African understvtding of God was that it was the only and ali-in-one 
energy force that created and simultaneously was all energy in the 
universe. This understanding recognized tlle God force as the source of 
all, the being responsible for all and the multiplicity of energy configura­
tions in the universe. Furthermore, the belief held that tllere are no energy 
configurations in the universe that are not from God and that are not God. 
It was the African way to respect completely this source of all energy 
manifest in and responsible for all things. This is African spirituality. 
Spirit is energy. Spirituality is the ability to get in touch witll, not only 
the ultimate source of all energy, but also tlle various multiplicity of 
energy configurations, which include matter, plants, animals, etc. This 
was, for Africans, the essential cosmic connection- the power connection. 
Since melanin is a superior absorber of all energy, it is essential to 
establish tlris understanding of God and "all energy." The fact that the 
albinos (whites) lack melanin may also help to explain why they have 
quite a different concept and understanding of God (all energy or all 
spirit), why they conceive of a trinity and why, in the view of many 
·.· non•white peoples, they (whites) lack "spirituality" and the capacity to 
in to, and tllereby establish harmony and justice in, the universe. 
•.J:1,;rth .... , because they lack the melariin sensory system, they cannot intuit 
all is one. 
However, at some unconscious level, tllere must be within the collec­
white psyche the awareness that the color black is essential to be in 
with the God force, justice and wisdom, and that is why they clothe 
171


--- PAGE 6 ---
The Isis Papers 
their men who are supposed to have knowledge of justice in black; and 
they clothe their scholars at the point of their scholastic (wisdom) achieve­
ment in black academic robes. Of course, one might cite a few exceptions, 
but black for ministers, priests, judges and scholars is the norm in thew bite 
supremacy system/culture worldwide. 
I recommend that Black and other non-white peoples begin to practice 
consciously removing the white image of the son of God from their 
brain-computers and, thus, removing the corollary logic that God is a 
white man. Secondly, Blacks and other non-white peoples must practice 
utilizing our particular energy crystalizations (bodies) as direct connec­
tions with the God force. (See Diagram IV.) This means we must learn 
to use our energy crystalization antennae to connect with the source from 
which all energy flows. It is the same as plugging an electric cord into a 
wall socket. By so learning to tune in to the cosmic energy source, it is 
possible to fmd the cosmic purpose of one's particular energy configura­
tion known as one's body. Then, it will be possible to use that cosmic 
energy for constructive purposes. 
I can say no more about how it can be done, but only that it can be 
done, just as I am saying that it is possible to break the logic circuit "God 
is a white man" in the rion-white brain-computer. 
To be Black and accept consciously or unconsciously the image of God 
as a white man is the highest possible form of self-negation and lack of 
self-respect under the specific conditions of white domination. Such 
perception, emotional response and thought are therefore insane. This 
logic circuit ensures that Black people always will look up to white people 
and, therefore, down upon themselves. Orily by breaking that logic circuit 
can the concept of Black and other non-white liberation become a reality. 
This is the direction in which we Blacks must propel ourselves as we enter 
the 21st century. 
172 
God 
(aU «;nergy) 
comuc energy 
Melanin Man 
an energ)'ilbsorbing Man r----------l~ 
Diagram#IV 
Use of 
cosmic energy


--- PAGE 7 ---
14 
The Symbolism and Meaning of Rape 
(October 1980) 
The symbol consists of multiple levels of energy data. The 
hieroglyphs, higher writings or writings concerning multiple levels of 
energy data, are written symbolic thought and language. Similarly, the 
parable is a statement of combined, multiple levels of energy data; it is 
also a statement of symbolic thought. 
Part of our ancient heritage as Black (African) people is the knowledge 
of the symbol. This working knowledge includes the ability to speak, 
write and decode symbolic language and thought. Melanin is essential 
for having deep knowledge of the symbol because melanin is capable of 
absorbing a broad spectrum of energy frequencies or data. 
Black is considered to be a perfect absorber of energy. There are 
inumerable facts that support this assertion. For example, Osiris, the great 
Egyptian (African) god, was referred to as "Lord of the Perfect Black"; 
Albert Einstein's great work on energy was based upon earlier knowledge 
in physics of the so-called "black box" energy absorption and mission 
experiments; black holes in cosmic space are so named because of their 
great power to absorb all forms of energy. 
Persons lacking high levels of melanin pigmentation in the nervous 
. .system, which includes the skin as its outermost manifestation. have great 
dif&culty in absorbing energy data from the universe at multiple frequen­
cies . deep energy levels. Therefore, these white-skinned peoples, the 
eJo,unclers of Western civilization and culture, experience great difficulty 
175


--- PAGE 8 ---
The Isis Papers 
in understanding and decoding the symbol. This is the most fundamental 
reason that "Westerners" have difficulty in thinking like "Easterners" 
(black and brown peoples- people with higher levels of melanin ~ ~eir 
nervous systems), and vice versa. Melaninated peoples are funcuom~g 
with a sixth sense, the additional sensory system being that of melanm 
P
·gmentation while Westerners function with only five senses. Thus, the 1 t • h II 
Western dictionaries defme hieroglyphs as "difficult to dec1p er. 
Similarly, the Western dictionaries define parable as "an obscure or 
enigmatic saying." . . . 
Black and other non-white peoples who have been tratned to think like 
westerners now have to retrain their brains and nervous systems to 
function at full capacity through conscious effort to use their melanin 
networks. This can be achieved through the practice of self-respect, 
wherein Black and other non-white peoples respect and pay close at~e~­
tion to what their own six-sense nervous systems inform them of. Thts 1s 
quite contrlUY to focusing on what white-skinned peoples are a~le to f~us 
on and what they train non-white peoples to focus on. Melanm-defictent 
"educators" can train non-white peoples to use only a portion of their 
nervous systems at best. Thus, it is the responsibility of ~on-whi~ peoples 
to take charge of developing the full use of their melanin potenttal. 
Familiarity with these issues are necessary for an examination of rape 
as a symbol in the white supremacy system/culture. Rape ~san unjust and 
sick pattern of behavior. It is a behavior pattern reflecuve of very low 
levels of self-respect and, therefore, of mental illness. Simultaneously, 
rape manifests very low levels of respect towards others. It is a horren-
dous violation of the selfhood of another. 
The most frequent form of rape is that in which a male aggressively 
and abusively imposes his genitals onto a female with the threat of 
destruction. This conduct is seen most frequently in situations of male 
confmement: in penal institutions, juvenile corrective institutions or 
psychiatric institutions - which are staffed and supervised ina~quately · 
A fundamental aspect of rape is the imposition of the male gemtals upon 
someone considered physically weaker or vulnerable by someone who (at 
least superficially) looks upon himself as being more powerful and 
176 
The Symbolism and Meaning of Rape 
capabl~ of subduing another. Condensed to the least common 
denomu~tor, rape is an act in which the genitals become a weapon. A 
w~apon 1s most fundamentally an instrument of aggression and is con­
~lVed of as an aide to the human body when the body alone is considered 
madequate for the task of subduing and conquering. 
. ~n today's world, rape is common. In the U.S., it is reported in highest 
mc~dence amongst members of the Black population, with Black males 
~pmg Black ~emales. There is said to be an approximately equal in­
Cidence of wh~te ~ales raping Black females as Black males raping white 
females. The mctdence of white males raping white females is lowest. In 
past decades, w bite male rape of Black females was of highest incidence. 
Instead of breaking into the hysteria of the women's liberation 
m?vement. regarding the issue of rape, I prefer to examine the meaning of 
this be~v10r, commencing with male use of male genitalia. As I have 
stated m all of my writings during the past 10 years, there is no behavior 
that can be adequately understood and decoded outside the context of the 
power relationships that exist amongst peoples. In today's world, the 
most fu~darnental of all power relationships is that of white power versus 
non,whlte (black, brown, red and yellow) powerlessness. The underlying 
factors and forces that have led to the evolution of this specific power 
system are 1) the numerical minority status of white-skinned peoples 
glo~y, and 2) the fact that white skin is genetically recessive to the 
. dommant genetic potential to produce melanin. If white-skinned peoples 
had not evolved a global system in which they established power over the 
wo~ld's non-white majority, the white collective would run the risk of 
. wh1te genetic annihilation. 
The fear of such annihilation has fnfluenced the white collective to 
·· evolve, over ~e centuries, massive weapon systems- from simple to gross 
mstruments of destruction and annihilation. This was done, 
fundamentally, to "equalize" the genetic power for white collective 
destruction, power possessed by the planet's men of color. 
The ability to decode symbols is essential to obtain an accurate 
. .· . _ of exactly what is happening in the surrounding environ­
:JilenL For example, the ability to decode helps us to understand deeper 
177


--- PAGE 9 ---
The I sis Papers 
meanings inherent in the major instruments evolved by the global white 
collective (to prevent white genetic annihilation) and the shaping of such 
instruments after the form of male genitalia: guns, bombs, cannons, 
cannon balls, airplanes and nuclear missiles. (See Diagram I.) It is little 
wonder, then, that the gun has been called "the great equalizer," or that a 
white male who is really supposed to be "something" is referred to as a 
"pistol." 
At the same time, the highest percentage of money expenditure is going 
towards the "arms race"- the race for accumulating sufficient weapons 
by both white superpowers, hopefully sufficient to prevent global white 
genetic annihilation. These weapons surround all of the world~s non­
white peoples. Of course, this is not what is said overtly. Overtly, whites 
claim that the white superpowers are arming against one another. But 
this is the language of the white lie, the great lie, the super or superior lie. 
In the depths of the language itself, it is possible to understand the exact 
meaning of the arms race. The arms race also means the "race" (genetic 
group) of people whose genetic existence is tied to weapons of violence 
(arms). Just as hidden within the word "America" (AMERICA), is the 
phrase, "I am race." Thus, it is a symbolic anagram. The whites are the 
only group on the planet to develop the word "race," and they have given 
this word maximum meaning. 
Clearly, in the global white supremacy system/culture, the highest 
percentage of energy is directed towards the construction of weapons out 
of a sense of genetic and genital weakness and inadequacy. Of all of the 
cultures in the world, Western (white supremacy) has the highest level of 
sensed male inadequacy and male awareness of genetic and genital 
vulnerability, thus the need for weapons of attack. This culture clearly 
has equated the male genitals with weapons and aggression. 
As mentioned in Chapter 10, the white collective looks upon the Black 
male specifically as the possessor of the genitals most capable of causing 
white genetic annihilation. This explains the expression, "to black ball," 
which means, "to exclude from social life." 
Thus, in the white supremacy system/culture, white females have been 
taught to focus on all Black males as potential rapists. At the same time, 
178 
The Gun ~ lketch) 
(The guo • a ~ oiv male geaiaalia) 
Bomb 
Weapons as = f the Phallus 
Missile


--- PAGE 10 ---
The Isis Papers 
white females are taught to describe the males that they have the greatest 
level of sexual attraction for as tall, dark and handsome. Clearly. it was 
no accident that once the white female began to petition for her liberation 
from the white male, she also began an all-out sexual aggression towards 
the Black male in particular, and other non-white males in general. 
Unable to admit her own sexual attraCtions and aggressions towards the 
Black male consCiously, she began to talk about developing anti-rape 
organizations to prevent rape - the projection being that white females 
were about to be attacked by Black males. Meanwhile, the greatest 
incidence of rape was being conducted by Black males against Black 
females. The above discussion is the best explanation for the white collective's 
(most specifically, the white male collective's) production of massive 
numbers and kinds of weapons of destruction (which land on Black 
mother Earth) that are symbolic substitutes for a genetic and genital 
apparatus perceived as inadequate. Simultaneously, it explains the use of 
the male genitals as weapons in the act of rape, most pronouncedly 
observed in the Black male population-a population forced into political 
(power) and functional inadequacy by the oppression of white supremacy· 
The weapons produced by the white supremacy system are the truly 
respected male genetic and genital apparatus of the global white collec­
tive. These symbolic weapons are perceived as countering the threat of 
white genetic annihilation by Black and other non-white male genitalia. 
These weapons then are used to rape and destroy Black mother earth, just 
as other technologies of the white supremacy system/culture rape and 
pollute the planet as a supposed statement of white male adequacy and 
power. In turn Black and other non-white males are forced by the same 
environme~t into thinking of their genital apparatus as destructive 
weapons of aggression through the act of rape. Black mal~~ engage in 
this activity out of their imposed frustration and sense of pohucal pow~r­
lessness and inadequacy. Non-white male genitals are used as destructive 
weapons primarily against Black and other non-white females. 
180 
The Symbolism and Meaning of Rape 
This behavior also can be viewed as paralleling white male collective • s 
sexual attacks on non-white women in the global white collective's wars 
of domination against non-white peoples. The white male's sense of 
genetic inadequacy contributed to the white male collective's need to 
continue to debase non-white women through rape and other forms of 
sexual abuse. Such abuse was necessary because the white male collec­
tive felt debased by the dominant genetic power of non-white women. 
Similarly, because within the context of white supremacy more stress 
and pressure is placed on the Black male than on the Black female, the 
B.lack male often perceives that the Black female has more power than 
hunself and that she therefore does not respect his manhood. In his sense 
of inadequacy, he strikes out in the rape of the Black female, seeking to 
debase her to the level to which he feels debased under the power system 
of white domination. 
Although there is no overt discussion of these dominating logic and 
thought sequences, they nonetheless act as powerful determiners of be­
havior patterns as seen in white and Black male populations. However, 
because there is no overt discussion of them, these behaviors have not 
come under conscious control wherein people consciously can think 
through their impulses to balance disturbing concepts and images of the 
male as inadequate. 
, •• Likewise, the global white collective and all of its non-white victims 
m the world, see no connection between the increased incidence of rape 
and the popularity of a singing group that calls itself the "Sex Pistols " 
thus ass~iating sex with violence. The same culture does not see ru:y 
connection between the numbers and shape of its missiles, bombs, guns 
·and male genital apparatus and the ever increasing incidence of sexual 
· . ,. the hi~hest level of violence being expressed in the act of rape. 
-In the magazme/ndia Today (Vol. 2 No.7, August 1-15, 1980, North 
edition), on one page there was an article on the epidemic of 
in India and on the very next page there was an article on the 
· " . of missiles and other nuclear weapons of destruction by the 
subconunent of India. The latter article was entitled "Soaring Into the 
181


--- PAGE 11 ---
The Isis Papers 
Space Age." Consciously, this page and subject association may be 
accidental, but unconsciously it is logical. 
India is one of the poorest countries in the world, with mass levels of 
unemployment and starVation. Those black and brown men are feeling 
debased and powerless under global white supremacy, which they still fail 
to understand after centuries of colonization. In India, there is a massive 
mental disease of people hating their skin color and wishing themselves 
to be as white as their early white (Aryan) invaders. They are obsessed 
with a caste system based on skin color. with the blackest people looked 
upon as "untouchables." They hate themselves and feel debased under 
white supremacy. Also, these non-white men have not discovered yet 
how to feed their people. Therefore, because of this debased view of self, 
they rape, just as the global white collective has raped the non-white 
women of the world and continues its rape of black mother Earth with 
weapons andpollution. 
Since the white supremacy system is predicated on the white 
collective's (most specifically, the white male collective's) sense of 
genetic and genital inadequacy and vulnerability, it reflects this sense of 
inadequacy and vulnerability in the raping of women, weaker men, and 
black mother Earth. Rape is most fundamentally a symptom in the entire 
syndrome of sensed male inadequacy. Therefore, those who wish to 
combat the world's epidemic of rape must wage counter-struggle against 
the global white supremacy system. 
Rape will cease as a dominant behavior amongst Black males once 
they begin to respect themselves fully as men, cease reacting unconscious­
ly to the white supremacy system's attack against them, and learn to 
struggle efficiently and effectively to neutralize and destroy this grave 
global injustice. 
182 
15 
T~e Sy~bolism, Logic and Meaning 
of Justifiable Homicide" in the 1980s 
Where there is no vision the people will perish 
- Proverbs 22:1 
Black people are afraid but Black 1 · their fear Black 
1 
d' peop e are gomg to have to get over 
· peop e o not know what ish · are going to have to 1 d appenmg, but Black people · earn an understand ha · h · · ·.· are not thinking, but Black w. tts appenmg. Black people 
. Bla people are gomg to have to begin think' 
. . ck people are not being quiet, but Black peo 1 . mg. 
start getting quiet so they can think Bla k P e are gomg to have to 
planning, but Bla k 1 . . c people are not analyzing and c peop e are gomg to have to begin anal · 
="!;. B: people do not undersl>nd deep self-respect, ;,:',1: 
. g g to have to learn the meanin d . self-respect. Black people . g an practice of deep 
children to play with parenth:d g~~g to have to sto~ permitting Black 
moaning kin . · ack people are gomg to have to stop 
... , roc g, crymg, complaining and b . goingtohavetostopthinkingth t h eggmg. Black people are 
Black people . a r yme and rhetoric will solve problems. 
1 ~e gomg to have to stop fmger-popping and singing Bla k 
peop e are gomg to have to stop dancing and clo · · c 
.. ·are going to have to stop laughing and and liste . wnmgl. Blac~ people 
·· of these behaviors and nmg to oud rad1os. All addr . th , many more, have absolutely nothing to do with 
essmg echallengesandconditionsoftheo e . 
, being waged against the Black collective. p n warfare contmuously 
183


--- PAGE 12 ---
The Isis Papers 
ar being waged against us because 
We Black people do not see thew afraid We are engaging in behavior 
we don't want to and because we are ~ness of the war - our true 
designed specifically to block out any ~wt the insanity of hoping and · th s forces us m o reality. Our behavtor u . al . pecific behavioral pattern edt the samty of an ysts, s . begging-asoppos o . f people activity: economtcs, 'fi duct mall areas o design and spect tc con la politics religion, sex and war. 
education, entertainment, labor, ~· th B~ck collective is the killing · the war agamst e . A major strategy m . kill d dai'ly in ever-increasmg k alsarebemg e ' · of Black males. Blac m e n wh'tte males also are pemg Other as no - . numbers, across the country. Th Black and other non-whtte · · numbers. ese killed in ever-mcreasmg . . iforms who have been killed b whtte males m un · males are being y . . ~~~ ~"arm of murder and slaughter ts 
S Thts parucuuu 1' 
authorized to carry gun · 
called justifiable homicide. ter understanding of this war 
Our Black collective today has no ~ea th . t di' d when Black males · · fi ble homtctde an 1 
and the phenomenon of JUSU ta dail 100 years ago in the period of 
were being lynched and cas~ated yf, white supremacy following the 
. , r reestabhshment o d' f "Reconstrucuon, 0 ll . have a greater understan mg 0 
Civil War. Nor does the Black c~ ec:;:kmales than itclid two and three 
the current" open hunting season on a 
decades ago. d what is going on, in our impotence 
Because we really do not understan d frustration, we start getting mad, 
. owerlessness an · d' and ignorance, m ourp . 'th 'cket signs rioting in rots rrec-. beggmg wt pt , . fussing, crying, rhymmg, . . our churches and preparing agam 
tion, hooping and hollering, moanm~lm t us even though he lies to us. 
bite man who smt es a . . d to vote for any w 1 Such behaviors are m vatn an . ll b lutely use ess. h These behav10rs are a a so aught and the problem - t e 
Th ill all come to n will take us nowhere. ey w . . 
. ti e and mtenstfy. . war- will stmply con nu n'ence of captivity out of Afnca ched in our expe The stage has been rea d strate a deep self-respect, · hallenged to emon ·ct wherein we are bemg c . -not J·ust the right Sl e, h le brrun-computers requiring us to use our w ~ . rh thm and rhyme. Now we must 
which pennits us to engage m rheton~d· yf our brain-computers, the left . d the left st e o begin to exerctse an use 
184 
Justifiable Homicide 
cerebral hemisphere, which pennits us to analyze critically and decode 
what is happening daily in front of our eyes and to organize a self- and 
group-respecting behavioral response to that which the environment is 
presenting us. We must have a disciplined, self- and group-respecting 
response to the specific war being waged against us. 
Without critical thinking, however, there is no self-respect. Without 
self-respect, there is no courage, no self-defense, no justice, no peace and 
no progress. 
In his struggle against white supremacy, the great leader of the 
Chinese-speaking non-white people, Chairman Mao Tse-Tung, accurate­
ly stated as recorded in The Collected Works of Mao Tse-Tung, "It is well 
known that when you do anything, unless you understand its actual 
circumstances, its nature and its relations to other things, you will not 
know the laws governing it, or know how to do it, or be able to do it well." 
With this in mind, all Black people everywhere must begin to under­
stand the exact and specific nature of the war that is being waged against 
the Black collective. All Black people must begin to understand in depth 
why we are witnessing Black males being shot dead almost daily by white 
males in uniforms and why it will soon escalate to more than one per day. 
Without the specific understanding of why we are seeing this behavior, 
we are unable to organize behaviors to meet this war strategy effectively. 
Furthennore, Black people everywhere must begin to understand why 
the Black collective, and Black males in particular, have been under 
intensive attack for the past 2,000 years. Indeed, Jesus was a Black male 
who was lynched by uniformed white male Roman soldiers 2,000 years 
ago, as a result of the same war that has continued into the present day 
extension of the same Roman (white) empire. 
Whenever there is a sense of increased vulnerability within the local 
global white collective - as, for example, caused by inflation 
: (CtiiiTencv devaluation), unemployment, loss of a war or counter-struggle 
non-white peoples (e.g., Arabs controlling and limiting oil supplies, 
taking white hostages, Black guerillas struggling in southern 
and the loss of the Vietnam War)- there will be an increase of the 
,:ev~:r-rn~ese.m "normal" daily slaughter and murder of Black and other 
185


--- PAGE 13 ---



--- PAGE 14 ---
The Isis Papers 
non-white males by those both legally and illegally authorized to do so. 
This murder and slaughter will be logically viewed as justified within the 
specific logic framework of the fear of white genetic annihilation. 
Within the historic framework of Western civilization and culture (the 
civilization and culture organized to prevent white genetic annihilation), 
all white peoples have the spoken or unspoken mandate to participate 
actively in their collective struggle for global white genetic survival. This 
specifically means, of necessity, the murder and slaughter of Black and 
other non-white males whenever it is felt within the white collective to be 
necessary and, therefore, justified. 
Because Black males, of all non-white males, have the greatest 
potential to genetically annihilate the white collective, Black males will 
experience the greatest ferocity of white supremacy's attack through 
justifiable homicide. Because Black and other non-white males have the 
potential to produce white genetic annihilation through the use of their 
genitalia and because genetic annihilation is the most fundamental fear of 
the global white collective, this collective (consciously or unconsciously) 
evolved a "counter" weapon or system of weapons, that theoretically 
could achieve non-white genetic annihilation. 
The sport of hunting animals (in most instances they have black or dark 
brown fur) in the white supremacy system/culture, wherein there is thrill, 
excitement and pleasure associated with the killing, is the way in which 
the white collective (most specifically, the white male collective), stays 
in physical and psychological readiness for killing Black and other 
non-white males Qustifiable homicide), aibeit that this obsessive practice 
may be functioning at unconscious levels of brain-computer activity. 
Unlike Black and other non-white peoples who killed animals for food 
and shelter purposes, the white collective engages in this activity as 
obsessive sport and play. By using the gun (the great equalizer) against 
helpless animals, they attempt to achieve a sense of manhood and security. 
A fleeting sense of manhood can be achieved by the white male sports 
hunter because in killing the large black or brown animal (the """nlv\ 1"" 
non-white male) there has been a symbolic destruction of the major 
to white genetic survival. Since the achievement, however, is 
186 
Justifiable Homicide 
symbolic, it must be re"""'ted d ·t · . ~""'" • an so as soon as th h . 1 IS time to hunt again. e untmg season opens, 
In the same pe "od · . . . n m whtch there has bee . . JUStifmble homicide there h al n an mcreasmg incidence of kiJ . ' as so been an · . lmg helpless animals makin h . mcreasmg enthusiasm for 
Pe • g sue huntmg 1 t" nnsy1vania world famous Whi oca tonsasPottersCounty 
f: • te adult mal h • athers to kill and destroy bel I . es ave been taught by their 
. P ess anunals for sport d · generation of white males . ta ' an m turn, the next . ts ught the means b h" genetic survival. Y w 1ch to ensure white 
Non-white males may say that the 
obviously hunting does not carry th Y also hunt ~d enjoy hunting, but 
non-white male as it does~ th e_same unconscious meaning for the 
h. 1ar e whtte male · th w lte supremacy p .. _.~.. 10 e context of the global 
• w u•ermore, Black mal from hunting down white mal . es never have gotten a thrill 
bee es wtth dogs and · fl n practiced by white males . n es, as has so frequently 
I · agamst Black mal tis absolutely critical that all BI k es .. 
the meaning of the following facts~c pethople examme and think through 
tw be" . at e very sam . e Ing shot down in the street . . e time Black males 
31 1980 10 ever mcreasing b • Washington Post has num ers, The August · reported that Pola d . mums. t country already is ask' th . n ' a so-called com-. mg e Umted Stat · gram purchases from $550 'lli . es to mcrease credits for "II" mt on m the cum fi mt ton in the fiscal year that b . ent tscal year to $670 
Or.>; • egins October 1 in 0 d f" 
c- ... n 11 needs to build up meat d . r er to mance the feed fi fi . pro uction. Do "e . " . ·. or eed gram to build up meat prod . nemtes provtde fmance 
uction for one another? 
On August 12, the press reported W 
designed 'to help bail Poland out a 
f . est German loan of $672 million 
Doder, The Washington Post.) 0: Alts economic difficulties' (Dusko 
Bank of America granted Pol d ugu~t ~2 a consortium led by the 
an an addttlonai $325 milli" on. 
A recent unclassified CIA stud 
a total of $21 billion, the bun/ ~e.v~als that theW est has lent Poland 
study reports that the West hasole~tm the l~t five years. The same 
as. tronomical $78 billt" the Sovtet block as a whole an on-anamounte ai the and General Motors combined Oth qu to total assets of Exxon 
well above $100 billion. . er experts put the total debt figure 
187


--- PAGE 15 ---
The I sis Papers 
Why are we bailing Poland and the Soviet Union out of their economic 
difficulties, feeding them massive transfusions of hard currency to buy 
bread for their restive masses and teclmology to boost their 
obsolescent centralized economies? Why are Western banks 
relieving the USSR of the expensive burden of propping up the Polish 
economy and regime'? 
The answer lies in a terse banker's paradox: Make a small loan and 
you have created a debtor; make a large loan and you have created a 
parmer . 
... The$1 billion which Westernbankshavefunneled to Poland during 
the current crisis is a startling political intervention on behalf of that 
country's communist regime ... 
The critical question for Black people is "who is the real enemy7" 
While massive numbers of Black males are unemployed and increasing 
numbers are being shot down in the streets in a presumably capitalist 
country, that same capitalist country is helping white communist countries 
and their workers retum to their jobs and have sufficient meats and other 
foods on their tables. Basically, the U.S. is supporting the whole white, 
so-called communist block. This does not include the Chinese-speaking 
non-white peoples. What is starklY illustrated here is that "capitalism" and "communism" 
are not two enemies. but simply the two extreme ends of the total spectrum 
of economic practices under the system of white supremacy, wherein it is 
of priority that all whites (males in particular) have jobs whether they are 
at the right or left economic ends of the white supremacy spectrum. The 
same would be true of the Democratic party/Republican party political. 
spectrum, which in this area of the world is the total political spectrum of. 
politics under white supremacy. Also, it must be noted that while Black males are being shot down ii. 
increasing numbers and experiencing high unemployment, white 
communists, in mass numbers, are being admitted to find their plac~"•J" 
and housing in this capitalist country and are referred to as "political 
refugees." Black Haitians, however, are not admitted and treated 
ly. 
188 
Justifiable Homicide 
In the global white supremacy system, all persons classified as non­
white are outside the white power spectrum and are, in effect, the real 
enemy. Thus, they are manipulated and/or eliminated at the will of that 
power system. In the context of global white supremacy, the only per­
manent enemies are those persons capable of white genetic annihilation, 
meaning Black and all other non-white peoples (most specifically males). 
In the most narrow perspective, justiftable homicide refers to the overt 
shooting murder of a Black male or Black males by white uniformed 
male(s). In a broader perspective, "justifiable homicide" also can refer to 
the numerous more subtle tactics of Black male control and destruction. 
To deny Black males jobs and genuine upward mobility is to deny them 
the functional roles of husband and father. To deny Black family units 
functional husbands and fathers on a mass level is to deny these families 
stability and to deny male children models for adult male functioning. 
Deprivation of male models for male functioning means permanent Black 
male social disfunctioning, affecting all areas of people activity for 
multiple generations. 
The massive increase of Black male bisexuality and homosexuality to 
epidemic proportions can be correlated directly to the debased functioning 
of adult Black males in Black family units by the racist system. The large 
of Black males engaging in drug use and abuse, including alcohol, 
is tied directly to the severely crippled Black family structure, brought 
through systematically denying Btack males functional roles as 
and fathers. The massive numbers of Black males trapped in 
· juvenile justice system and the penal system also are related directly 
absence of truly functional fathers and husbands in the homes from 
these victimized males have come. Current statistics (1980) indi-
.that among Blacks, the proportion of one-parent families is a stag-
49% (1.8 million families). This is 83% higher than a decade ago. 
rates among one-parent units are enormously higher than among 
units. 
television media also play a major role in reinforcing the debase­
the Black male. Bill Cosby is debased by always being depicted 
at the level of infants. Muhammed Ali is debased by always 
189


--- PAGE 16 ---
The Isis Papers 
. . roaches and biting into sandwiches in-
being shown clowmng, chasmg 1 • character "Mr. Jefferson" in 
1 ns Sherman Helms ey s . b' stead of waterme o . . . like a monkey and chm mg 
The Jeffersons is always clownmg, actm~ economic attainment. Mr. 
. 't of supposed supenor . over furniture, mspt e . 11' nt manly white male who ts ed to a more mte •ge , Jefferson is contrast . eall'~ 18. married to a white male). 
k ~ -~ 'e (who m r he is . married to a Blac .en~ sence of Black adult male mode ill 
With the massive failure and ab . . provides Black male youths . · real life teleVISIOn family constellanons m ' hi Shadow conditioning these 
f th odel of The ~ te ' k with the white a er m lack dult male models and to loo 
sed to the absence ofB a f'· ....... children to get u "the man .. This theme is advanced Ul u•er 
up to the white adult male as ·llai haise) and Different Strokes 
( · g Herve Ve c in Fantasy Island stamn ck le will look particularly at 
(starring Gary Coleman). Most Bla illi~~ .. e" However, both Gary 
d "He's a m o ........ · · · a1 G•n·v Coleman an say, hit males with constitution 
-J llai ha' earenon-w e , Coleman and Herve Ve c IS . th . hysical stature to be abnormal· . d fi . cies causmg err p . and/or genenc e Icten • but it is their genetic or · deed excellent actors, al ly short. Yes, they are 
1
~ irl site adult white males of norm 
constitutional abnonnahty' play g oppo presentation in both of 
. al h 'ght that is the core white supremacy phystc et ' . . . . 
these popular televtston senes. th Black and other non-white d truetive statement at . The profoundly es . . all defective compared to wh1te · all and constitunon Y th males are genenc Y . being propagated over e 
tl 10essage that 1s males is the sub e core . and constitutional abnor-
. This image of non-white male genetic d radios arrways. bile as background, newspapers an 
mality is set forth weekly, w . . f Nobel Prize winner Dr. on the discussiOn o give continuous coverage sed enetic inferiority of Black people 
Wl'Uiam Shockley about the suppo g S _, years aao the weekly . 'lization eveuu 0 ' 
and the need for therr sten . . f the Black male as a female 
. . resentation and promonon o . " as televiSIOn P . Fli W'lson's role of "Geraldine, w · portrayed m P 1 
a transvesnte, ~. fthe Black male's genetic makeup and 
similarundermmmg o. . ar weekly television portrayal of a we:ll-alfes:seu·· 
There was/is no such Slffiil tite in the white supremacy 
white male as a female and transves 
and culture. 
190 
Justifiable Homicide 
Blacks and other non-white people do not perceive these messages 
because they are blind to the context of the white supremacy power 
structure that surrounds thelD. They look at such programs and are 
pleased; they smile and laugh. Nonetheless, this continued presentation 
of Black genetic inferiority makes the fmal destruction of Blacks appear 
to Blacks themselves as a relief from the burden of their own genetic 
inadequacy. One can be assured thai there will never be a weekly 
television presentation of a constitutionally and genetically deformed 
blue-eyed, blond white male, playing opposite an irltelligently behaving 
Black male of normal stature, as long as the white supremacy system 
remains intact. 
. These more subtle means of achieving justifmble homicide all serve to 
advance the ultilDate goal of white genetic survival. For, with Black adult 
males unable to function as 10en (on drugs, in prison, as clowns and 
buffoons, as infants and perceived as genetic defectives, transvestites and 
homosexuals), there will not be a major threat of white genetic annihila­
tion, and white genetic survival is assured. The white collective cannot 
be asked to cease their drive for justifiable homicide in its gross and subtle 
forms. To do so would mean white suicide . 
It is therefore the self-respecting task of Blacks and all other non-whites 
to understand the war and the behavioral dynaiDic of white supremacy, in 
which they are presently trapped. Through this understanding, we must 
evolve our own behavior (in all areas of people activity) that will even­
tually checklDate this global white necessity and injustice. 
. Black people may begin by educating all Black male children to 
understand white supre10acy and by putting increased pressure on Black 
~males to recognize their role as husbands and fathers. This understanding 
means that Black men must work and provide support for their families, 
the white collective attempts to prevent them from doing. Males 
do not demand and fight, if necessary, to have jobs cannot become 
."uu~'Ullii'U:S or fathers. Most certainly, teenage male children cannot be­
parents, which means that Black females will have to learn when 
under what circumstances they should relate to Black 10ales in the act 
Ul sexu.i:IJ intercourse and self-reproduction. 
191


--- PAGE 17 ---
The Isis Papers 
This internal pressure to preserve the role of Black manhood becomes 
a means by which the concept of Black manhood is developed and 
preserved by Black peoples themselves. This activity will counter the 
thrust of the Black male as female, clown, infant, buffoon, transvestite, 
homosexual. Black males who are unwilling to fight for their manhood 
are thereby indicating that they debase Black manhood and will not be 
able to teach it to the next generation. These males do not deserve the 
privilege of procreating themselves, and this should be enforced by all 
Black females who are self-respecting. 
White supremacy is war against Black people in general and against 
Black males in particular, as embodied in such tactics and strategies as 
justifiable homicide. It will require a total commitment and counter war 
effort on the part of all Black peoples to neutralize, by every means at 
their disposal, this war of racist injustice. 
As Black people, we also can adopt the defmition that under the 
conditions of white supremacy, Black manhood does not mean macho or 
money, but instead it means warrior or soldier against white supremacy, 
embracing everything that the words warrior or soldier imply. Those who 
do not wish to be warriors or soldiers should not procreate themselves, as 
their offspring can be expected to be destroyed by white supremacy 
anyway. This is by no means a definitive statement on Black response to 
justiftable homicide, but it is an attempt to elevate the discussion on this 
specific white supremacy war strategy. Further discussion amongst Black 
people will help to define all necessary Black behavioral response. 
192 
16 
Paper Money and Gold As Symbols 
(1980) 
The image or concept of the self in the deep recesses of the brain-com­
puter, as programmed through the total environment interacting with the 
genetic and constitutional base, detennines all patterns of symbols, logic, 
thought, speech, action, emotional response and perception in all areas of 
people activity. As such, the self-image is the core from which all else 
.evolves in the brain-computer. Thus, the deep self-image is the key 
concern of the psychiatrist. 
Why should one focus on deep symbols? What do we achieve through 
· symbol analysis and understanding? Truth cannot be concealed. Truth 
is "that which is." It is specific energy in the universe. It literally begs to 
·. be revealed, especially when hypocrisy and deceit- distorted statements 
of "that which is" -move towards domination. Truth then reveals itself, 
. speaks and surfaces through the symbol. The symbol is the fonn through 
· which a highly dynamic idea or concept can "tunnel" underground 
through the unconscious to be expressed. The symbol is the product of 
. environmental energy condensation. 
R.A. Schwaller de Lubicz in his book, Symbol and the Symbolic, 
explains: 
... that true progress inhuman thought can be made only if we call upon 
the 'symbolizing' faculty of human intelligence, the faculty developed 
and refmed in the Temple Culture of ancient Egypt and reflected in 
the hieroglyphics that have come down to us undisturbed. The 
mentality of ancient Egypt helps to free us from our present intellectual 
impasse, while 'symbolism' must be recognized for what it is: the 
193


--- PAGE 18 ---
~~,...."'"'"-"""--'"'-..,...-="'-~" ~~---~---
The Isis Papers 
intuitive means of overcoming the limitations of reason and achieving 
a higher humanism. 
Schwaller de Lubicz also indicates ... 
Egypt and other cultures grounded in the symbolic method, were 
indeed, through symbols, educating the neurological structures of the 
brain to maintain an active, conscious connection not only between 
the bilateral lobes of the cerebral cortex, but also with the impulses 
and subliminal information received from the ancient and deeper 
limbic and reptilian centers, so that these aspects of our nature could 
be integrated into the activity of our reasoning mind. 
Symbols and the decoding of symbols has yet to become a major area 
of interest and study in Western civilization. This is regrettable at one 
level, yet very understandable at a deeper level. Decoding the symbol is 
an activity not unlike that of the physical scientist who places matter or 
living substance under the lens of a light microscope or an electromicro­
scope for the purpose of gaining deeper insight into and understanding of 
the structure and function of that matter. In both instances (decoding the 
symbol and examining matter under a microscope), the process of inves­
tigation serves to refine our knowledge and influence our behavior in the 
universe. Decoding the symbol also leads to a deeper understanding of 
the self, and so frees the self. There are few who would argue that in-depth 
knowledge is not superior to knowledge of the surface alone. 
The process of decoding and visualizing the symbol does not require 
the aid of a device beyond the human body, such as the microscope. Such 
a process requires fast and foremost the activity of the right cerebral 
hemisphere and those sensory, neuro-chemical channels that feed primari­
ly into this area of the human brain-computer. As a theoretical extension, 
I am convinced that the neuropigment melanin plays a crucial role in this 
right cerebral hemisphere sensory, neurochemical system. 
Melanin acts as an energy-data absorbing biological pigment in the 
nervous system leading specifically to the right cerebral hemisphere. 
Melanin as a neuropigment has the capacity to absorb levels of energy 
activity outside the spectrum of energy frequencies processed by the five 
194 
Paper Money and Gold 
traditional senses (sight, hearing, touch, taste and smell) recognized in 
Western civilization, the civilization evolved by the white skinned collec­
tive who lacks any substantial quality of melanin skin and nervous system 
pigmentation and likewise, who has a lesser energy-data gathering capacity. 
Let us now examine some views on money. 
For the Jove of money is the root of all evils; it is through this craving 
that some have wandered away from the faith and pierced their hearts 
with many fangs. (Holy Bible, Timothy 6: 11) 
Ernest Becker in Escape From Evil states: 
One of the fascinating chapters in history is the evolution of money -
all the more so since it has yet to be written.... One of the reasons it 
isn't written is that the origin of money is shrouded in prehistory; 
another is that its development must have varied, must not have 
followed a single universal line. Still a third reason touches closer to 
home: modern man seems to have trouble understanding money; it is 
too close to him, too much a part of his life. As someone once 
remarked, the last thing a flSh would discover is water, since it is so 
unconsciously and naturally a part of its life. But beyond all of this, 
[money] .... is still sacred, still a magical object on which we rely for 
our entrance to immortality. Or, put another way, money is obscure 
to analysis because it is still a living myth, a religion .... How else 
explain that we do not yet have a single history of money, despite the 
massive collection of anthropological and historical monographs, the 
observations by Plato and Aristotle themselves, those by Augustine 
on money fetishism ... the insights of Marx, and now, finally of modem psychoanalysis? 
... Death is overcome by accumulating time-defying monuments. 
These accumulations of stone and gold make possible the discovery 
of the immortal sourl...Death is overcome on condition that the real 
actuality of life pass into these immortal and dead things; money is the 
man; the inunortality of the estate or a corporation resides in the dead things which alone endure. "5 
195


--- PAGE 19 ---
The Isis Papers 
In Life Against Death, Norman 0. Brown asserts: 
No wonder economic quality is beyond the endurance of modem 
democratic man: the house, the car, the bank balance are his 
immortality symbols. Or, put another way, if a black man moves next 
door, it is not merely that your house diln]nishes in real estate value, 
but that you diminish in fullness on the level of visible immortality -
and so you die. 
, In his essay "The Ontogenesis of the Interest in Money" (The 
Psychology of Gambling, edited by Jon Halliday and Peter Fuller), Sandor 
Ferenczi states, 
Every psychoanalyst is familiar with the symbolic meaning of money 
that was discovered by Freud. Whenever the archaic way of thinking 
has prevailed or still prevails, in the old civilizations, in myths, 
fairytales, superstitions, in unconscious thinking, in dreams and in 
neuroses, money has been brought into the closest connection with 
filth! 
Ferenczi outlines in some detail his own view of the transformation of 
anal-erotic interest into monetarY interest, wherein the individual ends by 
being able to possess something of color that has value, is hard (and not 
soft), it neither has odor nor causes the person who touches it to be soiled 
or dirty. 
Edmund Bergler, author of Money and Emotional Conflict, states, 
Money neurosis can be found in every country. every culture, every 
group of any given society; therefore it cannot be used to prove 
anythmg against our system of free enterprise. For money neurosis is 
a by-product arising independently of any external system. 
In sharp contrast to the above quotations and viewpoints on 
Emest Becker, in his work Escape From Evil, relates an African view 
money: 
Recently I have heard Bantu of the old school say, with reference to 
our modem products, the Europeanized evolves, 'These are men of 
196 
Paper Money and Gold 
lupeto (money)'. They have explained young men of ours know nothin b to me that the Europeanized 
possessing any value ~ g ut money, that it is the only thing 
hil .or them Th . p osophy .. .for a philosophy of . ey ... give up their Bantu 
ideal, their end and th money. Money is their one and onl . e supreme ultimat .. Y actlOns .... Everything has be d e norm ... regulating their 
modem universal rule of con:~ct· esltroyed( by this new value, this · upeto money). 
These intriguing remarks can be understood beneath the surface to comprehe d h only when we probe deep 
at the unconscious level of th n w atmoney(papermoney)represents e symbol - a level f d 
suspected by Sigmund Freud T f 11 ar eeper than ever 
depth of the Western self-i . o u ~ un~e~tand, one must examine the 
N 
1 
mage and Its ongm 
o c earer statement of the Western . 
that expressed by essayist Samuel Lan :If-concept need be found than 
Made Twain. In "Skin Deep " o f g om Clemmens, .known to all as 
D • ne o a collecti f amned Human Race, Twain described on. o essays entitled The 
commenting on their costwn d a gathenng of people in India es an complexions as follows: , 
... The company 
fir 
present...made a fme sh eworks, so to speak · th ow, an exhibition of human 
brilliant color.... ' m e maners of costumes and cominglings of 
I could have wished to start a rival e ... and clothes. It would have b :mition there, of Christian hats 
devilish spectacle Th theen a deous exhibition, a thorough! 
did 
· en erewould th Y sa vantage of the white . no ave been the added un 1 complex10n It · p easantcomplexion when itk : lS not an unbearably 
?~petition with masses of bro~ps to Itself, but when it comes into 
It lS endurable only because we and black. the fact is betrayed that 
brown skins are beautiful b t beare ~ed to lt. Nearly all black and 
d k u a autiful hi · · ar complexions are massed the w te skin lS rare .... Where 
unwholesome, and sometimes :::::-e the whites look bleached out, 
down South in the slavery da b fi y ghastly. I could notice this 
satin skin of the SouthAfric ~ I e ore the war. The splendid black 
very close to perfection. an u us of Durban seemed to me to come 
heard from a 19th century Am . encan essay· t 1 . statement published in th fi IS • et us now hsten e mal quarter of the 20th century 
197


--- PAGE 20 ---
The Isis Papers 
. How to Get a Great Tan (Without (June 1979). Roger C. Sharpe, m 
Frying) explains: 
ff . ter's draining hold and . . To shake o wm It's time to feel alive agam. er SWl It's also the season get out into the reviving glow of thethsunun ho ~and those who wish 
kind of people: ose w ' . t when there are two s do ' be left out in the shade. It s ume or 
they could. This summer, n t Fr Memorial Day to Labor Day, 
you to glow with a healthy tan. ~g off those excess pounds, 
you'll be on display. That means d of Let's face it: a great tan 
and domring a new skin you'.ll be prouel .eel A bit of color can take 
sexter more r ax • d . makes you look younger, ' £ 1 better about yourself. An lt 
you a long way. It will make y~u ~ 'ally when there's more of Will make others look at you tWice, specl d things in life, getting a 
Y with most goo you that can be seen. et, as d For most of us, who have only 
great tan is a double-edged swor : there is never enough time to 
weekends or a brief summer vacau.on, t there we tend to overdo a 
spend in the SWl. So when we do get ?~y felt. • We stumble back to good thing. The consequenses are rap\"" What promised to be a ff. burned to a er-r· he O
ur homes and o lees, h k or streaks and splotc s. 
like a pate wor ks f gorgeous tan looks more h rt haircut) and the bac o 
Our earlobes are tender (another tooeks :e are plagued with flaking 
For the next we • d d 't our knees are sore. . We don't feel young an we on 
skin in the bedsheets. We ltch. d come home a mess. Surely 
d reat tan an we ' . d feel sexy. We wante a g . the a es that follow, we ve tne 
there's a better way! There.IS.ad In . pb!edonon-the-spotresearch 
d practical v tce, . . ts to give you some goo ' W lydiscuss theposltlve aspec 
and talks with medical experts. eso~ summer, be smart. Find out 
of tanning, as well as the dangers. £ ou go out there. you can get 
what happens to you in ~el SWl ;~~~~r~ a natural for tanning, you'll 
a great tan, more effecu.ve y. d keep - a better tan. And 
pick up pointers that will help you get -:able to catch the rays, this 
if you're the type who nev~r see~ to 
uld be your turning pomt. summer co 
. ter "Getting the Perfect Overall The same author continues m the chap 
Tan": 
. mind if you decide to go nude this Something you should keep m our body that have never been 
SUillffier is that there may be parts ~f~ throomlight. You don't want 
exposed to anything stronger~ . e :o some commonsense advice to rue the day you went back to astcs, 
198 
Paper Money and Gold 
is in orc:ler. Don't try to overdo your time in the SWl; keep your initial 
tanning time down to a minimum. Gently break in those fonnerly 
unexposed parts of your body to the idea that this is their year in the 
sun. Extra sunscreening for these areas are also in order to prevent 
any drying and urmecessary burning. Mter all, what's dte point of 
sunning aiJ over if one part of you gets golden brown and another 
bright red? So be careful. Take things a day at a time. 
Melanin is the black pigment which pennits skins to appear other than 
white (black, brown, red and yeliow). Melanin pigment coloration is the 
nonn for the hue-man family. If there are non-white readers who disagree 
with this presentation of white rejection of the white-skinned self, may I 
refer you to the literature on the currently developing sun-tanning parlors. 
In a Newsweek (December, 1979) article entitled, "90-Second Suntans," 
there is a picture of a heavily tanned girl clad in a bikini swimsuit. Under 
the picture the caption reads, "Los Angeles tanning booth: Brown at any price." The article concludes: 
For growing hordes of sunlamp worshippers, however, it seems to be 
a tan at any cost. 'Something is going to get all of us one day, so why 
worry about it?' rationalizes Robert Duncan, Manager of a fast-food 
restaurant in Costa Mesa, Calif. 'If tanning is going to kill me at least I'll be a good-looking corpse.' 
The above testimonies, from white persons writing perhaps a century 
apart, manifest the white collective's dissatisfaction with the white com­
plexion. Likewise, a pervasive and strong desire on the part of the white 
global collective to have skin that looks otherwise- skin that shines, skin 
tliat is satin black or golden brown in color, skin that does nor exhibit a 
,"'"'~'llluu'• pigment deficiency - is articulated clearly. 
In addition, Western culture has a folk saying, "Clothes make the man," 
implication being that the worth of the person is established ani y after 
body (shamefully white) is covered. This same symbolism was 
~prteSSt:o unconsciously at a mass level at the height of the Watergate 
- the only time in the history of America (the major unit in the 
" white organization) when a President was forced to resign because 
;,~fllltmeJ'" behavior. At the peak of this period of national shame, white 
199


--- PAGE 21 ---
l.-, 
The Isis Papers 
l began to dart about naked, running across open spaces, exposing maes . h' h their naked white bodies, and then hiding. This behaviOr, w .Ic was 
never decoded at deep levels, was called streaking. The behaviOr sym­
bolically represented that in the white collective brain-computer the nake.d 
white body is equated with shame. Thus, when deep national shame. Is 
exposed to the world, there is a compulsion to expose the naked white 
body. . th . f There is also a parallel with the present increase m e pracnce o 
nudism in this area of the world, when America is experiencing a lo~s of 
power and prestige at national and international levels.. At the nm~, 
America begins to reveal more and more of the naked white body. ThiS 
pattern of increased white body exposure also incl~des the ~pl~ss and 
bottomless bars that came into prominence followmg Amenca s great 
shame in the loss of the Vietnam War. . . 
Now examine a dollar bill. Note that the original p~per IS ba~Ically 
white. On one side, the printing and engraving is done w.tth ~reen mk ~n 
white paper. On the other side, the printing and engravmg .Is ~one with 
black ink on white paper. A major symbol on the dollar billts ~.so the 
African pyramid and the symbol of Osiris, the divine eye. Osms :'.as 
referred to as "Lord of the Perfect Black." Now recall. the. far~nli~ 
expression, "Money does not grow on trees." The surface. tmplicanon lS 
that money is not so readily available. At a deeper level m th~ Western 
psyche, the statement likens paper money to tree leaves. One stde ~f that 
paper money is green, and the money is in tum referred to as green 
backs." d To further decode the symbolism of paper money' o~e mu~t understan 
that all paper money in Western culture is the sym~hc equivalent of the 
proverbial fig leaves. Western artists always deptct fig leaves as the 
objects used to cover the genitals of the white bodies of Adam and Eve-
covering their nakedness, their bodily shame. . . 
The side of American paper money engraved and pnnted 1~ bt~ck 
symbolically (and unconsciously) represents the black (melanm. ptg­
mented) skin that the albinos or whites should have possessed, were lt not 
200 
Paper Money and Gold 
for their genetic defect of albinism (the reason for which they were 
originally cast out of Africa by their Black mothers and fathers). 
Further, it is no accident in the present day capital of the global white 
supremacy system- Washington, D.C- that the vast majority of the 
people in the city are Black and that the paper money is printed by a large 
majority of Black workers. In other words, Black backs are producing 
"green backs," which could equally be referred to as "black backs." For 
in the minds of the white collective, whites should have black backs 
instead of white backs and they should not need green backs to cover w bite 
backs. A similiar realization causes whites to tan, as though the hue 
achieved through tanning is "supposed" to be their true color. 
This decoding allows the slang (in this sense, symbolic) expression, 
frequently used by Blacks in America, "Give me some skin," to be placed 
in a more meaningful perspective. On the surface level this expression 
means, give me your hand - skin touching skin - to shake, as a greeting. 
At yet another level the implication is: "Give me some money." 
Blacks living amongst the white collective have internalized uncon­
sciously the symbolic equation of paper money with the covering for the 
degraded white skin. In fact, albinism is the origin for the unconscious 
development of this white equation of paper money with skin. 
In their book, Money Madness, Herb Goldberg and Robert T. Lewis 
state: 
Studies of self-made wealthy men, for example, show an extremely 
high incidence of parental death and parental divorce, which resulted 
in a high degree of insecurity early in life. Many of these men, as 
young boys, apparently set out to amass so much money that they 
would never be left stranded again. They also were faced with 
assuming adult responsibility while still children, and they tried to 
prove to themselves and others they didn't really need to depend on 
parents. 
Does this not parallel the experience of the rejected albino mutants who 
· Western civilization arid culture? 
With the symbolism of money in the white supremacy culture decoded, 
phenomena of gambling, monetary inflation cycles and other be-
201


--- PAGE 22 ---
The Isis Papers 
. ll areas of the Western civilization can be better haviors present m a 
· understood. . th s mbolic covering of white bodily 
Money, like the fig lea~es, IS e y f al e when no value is present. 
shame and is designed to giVe a selnse o vopeu rates at a level unavailable 
. . shame and value essness Its immerswn m . id red at surface levels of the white 
to conscious thought. Mone~ IS c:s ~which is like saying that white is 
or Western psyche to have hlgh v ubee m· deep reality money is 
. · ) However cause geneucally supenor · ' d resents shame the real value 
designed to cover white b~y shame an re~e latter m~ that in reality 
of the money will always nse an: ~e:_J~~ the same as tanning the white 
money is worthless and ~eb~e w. ~~ This reflects the fact that while 
skin after sayi~g that white IS s~pe~e). unconsciously feel inferior to the 
whites are saymg they arelsu~n~;' T:e concept of white skin superiority 
melanin pigmented globa maJon Y. 
is the same ~ inflate.d money' :~rthl~::omenon of gambling there is the 
Similarly ,m the highly sym. o c p bly has high value. Yet the most 
t oney because It presuma attempt to ge m . . . money but losing money and real't of gambling 1s not wmrung • common 1 Y . . bod hame literally and figuratively. 
being disgraced- revealmg white y st of ~e decoded symbolism of 
. mbling in the the contex By placmg g~ . itted b whites who lost their money during the 
money' the sw~Ides comm lai~ed· they had lost, albeit at unconscious 
recent depresswns can be e~p . ha . Blacks and other peoples of · g for wh1te body s me. levels, the cove~n . ed and not simply because they may not 
color were not similarly affect , in the first instance. Psychologically, 
have had that much money to lose kin melanin could handle better 
d th persons with permanents . Blacks an o er h fundamental body shame to •· 
being without money because they ave no •. · 
cover. al makes it possible to understand·• 
Decoding the symbolism of money so . . th fecal matter 
why Sigmund Freud and his followers assocmte;h:~:;tew;syche then (as.··. 
and filth, which are usually brown or black. of white body shame · .. 
now) could not confront s~l~-negation ~!~; s~::hite psyche to probe 
. 1 Therefore lt IS not possl consciOUS Y • ' . the cover for white body · deeply enough to see that paper money lS ·.· 
202 
Paper Money and Gold 
That same white psyche then displaces the association of money with 
melanin pigment to associate money with the only other brown and black 
pigment manufactured in the human body, the pigment responsible for the 
color of fecal material, coprobilirubins. 
This discussion brings to mind a seminar I attended while training to 
become a child psychiatrist. The esteemed "father of child psychiatry" 
and the program director of the seminar, Dr. Reginald Lourie concluded, 
while evaluating the case of a Black child, that the reason this child hated 
himself (and the reason Black people in general hated themselves) was 
because he was the color of feces. Of course, my strong objections at the 
time did not change the basic logic of Freudian psychoanalytic theory, 
which many Black professionals have learned by rote, internalized and 
projected onto their Black patients. What Dr. Lourie, following Dr. 
Freud, had done was state that melanin pigment was the equivalent of the 
coprobilirubins. It was easier for the white pysche to state consciously 
that it desired to be tan like fecal matter than to admit consciously a desire 
to have melanin pigment and to be like black people, whom whites in 
psychological compensation, had to debase. 
Decoding the symbolism theory further explains the reason why some 
whites in their sexual practices like to be smeared with human excrement. 
And likewise, this decoding illuminates the meaning behind one of the 
most common forms of expression in the white.culture, which is "SHIT," 
or to refer to someone as a "SHITHEAD." Also, it now should be more 
than crystal clear why, at unconscious levels in the white psyche, it is 
perceived that Black and other skin-pigmented peoples do not need money 
like white people do. White people need paper money to cover white body 
shame while Black and other skin-pigmented peoples do not have the need 
of such covering. 
•· " When Blacks and other non-whites are struggling to obtain equal pay 
for work done equal to that of whites, they are struggling against this 
Jmcontscious symbolism. As long as the system and culture of white 
Supremacy remains intact, non-whites will not have the same money to 
with as whites and their money will not be able to do what money 
the hands of whites is able to do. 
203


--- PAGE 23 ---
The Isis Papers 
Because Blacks and others with permanent melanin skin pigmentation 
do not feel a sense of white body shame, they do not have lhe same anxious 
motivation to acquire money as does the white-skinned global collective. 
Although some have sought to attribute this lesser general motivation to 
"genetic inferiority," "a lack of intelligence" or "laziness," these 
rationalizations cannot withstand deep analysis. 
The symbolism of gold in the white supremacy system is quite similar. 
Previously, I mentioned Mark Twain's reference to "The splendid black 
satin skin of the South African Zulus .•. " as well as Roger C. Sharpe's 
question, "After all, what's the point of sunning all over if one part of you 
gets golden brown and another bright red?" And, everyone in this culture 
is familiar with the many suntan lotions and creams that advertise their 
ability to help one acquire a golden tan. I therefore theorize that because: 
1) black and brown skin (melanin pigmented skin), with its natural oils, 
glistening and gleaming in the sunlight, looks like gold (as is attested to 
in the white supremacy culture by the frequent references to a "golden 
tan," meaning a golden brown or black color), and 2) that which was 
deeply desired more than anything else by the albino mutants in their white 
psyche (no matter how deeply repressed), was to have melanin pigmented 
skin, then the metal gold (the only metal substance with lasting luster and 
a color that approximates the color tones of melanin pigment) became the 
deeply unconscious symbol of the most desired substance in the entire 
global white supremacy system/culture. Gold is then the symbol for 
melanin skin pigment in the white psyche. The possession of gold in the 
white psyche is the unconscious equalizer for the absence in whites of 
melanin. That is the reason mulatoes, or Semites, of the Jewish religion 
always were accused of having all of the money and gold. 
The symbolism of gold explains the most fundamental reasons that, 
for a considerable period of time, Western paper money was backed by · 
the gold standard, which prevented general fluctuations in the value 
paper money. Symbolically, the gold standard meant that melanin 
and is the nonn and standard for human beings. Presently, the 
monetary system is on the dollar standard, but there are many 
national units pressuring for the return to the gold standard. 
204 
Paper Money and Gold 
The value of gold is tied unconscious! . . 
computer to the power of th 1 Y m the whtte collective brain-
- the black, brown, red and e e~: es who possess melanin in the world 
indicate that white is not realyl ~ples .. When global events shift to 
Y supenor-as m the k · h - the white-skinned collective . aruan ostage taking 
repressed sense of white genetic =nences se~-doubt and the deeply 
apparatus of the white psyche Then :uacy ~gms to break through the 
its symbol" . , e relative value of white skin and tc cover (the dollar) dro s and 
equivalent, gold, escalates as ex ress~ the value of the melanin 
the world market. It should be n~ted tha:y the value and cost of gold on 
the value of the paper monies in the h" as the value of gold moves up, 
th . w tte supremacy system d I" e whtte supremacy system 'cult hi . ec mes. In 
ki . '' ure, w te skin and melani · s nand their respective symbol· . al n ptgmented tc equtv ents alwa . anotherin value when the pa . , ys move opposlte one 
Th , per money IS not backed by the gold standard 
~ gold has long been associated with black- ki . . 
collective white psyche is aive furth s nned people m the 
c· n er strong support · G ogy, specifically in Jason's search forth G ld m reek mythol-
obtain the Golden Fleece from the C I ~. o en Fleece. Jason hoped to 
Herodotus (425? B.C. - 484? B C) o c tan~, whom the Greek historian 
S. . • • • , according to Robert 'T' 1 , mus Mystery discussed. ~ emp e s The 
My own idea on the subject was based fir 
Colchians) have black skins d st on the fact that they (the 
much, as other nations h anthwooly hair (not that that amounts to 
ave e same) and dl especially, on the fact that the C 1 hi • secon y, and more 
Bth" . o c ans the Egypti d Ioptans are the only races which fr •. . ans, an the 
circumcision.... om anCient tunes have practiced 
The phrase "Golden Fleece" is made u of . 
• people: "gold" d . p two words assoctated with 
, enotmg black or brown skin and "fleece" d wool or kink ha · Th , enot-
.... search for melanin. Y rr. e search for the Golden Fleece becomes 
i.E. Cirlot' s Dictionary 0 rs mb 1 ·. th 'J Y 0 s says that the Golden Fleec " · e symbols denoting the conquest of the . . e IS one 
•ann---'-' " ..., h" . unposstble or the ultra-ror W Ite-Sktnned peopl · · • 
or golden brown or black. es, It lS Impossible to produce 
205


--- PAGE 24 ---
The Isis Papers 
Later, in the Middle Ages, Western man (the white collective) con­
tinued his perhaps unconscious search to make oi: acquire melanin (satin 
black and golden brown) through the higly symbolic process called 
alchemy. Israel Regardie reveals in The Philiosopher' s Stone that the 
word alchemy is an Arabic term consisting of the article al and the noun 
khemi. The noun khemi refers to Egypt, whose Coptic or Ethiopian name 
is Khem. Alchemy would then be translated as, "the Egyptian matter" or 
"that which pertains to Egypt." The tenn al Khemi could also be translated 
and understood as "the Black matter," or "that which pertains to the 
Blacks" or "that which the Blacks are able to make or to do." Alchemy 
was essentially a symbolic process involving the endeavor to make gold, 
symbol of illumination and salvation. More specifically, the anempt was 
to convert lesser metals, such as silver and lead, into gold. The lesser 
metals can be translated as "a less desirable skin color or white skin color." 
These highly obsessive and fruitless laboratory experiments eventually 
led to the development of the science of chemistry, whose very name 
comes from alchemy. Chemistry later became the basis for the modem 
science of genetics, in which Western man continues his efforts to make 
new genetic material, hoping to create life (and possibly genes that can 
produce melanin). 
Again, what is revealed is Western man's search for that which the 
Egyptians and the Colchians (the Blacks) were able to achieve. The real 
mystery to the white psyche was that Blacks were able, with their genetic 
material, to produce the gleaming satin black and shining golden brown 
skin color through the presence of melanin in their skin, a pigment whites 
were unable to produce. However, then as now, whites deeply desired the 
ability to produce melanin colored skin. 
It is of even greater symbolic significance that the special wisdom, 
knowledge, power or abilities of the Eyptians, which the European 
alchemists had hoped to duplicate, was thought by Europeans to be 
associated with or contained in "the philosopher's stone." The alchemists 
desperately sought to find or get a fragment of "the philosopher's stone," 
as it was the prerequisite for turning lesser metals into gold. 
206 
Paper Money and Gold 
The Journal of Human Sexuality reponed in "Pelvic Congestion 
Syndrome in Men" that the word stone in the language of the ancients 
means "testicle." Testicles contain the genetic material. In the context of 
the decoded symbolism of gold, the alchemists' search for the 
"philosopher's stone" can be translated as the search for the testicles that 
contain the genetic potential to produce the satin black and golden brown 
skin color. The word stone, meaning testicle, even comes down to the 
present in such language expressions as "stone ache," which is a colloquial 
term used for "testicular ache." 
The foregoing discussion is presented in the hope of increasing 
professional understanding and appreciation of the world of symbols, 
logic, thought and behavioral dynamics in which we presently find 
ourselves. This world creates the functional pathologies that our patients 
expect us to be able to solve. 
The central pathology of logic and thought spawned· by Western 
civilization is the lack of white self-appreciation, predicated upon the 
fundamental inadquacy of the white genetic makeup. This lack of self­
respect has spread wherever Western civilization bas gone and now 
infects all of the peoples on the planet As we move through this period 
in which paper money and gold are increasingly difficult to obtain (even 
for many white-skinned people), it is now possible, with this symbolism 
decoded, to understand why Blacks and other non-whites will continue to 
experience difficulty obtaining paper money and gold. 
The psychiatrists working with Black patients will have the task of 
helping those patients understand paper money and gold as symbols in the 
culture and, most importantly, increase their sense of self-respect and 
self~worth - even in the face of the declining value of paper money and 
decreasing availability of gold. Indeed, Blacks and other non-whites 
already possess that for which gold and paper monies have become the 
symbols. Psychiatrists working with white patients also will have the task 
of helping those patients understand paper money and gold as deep 
symbols in the historic Western culture and, further, as substitutes for 
white self-respect. Psychiatrists must help those white patients struggle 
207


--- PAGE 25 ---
The Isis Papers 
. . If "espect despite their conditions as albino ain and mamtam se -· • . 
~u~ts in a world where the norm is to have ~~~~~~:;u~~~ have to be 
The price of gold, or the number oBf lpapek anr d other melanin pigmented 
·11 · seas long as ac spent for gold, WI mcrea. . . self-respect and black, brown, red 
peoples continue to exerc•se mcreas•.ng th power of white-skinned 
Earth relauve to e and yellow power on ' f the numbers of dollars spent per 
peoples. The price of gold, in t~rm~·o skinned peoples are able to force 
unit of gold, will decrease on~y lf ~ h•~- lace "as designated in the white 
skin pigmented peoples back mto t e~r ~ ' 
power equation of white over non-white. WfNW. 
208 
17 
The Symbolism of Boxing 
and Black Leather 
, (July 1982) 
The global practice of white supremacy encompasses all patterns of 
symbols, logic, thought, speech, action and emotional response in all areas 
of people activity, for those self-defmed (individually or collectively) as 
"white." Therefore, the system of global white supremacy can be most 
readily understood as a survival system, a system based upon the facts of 
the global white numerical minority status, white genetic recessiveness 
· and white genetic vulnerability. It is also important to comprehend that it 
is a "fear" system- a system that is consciously or unconsciously aware 
of its genetic vulnerability and fearful of its genetic annihilation. 
Like the symbols discussed in preceding chapters, the sport of boxing, 
Jn the white supremacy system and culture, is yet another instance of 
specific behavioral and object symbolism that manifests the collective 
}Vhite concern of its genetic vulnerability. Much of the motivation to write 
· essay came from the heavyweight boxing championship fight be­
Larry Holmes, the undefeated Black champion, and Gerry Cooney, 
. the number one white contender and subsequent loser. Race was the 
and overriding concern in this contest, with Cooney portrayed as 
"white hope." The real fight took place with the atmosphere created 
the series of "Rocky" movies. In these fantasies, Sylvester Stallone 
· the white fighter in the red, white and blue trunks who is always 
~IC'JtlnnnQ over his Black challenger. 
209


--- PAGE 26 ---
. 
), 
The Isis Papers 
Encyclopedia Britannica (15th Edition) states, 
Boxing is the art of attack and defense with the fists in which the two 
contestants wear padded gloves, box bouts of three to 15 rounds (each 
round normally of three minutes duration), and generally observe the 
code set forth in the Marquess of Queensbury rules .... Contestants are 
matched in weight and ability, each trying to land hard and often with 
his own flSts and to avoid the blows of his opponent. 
The term pugilism and prizefighting in 20th-century usage are 
. practically synonymous with boxing, though the first indicates the 
ancient origins of the sport in its derivation from the Latin 'pugil', "a 
fighter with the cestus (a hand covering)," related to the Latin pignus, 
'flSt,' and derived in turn from the Greek 'pyx' 'with clenched flSt'; 
while 'prize-fighting' emphasizes the pursuit of the sport for gain. 
SamueiJ ohnson in his Dictionary (1975) defmed a prizefighter as 'one 
that fights publicly for a reward.' 
Of the history of boxing, Encyclopedia Britannica continues 
There is evidence that boxing existed in ancient Crete, where a 
civilization was established by about 1500 BC. Centuries before the 
arrival of the Greeks, boxing was known in the Aegean .... In the early 
days, fighters wore thongs of soft leather bound around their fists and 
(often) two-thirds of the way up their forearms to protect hands and 
Wrists. Beginning in the 4th century BC, harder leather was used for 
the thongs, with the result that they became weapons as well as 
protection. And finally, late in the history of the Roman Empire, the 
Greeks adopted the hand covering called cestus, which was studded 
with iron or brass nuggets and was used in battles to the death in the 
Roman arenas .... The first Greek fighters were not paid; glory was the 
only reward they sought. Later, wealthy men trained their slaves as 
boxers and had them perfonn for special entertainments. In the 1st 
century AD, Romans forced cestus clad slaves to bludgeon one 
another to death in a gruesome perversion of sport for the 
entertainment of crowds who thronged to arenas to see the kill. With 
the rise of Christianity and the concurrent decline of the Roman 
Empire, pugilism as entertainment apparently ceased to exist. At least, 
there is no record of it. 
210 
Symbolism of Boxing 
In more modern times, with the rise of London as a major city in the 
17th and 18th centuries, prizefighting became a major sport there - the 
sport being bareknuckle in character. :Sill Richmond (1763 - 1829), an 
American-born former slave, became the flfStman born in America to win 
acclaim in England as a flfSt-class pugilist. Tom Cribb (1781-1848), the 
Englishman, is considered the first to win immortality in the sport of 
boxing. Cribb beat Richmond in 90 minutes in 1805. Later, after winning­
the English championship, he twice beat Tom Molineaux (1784-1818), 
another American-born former slave, in what were considered Cribb's 
greatest performances. 
As evidenced by the above, ethnic and racial considerations have long 
been a major theme in boxing. The first man considered a scientific 
fighter is described as "an English Jew" named Daniel Mendoza (1763-
1836). Other fighters remained associated with their ethnic and/or nation­
al origins. The waves of immigrants that came to America from the British 
Isles and Europe, all coming to America competing with one another for 
advancement, produced not only outstanding fighters identified as "Jews," 
but others identified as "Italian," "German," "Scandinavian," "Polish," 
"American Negroes" and "Foreign-born Negroes." Of course, the only 
group against which there was great prejudice at times was against the 
Black fighters, who presently dominate the ring in all weight categories. 
Amateur boxing began during the 19th century in Britain. In 1888, the 
Amateur Athletic Union (AAU) of the United States was founded. In 
1923, the Chicago Tribune newspaper founded an amateur competition 
called the Golden Gloves. The name, Golden Gloves, was first used in 
New York in 1927. It has now grown into a national competition rivalling 
the AAU. (See Chapter 16.) 
Although boxing as a sport is now worldwide, there is no accepted 
world-ruling body for professional boxing. Each country has its own 
rules, and in the U.S. each state has different rules. Most common, 
however, is that the bouts take place in a "ring"- which is in reality an 
14 to 20 feet square, surrounded by three strands of ropes. Profes-
sional bouts are from four to fifteen rounds in duration. 
211


--- PAGE 27 ---
The Isis Papers 
Key to this discussion is the general rule that disqualification may be 
made by the referee during a fight for fouls - such as hitting below the 
"belt," an imaginary line drawn across the body from the top of the hip 
bone. There are other rules for disqualification, but the above usually is 
recognized as the most crucial rule. Also significant for this discussion 
is the central aspect of technique that dictates the gloved hands must be 
held up in front of the body: the left hand shoulder high and extended 
about 12 inches. The left hand is slightly higher than the right, with the 
left forearm held across the chest, right fist almost touching it, and both 
elbows bent and resting lightly against the ribs. The right fist is held close 
to the chin for protection and tucked into the chest, and the shoulders are 
hunched. (Encyclopedia Britannica, 15th Edition). 
Whereas the above sets forth the specifics of the formal boxing match, 
it is the specific symbolism and the symbolic elements in the behavior of 
boxing that are the major concern. Awareness at the level of the symbol 
and the symbolic enables us to comprehend a more significant meaning 
of the dynamics of the world around us. 
Essentially, to the extent that the surrounding reality is not understood 
at the deeper levels- at the level of the symbolic- the individual and the 
collective remain relatively powerless. Symbols and symbolic activity 
impact at subconscious and unconscious levels of the brain-computer, 
escaping conscious level screening and control over the behavioral out­
flow that has been stimulated by the symbol and the symbolic. With 
in-depth understanding, the symbol and the symbolic can be decoded and 
made available for conscious use and disposal. increasing the individual's 
power over the self and the surrounding environment. (See Diagram I.) 
212 
Symbolism of Boxing 
Brain-Computer Level Brain-Computer Input and Output 
Conscious Overt-Surface 
Subconscious Symbolic-Symbolic 
Unconscious Symbolic-Symbolic 
Diagram I 
Brain-Computer Level of Functioning 
and Level of Input and Output 
of Environmental Data 
Decoding the symbols and the symbolic behaviors in boxing requires 
returning in time to ancient Africa, the birth place of human beings, and 
more specifically to the African country called Egypt - in the period 
antedating the invasions by the white tribes of Europe. The most impor­
tant Egyptian god was Osiris, referred to as "Lord of the Perfect Black," 
which I interpret as a reference to his skin color. The symbol by which 
Osiris was known was the black bull called Apis. J .E. Cirlot' sDictionary 
of ~ymbols refers to the bull as the historic symbol of white superiority 
over black. However, this seems to be a conscious or unconscious attempt 
by Cirlot to reverse the meaning of the bull symbol since the black bull 
was the symbol of Osiris, a Black god. Thus, in actuality, the bull must 
represent the opposite: black superiority over white in the psyche of the 
white collective. 
Moving forward in time, the sport of bullfighting became prominent 
on the continent of Europe, in Spain, shortly after the Moors (Black 
'* Africans) who had conquered Spain for seven hundred years, were finally 
. •. beaten and chased back into Africa. Of course, by that time, the skin color 
.. and hair of the peoples in Spain and in southern Europe had darkened 
· .because of the dominant black genetic material which the Africans 
h .. nnnht with them. However, the Spaniard response to being conquered 
213


--- PAGE 28 ---
The Isis Papers 
by the Africans, following the military but not the genetic defeat of the 
latter, was to begin the obsessive symbolic ritual of bullfighting. A ~ale 
person dressed in a "suit of lights" (which can be decoded as ~eanmg a 
light-or white-skinned person), daringly prances and parades m front of 
a black bull (acting as though he really wants to be gored) and, fmally, 
with the help of several others, kills the bull. The fighter (the toreador), 
then normally takes as souvenir the bull's ear or tail, both of which have 
been recognized as phallic symbols. Further, the bull is often eaten and 
its testicles, seen as giving power to the diner, are consumed as a delicacy· 
Following the Civil War in the U.S., a country whose development was 
based upon the slave labor of Blacks captured from the continent of 
Africa, the bull-steer again takes on major significance. The victory in 
that war went to "the North." "The South" and the slaveholders lost the 
war. they also lost their Black slaves through the emancipation process. 
Many of the white ex-slaveholders moved westward, initially, wantonly 
slaughtering the massive herds of black and dark brown buffalo. The 
indigenous inhabitants of America, who are incorrectly referred to ~ 
Indians, called the Black soldiers, "buffalo soldiers." The source of thts 
terminology likely stems from the similarities: the hair on the head ~f the 
buffalo is very curly, like the helix hair on the heads of the Africans 
(Blacks). Thus, these white cowboys and soldiers were slaughtering the 
symbols of Osiris, the Black god, and symbols of the Blacks. 
Once the buffalo were removed from the plains, in addition to the 
so-called Indians who were also killed, these whites began to raise (bree4) 
cattle (cows, ox, bull, steers). For for the most part, these cattle have been 
brown and black in coloration. The superior cattle, the angus, is mostly 
all black. Even more interesting is the fact that the whites who raised; 
bred and herded brown and black cattle, referred to themselves as "cow­
boys," a highly interesting word which doubly effeminizes these ~ales. 
The word "cow," while it can \)e used broadly to refer to any domesticated 
bovine, is used most specifically to refer to the mature female cattle. 
Similarly, the word "boy" historically has been used by whites in ~e U.S. 
to refer to the Black male as a means of minimizing and degrading .. 
masculinity. These cowboys, nonetheless, threw ropes (lassoes 
214 
Symbolism of Boxing 
lariats) around the necks of brown and black cattle (just as ropes were also 
placed around the necks of Black men in lynchings), and they also 
castrated the cattle-producing steer (as they castrated Black men who were 
lynched). 
Cattle-raising and cattle-herding operated under the ostensible purpose 
of producing beef for eating. The U.S. has become on~ of the major 
beef-eating nations in the world with its favored meats being steak and 
hamburgers. Beef is the preferred meat of the majority of whites in the 
. global white supremacy system and culture. Beef eaters are suppose to 
be or to become more powerful and more masculine. 
Cattle were also put to other uses, mainly the production of leather for 
shoes, gloves, clothes, luggage, etc. The wearing of leather, particularly 
black leather, is supposed to make one appear maximally masculine and 
powerful .. ~thers are used in the production of many articles of clothing 
for the m1htary. The German military (the Nazis) in the Second World 
War, perhaps, exceeded all other white supremacy forces in the utilization 
of black leather to give the appearance of power and might. 
As a result of the aforementioned facts, the black bull and its symbolic 
uses- clothing and food- have come to demonstrate the power that was 
orig.inally seen in Osiris ("Lord of the Perfect Black;'). The sport of 
boXIng assumes the same theme of power. In this specific instance the 
theme is expressed through the use of the leather gloved fists, contin~ing 
a practice begun in the days of the Roman Empire. 
In current times, the fists of the boxer are covered by rounded, padded, 
colored leather boxing gloves. These paired gloves, poised together in 
front ~f the b~ Y. at the beginning of the fight, are symbols of the genetic 
material containmg skin-covered testicles - the containers of the true 
power of the man, the genetic essence. 
The poised fiSts, are in direct parallel alignment with the testicles below 
,,. The critical off-limits body area, which the boxer is penalized 
s~g. is the area of the testicles or genitals - "below the belt." Of 
, course, this body area restriction in the boxing match is to prevent serious 
.· , and bodily damage. However, it also is necessary to prevent the 
association of the symbol with the true objects whose power is 
215


--- PAGE 29 ---
The Isis Papers 
really being contested, the genetic power residing in the testicles. It is as 
though the "below the belt" restriction states, "the testicles have nothing 
whatsoever to do with this contest." In reality, however, the contest is 
only about the genetic power of the testicles. Some investigators also 
view the paired feet (often leather-covered) as symbols of the testicles that 
are in parallel alignment above them. This awareness contributes to a 
deeper understanding of the foot and the shoe fetishes seen in the global 
white supremacy system/culture. 
Returning to the boxing arena, the symbolic contest of the genetic 
power of the testicles is staged in a "ring." It is referred to as a ring because 
it is symbolic of the female vaginal orifice. The bout also takes place on 
canvas, typically considered white in color. 
In the recent Holmes-Cooney fight, the canvas was colored red, white 
and blue. This is significant because these three colors: red, white and 
blue are the most important symbolic colors in the white supremacy 
system and culture, as manifested by the colors of the flags of the majority 
of white nation-states. The flag on a pole symbolizes the lateral view of 
the phallus and the testicles, the colored cloth representing the testicles. 
A red, white and blue cloth symbolizes genetic material that produces 
white skin, through which can be seen, red arterioles and blue veins, hence 
the expression "bluebloods," a phrase which means that the skin is white 
or pale enough for the blue veins to show through. Blue veins and 
arterioles typically are not visible through melanin-pigmented skins. 
Additionally, in Rocky, Stallone wears red, white and blue trunks that are 
designed to symbolize the American flag. The trunks cover the genitals 
and, in this instance, genitals that produce white skin through which red 
arterioles and blue veins can be seen. 
Fjnally, in regards to the boxing match, the gloved fists typically are 
covered with black, brown or other colored leather, as opposed to white 
leather. This fact reveals that, at the deep levels of the white individual 
and collective psyche, power is thought to be associated with color (skin 
color), as opposed to colorless (white) skin. In the final analysis, it does 
not matter which boxer (white or nonwhite) is the winner at the surface 
level. The color of the gloves of the winner are always non-white, and ·. 
216 
Symbolism of Boxing 
the white fighter who dons colored gloves simply identifies himself with 
the po.wer and color of the bull of Osiris, which is black- not white. Thus 
col~r IS always the winner at the deeper levels of the psyche- just as in 
reality black (skin color) is always genetically dominant to h't Add'. w I e . 
. lli~n~ ~up~ort for my thesis is found in an article entitled "M.D. 
Desc~bes Fis~g ~sCaring SexualPractice,"inPsychiatricNewso[the 
Amerzcan Psych~atrzc Association June 18 1982 The art' 1 • • • IC e reports on 
the wor~ of Thomas Lowry, M.D., Chief of the Psychiatry Department at 
the Kaiser Permanente Medical Center in ValleJ·o C l'c . G . . , a llOmia, and 
regory Williams, an occupational therapist living in San Francisco. 
Lowry created the tenn "brachioproctic eroticism II to desc 'b th . 
kn " . . .. n e epractice own as fiStmg. The article states, 
'The ultimate closeness' and 'the ecstatic and total tru t' . of the phr ed b s are JUSt two ase.s us y participants to describe their feelings during a 
sexual practtce that, although bizarre and seemingly unlik 1 . 
apparently engaged in by a sizeable number of persons. e y, IS 
This pra~tice consists of one person inserting his or her hand and 
foreann mto the rectum of another- In the first phase of their study 
Lowry and Williams distributed questionnaires at "leather" b , 
homosexual 
conventions, specialty nightclubs booksto arsd, 
doctor'sconsultingr 0 p th • res, an 
. . 0 ms.... rom ese data, the authors estimate that 
nat~onwtde, roughly 50,000 persons have incorporated flsting int~ 
th:u. regu~ar sexual repetoires. The study is reported by Lowry and 
~111~~ m the January 1981 issue of the British Journal of Sexual 
ed~cme and was presented by Lowry at the March 1982 annual 
:e~g of.the American Association of Sex Educators, Counselors 
eraptsts .... Themeanageoftherespondentswas341 d. their · · · years, an ~aJar occu~anonal groups included (in descending ordeb 
~ofessi~nals, busmessmen, skilled laborers, and unskilled laborers. 
:mety-s!X percent stated that they were exclusively or predominantly omosexual.. .. 
There is deep le~el symbolism involved in fisting, a practice that 
re~re~ents a form of chnical pathology of the self-concept and self-image 
It Is.directly related to the above translation of the symbolism inher t .. 
boxtng - wherein th llfi II bee en m e Ist omes symbolic of the testicles. Chapter 6 
217


--- PAGE 30 ---
The Isis Papers 
explains that male homosexuality is based upon the conscious an<l/or 
unconscious sense of "male-substance deficiency." This results in the 
highly symbolic and behavioral preoccupation with the internalization, at 
one or the other end of the gastrointestinal tract, of male substance in the 
form of semen. Lowry and Williams reveal that there is an increasing 
number of persons, the vast majority of whom are exclusively or 
predominantly homosexual, who in response to a deep sense of 'male­
substance deficiency • are motivated to have the fist and forearm of another 
inserted into the anal end of the gastrointestinal tract. 
For greater clarity, the fist and forearm in abstract form constitute a 
ball at the end of a road or stick. This abstract diagramatic form resembles 
the lateral view of the male genitalia. 
The questionnaires for the data collected by Lowry and Williams were 
distributed in "leather" bars, along with other places frequented by 
homosexuals. Leather bars are settings where mostly white male 
homosexuals dress in black leather and/or engage in various forms of 
sadomasochistic sexual activity involving the use of black leather, (e.g., 
whips). Having a leather whip inserted into the rectum is one form of symboli-
cally internalizing, not only male substance but, more specifically, Black 
male substance (the leather being symbolic of the Black male). Being 
beaten by a whip, or being "dominated" by someone dressed in black 
leather are other symbolic forms of internalizing Black male substance 
through the act of submission. 
The wearing of leather and the preoccupation with the use of leather 
objects, including boxing gloves, is the subconscious and unconscious 
return, through symbolism, to the white collective's perception of the 
dominant genetic power of the Black male. Therefore, for men who 
consciously and/or unconsciously sense themselves as def1cient in male­
substance, to act out symbolically and to don or to internalize symbols . 
representative of the highest standard of male power - blackness - is 
logically correct, if not logically necessary. 
218 
18 
The Cress Theory of the Holocaust 
(1980) 
the Hgeyrpe::~o~f thEe destruh ction of the Semites of the Jewish religion and 
urope ave been presented nti . Well there · as a co ounding puzzle 
' ls an answer, horrendous yes, but not at all diffi 1 . 
understand· and th · 1. . Icu t to ' e Imp Icatlons for Black people are profound 
The New York Time (J 8 19 . · Set Up Institut C s une , 80) m an article entitled "Brandeis to 
e on auses of Holocaust," reported: 
:andeis University will establish a research institute to stud 
m::~usem·no~ theJHolocaust, the 15 year period in which mo~ 
I Ion ews were killed in E 32-year-old Je · h urope .... By autumn the 
WIS sponsored but nonsectarian un. . 
expects to have a dozen junior and senior research Iversity 
P
lan · ~ ers at work 
mng c?nLerences, lectures and articles on the riod and 
~e approXImately 150 years of events leadin pe_ " Important as th g up to It..... As of m . ey ar_e, we n? longer need any more collections 
res~o~s b~survivors,_ pictures of concentration camps and 
Jews'" s~dtoMarve mechamsms of Hitler's 'fmal solution for the 
• ai er H Benstein 'de 'What's needed no · · . 'pres~ nt of the University. 
for what happened w :d rnl ~e future IS an attempt to account 
. , exp am why, and to give so . . h 
znto future events if possible" ( th , m~ mslg t B . . · au or s emphasis) Mr 
emstem swd the institute would be f'manced by an $800 000 
~~t from Drd. L~lo Tauber, a surgeon in the Washin~ton 
: . area an surviVor of a forced-labor cam in H , 
will be the only institute of its kind . th~ ungary. It m IS country, Mr. 
219


--- PAGE 31 ---
The Isis Papers 
Bernstein said, and the only one outside of Israel, where the 
Hebrew University in Jersusalem has a similar study group 
called, 'The Hand of God.' Unlike that research institute, 
which concentrates on the Holocaust years 1930-1945, the 
Brandeis Institute intends to look at the broader range of 
Western European history from about the time ofNapolean's 
emancipation of the French Jews in the flrst decades of the 
1800's. 
'We cannot bring them back,' Dr. Tauber said of the estimated 
20 million civilians, Jewish and non-Jewish, who died in Nazi 
labor and concentration camps, 'But I would like to see people 
educated to the realization that it can happen anywhere, 
anytime, again ... .' 
Whereas I am not an invited scholar nor a petitioner to attend the 
Tauber Institute at Brandeis University, I have been a student of anti­
Semitism in Europe and the destruction of the Semites of the Jewish 
religion since the mid-1950s. Throughout that time, I remained con­
vinced that the treatment of the Semites of the Jewish religion in Europe 
and in America was intimately related to the gradual destruction of Black 
people as well as the millions of native peoples found in the 'Americas' 
by the immigrating whites from Europe- a pattern which continues to the 
present. Further, I was convinced that the "flnal solution" for the Semites 
in Europe was associated with the "atomic bomb solution" for the 
Japanese peoples in World War II, and that the anti-semitism of Europe 
and America was intimately related to the "apartheid" of southern Africa 
and to the historic pattern of treatment (mistreatment) of all of the peoples 
classified as "non-white" or "non-aryan" peoples by the peoples who • 
classify themselves as "white" or "aryan." 
One of the serious flaws in Western logic, thought and scholarship 
the failure or inability to see things as a "whole.'' Rather, the tendency is 
to perceive fragmented "abstractions" that are never united as one. 
pattern of thought is sharply contrasted to the Eastern mode of ttnlliWtg 
and perception that begins with the perception and analysis of the 
220 
The Cress Theory of the Holocaust 
so as to place in accurate pers tive an be isolated from the whole. pee Y parts or fragments which may 
The focus on the destruction of the S . . an abstraction outside of th erwtes of the JewiSh religion as . . . e context of the totalityofth h' . 
ct vibzation and cultural impe ti' (th e IStonc Western 
h 
ra ve epast2 OOOye 1 w Y there has not been to da ' ars, at east) explains 
Semitic destruction in ~ t::_ a comprehensive understanding of the 
I 
· urope uom 1933 to 1945 I d d nsbtute at Brandeis Universt't .11 • n ee , the Tauber $SOO Y wt not find the an . ,000 grant, not withstandin ) wi . . . swers It seeks (the 
of only 150 years of history of Sge 'teth ~e limited htstorical perspective 
s . mt smEurope 
ometimes, at deep unconscious levels . fmd answers to problems that th b . ' people do not really wish to 
tha 
eyo sesstvelycomplai b t problem has caused the d th f . n a out, even when . ea o su million 1 conscious awareness perhap f th peop e. There is the ' s, o e need to know th h 1 
understand in depth; but below this surface . e w o e truth and to 
need to maintain th . , there ts the more powerful e status quo, whtch depth kn 1 would explode in volcanic f: hi . ow edge and awareness h as on. Specifically I am fi · 
aps, an unconscious need on th f . re emng to, per-
( d 
e part o Semttes of th J · · h . . 
an perhaps other Semites as well) t . . e ew1s rehg1on 
understanding their entire historic e: av~td confrontmg and, therefore, 
Europe, in addition to the· . penence amongst the whites in. . rr pnor experience with th h' still resided in Africa two th d e w Ites while they ousan years ago 
H~wever, I have no such unconscious n . perceive the existing chaos and i . . eed. To the exact contrary, I h nJUStice on the planet Earth t b 
orrendous magnitude that this gl b 1 .1 o e of such 
the surfacing of depth kno led o a e~t ~eeds to be broken asunder by . . w ge and mstght so that th 
.·greater JUStice can evolve and pre .1 I . . e true calm of a 
. forth the molten materials from i vru . t Is JUS~ as when a volcano spews 
oecc)m<~senriched and more ferti~s c;;re,th the sotl.upon which the ash falls Thi e om at which subsequ tl . 
. s essay, then, is for all Black 1 en y spnngs 
un,nP-r•ot<>••.t the d tru . peop e and for others who wish to . es cuon of the Semites and . . and 1945 It · . gypsies m Europe between 
· ts a presentation of th · · 1 , once and for all why the e .cntica datum that will totally ' re was anti-Semitism in Europe and why 
221


--- PAGE 32 ---
1':, 
!'' 
The Isis Papers 
a "final solution" for the Semites as well as for the gypsy population in 
Europe was needed. 
It is necessary at this point to reiterate the key issues of The Cress 
Theory of Color-Confrontation and Racism (White Supremacy): The 
white supremacy (white survival) necessity is to establish, maintain, 
expand and refine the power equation white over non-white (W/NW), 
white power over all peoples with an ancestral history of substantial 
melanin skin pigmentation that can be genetically transmitted. The wtlite 
genetic phenotype can be maintained on the planet Earth only through this 
means (intensive "genetic-watch"). 
The implications of the Cress Theory are that all behavioral patterns 
in the global white collective! begin and end with the consci~ms and/or 
unconscious consideration of white genetic survival and the corollary 
consideration of the global threat of white genetic annihilation by the 
non-white majority. Were this not the foremost consideration of the 
global white collective, a white population would not exist on the planet 
Earth; it would have succumbed to white genetic annihilation, and, 
therefore, never would have been an organized psychological and military 
defense. 
So, what does all of this have to do with the mass destruction of 
members of the Jewish religion living in Europe and the phenomenon of 
anti-Semitism? First, much confusion has arisen because of the conscious. 
and/or unconscious insistence of mixing a discussion of religion with a 
discussion of race, specifically as it concerns the Semitic population that 
practices the Judaic religion. This population migrated from Africa and· 
has resided in Europe for the past two thousand years. The "holocaust"· .• 
in Europe was the end result of the long-standing dynamic of anti-Semi­
tism. Semite refers to a racial group. Thus, anti-Semitism was a dynamic · 
directed specifically against a group with a distinct racial (genetic) back­
ground, which incidentally practiced a particular religion. 
A Semite is conventionally defined as "a member of any of the 
whose language is Semitic, including the Hebrews, Arabs, Assynan~ 
Phoenicians, Babylonians, etc." (Webster' sNew World Dictionary). 
adjective Semitic is defined as "1. of, characteristic of, or like a Semite 
222 
The Cress Theory of the Holocaust 
the Semites 2. designating or of a major group of languages of south­
western Asia and northern Africa, related to the Hamitic languages and 
divided into East Semitic (Akkadian), North West Semitic (Phoenician, 
Punic, Aramaic, Hebrew, Modern Hebrew, etc.) and South West Semitic 
(Arabic, Ethiopic, Amheric)." Webster's New World Dictionary also 
infonns us that the prefix, "semi - "(L., akin to Gr. hemi-, Sans. sami-, AS. 
sam), means half, as in semidiameter. 
Thus, both of the words Semite andHamite (the later from the Greek 
"Hemite") could refer to peoples who were Black, but a mulatto-type 
mixture of Black and white and combinations thereof, hence "semi-" or 
"hemi-"- half Black and half white- much like the present mixed Black 
or colored population in the U.S., or wherever white males have sexually 
aggressed against African (Black) females. A fine example is the Roman 
(white) soldiers' sexual aggression against African women. In my decod­
ing, the word Semite, as from the Latin prefix "semi-," means someone 
whose ancestry was a Black and white mixture, therefore Black (since Black is genetically dominant). 
In The Washington Post (May 4, 1979), in an article entitled "Pope to 
View Poland's Black Madonna," Sylvana Foa reports: 
.... The mysterious Black Madonna of Czestochowa is the most 
sacred icon in Poland. It is also one of the most haunting and 
beautiful works of religious art in the world. Pope John Paul 
II, a strong advocate of devotion to the Virgin Mary will travel 
to the hilltop monastery in June to show his special devotion to 
the strange painting depicting Christ's mother as a black 
woman .... Art experts believe the Madonna was painted 
between the 6th and 8th centuries and say the style is 
reminiscent of early Egyptian Christians .... many an historians, 
believe the Madonna is one of the rare black Madonnas still 
extant. Most of the Madonnas painted in the earliest centuries 
of Christiandom were black, according to historians and it 
wasn't until the Renaissance that it became popular to give the 
mother of Christ the features of a Florentine maiden ... " 
223


--- PAGE 33 ---
The Isis Papers 
The "features of a Florentine maiden" means the features and coloring 
of a white woman. Thus, religious and art history support the fact that the 
Semites were Black people, with the highly esteemed personage of Jesus 
and his mother as evidence. In the diaspora of the Semites of the Jewish religion after the 
Babylonian exile 2,000 or so years ago, Semites left Africa and went to 
Europe. With continuing genetic admixture with the European (white) 
population, operating under the defmition that a Jew is "anyone whose 
mother is a Jew," it was possible, if enough white males had sexual 
intercourse with a sufficient number of Semitic or colored women, for the 
once Black population of Semites to become progressively lighter and 
lighter. All offspring from these white males and Semitic women of the 
Jewish religion then would become Jews. 
Over 2,000 years or 100 generations, the population that was once 
Black became significantly lightened. Just examine how relatively light 
in color Black peoples in the U.S. have become after only 20 generations 
of white male sexual aggression against African (Black) women. Just 
think what we could achieve in 100 generations if our goal was to become 
lighter and lighter with each generation, using the well-known formula: 
Don't marry anyone darker than yourself! 
It is significant to this discussion that Karl Marx (1818-1883), another 
Semite of the Jewish religion, had such darlc skin that his children called 
him "The Moor," meaning of course, "the Black." Robert Heilbroner, in 
his book The Worldly Philosophers, states, in contrasting the appearance 
of Marx with his co-wm:ker Friedrich Engles, "They were very much . 
opposites in appearance. Marx looked like a revolutionary. His children · 
called him, 'The Moor,' for his skin was dark and his eyes deep-set and 
flashing." Prior to reading Heilbroner, I always had been impressed by the greai 
similarity in appearance of Frederick Douglas, the pre-Civil War 
orator, and Karl Marx. Frederick Douglas was the offspring of a 
woman and a sexually agressing white slave master - thus himself 
Semite or mulatto. 
224 
The Cress Theory of the Holocaust 
Another Semite of the Jewish religion who was identified as "a Black" 
was Albert Einstein. Albert Einstein (1879-1955), the great Nobel prize 
physicist, as documented by Robert Clark's Einstein: The Life and Times 
was once described as "1.76 meters tall .... broad shouldered, with a slight 
stoop. His short skull seems remarkably broad. His complexion is 
swarthy .... " (Webster's New World Dictionary defines the word "swarthy" 
as "having a dark skin; dusky; dark. SYN. see dusky." 
The same dictionary defmes dusky as, "1. somewhat dark in color; 
shadowy; swarthy; 2. lacking light .... dusky suggests a darkness of color 
or absence of light, verging on blackness. Swarthy and tawny both refer 
only to color, swarthy suggesting a dark brown verging on black .... " The 
Encyc/opediaBritannica, described Einstein as: " ... a young man, not very 
tall, with a wide and long face, and a great mane of crispy, frizzled and 
very black hair, sprinkled with gray and rising from a lofty brow. His 
nose is fleshy and prominent, his mouth small, his lips full, his cheeks 
plump ... " This was a description of Einstein in his middle thirties. Crispy 
and frizzled hair is one half step away from kinky hair. Again, we see in 
the person of a most prominent Semite descriptive features that are 
associated with the genetic stock of the Mrican continent: swanhy skin 
and crispy, frizzled hair. 
We now come to Sigmund Freud (1885 to 1939), a Semite of the Jewish 
religion, born in Austria, a physician and psychiatrist and founder of 
psychoanalysis. In a July 23,1979 Time book review of Freud: Biologist 
of the Mind entitled "Did Freud Build His Own Legend?" Frank Sulloway 
revealed, "Sigmund Freud idolized Hannibal. So much that for years he 
was psychologically unable to enter Rome because Hannibal had never 
set foot in the city .... " It is interesting that Sigmund Freud, a Semite of 
. the Jewish religion, should identify himself with Hannibal. Hannibal was 
aBiackman. 
. Encyclopedia Britannica states, 
Hannibal (b. 247 B.C., North Africa- d. 182 B.C., Libyssa, 
Bithynia, now Turkey), one of the great military leaders of 
antiquity, commanded the Carthaginian forces against Rome 
in the Second Punic War (218- 201 B.C) .... After the Romans 
225


--- PAGE 34 ---
The Isis Papers 
declared war in 219 B.C., Hannibal, at the command of a force 
of about 40,000 and a number of elephants, crossed the 
Pyrenees into southern Gaul. From there he executed an 
incredible fear to militarY enterprise proceeding across the Alps 
into northern Italy. In 217 B.C. at the Battle of Lake 
Trasimene, he inflicted one of the greatest defeats suffered by 
Rome .... 
I have quoted the above sources extensively because there is a sig­
nificant reason why three of the greatest Semitic thinkers of the Jewish 
religion have been described as dark in appearance or have identified 
themselves, as in the case of Freud, with Blackness. Freud even went 
further in his last work, Moses and Monotheism, written in part while 
fleeing from the Nazis, to describe the founder of the Jewish religion, 
Moses, as an Egyptian - meaning of course. a Black man. Each of these 
representative Semites of the Jewish religion either has identified himself 
or has been identified by others with Blackness. primarily because the 
Jews in Africa two thousand years ago were Black (African) people. That . 
is the reason that all of the earliest paintings of the Madonna and child 
(Jesus and his mother) were a Black madonna and child. They were 
The modem day, highly misconducted Semites of the European Africans. 
experience may want and may have wanted in the past to forget their Black 
ancestral heritage and suppress this truth. but the global white collective 
never has forgotten this critical fact. Always, the white collective, con­
sciously or unconsciously, must remember this fact in relationships with 
"Semites" and all other peoples whose genetic history causes the whites·· 
to classify them as non-whites, if there is to be white genetic survival.··· 
Adolph Hitler. other Germans and Europeans, all of whom are 
were aware (consciously, subconsciously or unconsciously) of the greater· 
origin of the "Semites" no matter how light-skinned many of them 
have become after 2,000 years of miscegenation with the whites 
"aryans." Hitler and his followers not only mandated the destruction 
the Semites, but also the destrUCtion of the gypsies. Webster's New 
Dictionary defines "gypsy" as "n. (pl. gypsies). (earlier gypscien, 
226 
The Cress Theory o-tthe u I 'J uo ocaust 
for Egypci E . en, gypuan: so called becau Egypt - a member of a wanderin C ~ thought to have come from 
black hair, found througho t th g aucasian people with dark skin and u eworld "Th falsely that the word "caucasl· " ... ereadershouldnotconclude an means " h' .. used to refer to dark skm' ( h' w lte. Often, "caucasian" I·s non-w Ite) peo 1 However, white means whit d p es who may have straight barr' e an caucas· · 
The reason Hitler gave for makin Ian m~~ms caucasian. 
on the list of destruction was th t ! the Semites and gypsies priorities 
(aryans) as "non-white" 1 a ey were classified by the whites 
no h' peop es, whose origin · n-w Ite peoples were considered geneticall . wa~ m Africa. These 
capable of causing whi•e . . y mfenor to the whites but . • genetic anmhila · • Sldered essential by those wh . non. Therefore, it was con-
to destroy those in their 'do were mterested in white genetic survival 
. m1 st whom they beli genetic annihilation All . eved could cause whi'te 
. . . · non-white 1 a_nmhilatlon because of their b'li peop es can cause white genetic 
tlon. Hitler made it absolutet \ ty to produce melanin skin pigmenta­
supremacy and white racial y ~ ear that his objective was global white 
Th 
punty. 
· e s 'fi . peel IC fear of white genetic annih· . m the global white collecti bee ilatlon, while always present 
frequently acted upon in ti ve, h omes more prominent and is more 
th 
· mes w en whites h 1 ere IS serious economic . ave ost a war and/or when 
~ . uncertamty At th . eels msecure because them . . ese tlmes the white collective 
d ~ . aJor props for the se f · . an or white genetic survival th . nse o white mvincibility 
failed. - err guns and money- seem to have 
~us, :Uter the German's loss of World . political mstability high I I 'nfl . War I (which was followed by th • eve I ation and hi h ere appeared on the scene a dyn . g level unemployment) 
10 desttoy !hose perceived anne spolresperson, aniculating the need 
In the United States as c~pable of ultimate white destruction we are m such a period Th . 
··. . War(a warlosttonon-white . ere has been the loss 
(Watergate, etc.), and there is :o:le), fo~owed by political 
~>.m•"'"'·~~--· Thus, we witness incr . g level mflation and un-
.. the Ku Kl Klan easmg levels of activity of N . . ux and other k azis, 
laureate, Dr. William Shockl . spo ~persons, such as Nobel y • artlculatmg the need to get rid of 
227


--- PAGE 35 ---
I 
The Isis Papers 
Black people and discussing Black genetic inferiority; some also focus in 
the Semites as a problem. 
This behavior must not be looked upon as immoral, as though it can 
be challenged by moral persuasion. This logic, thought, speech, action, 
emotional response and perception is of absolute logical necessity for a 
people who historically have been in fear of their genetic annihilation by 
Black and other non-white peoples. 
The term anti-Semitism means white supremacy (racism). A 
holocaust, the open destruction of non-white people by white people, 
occurs when: 1) there is a sufficient level of insecurity or anxiety in the 
white population relative to white genetic annihilation; 2) there is no 
longer a plan; or 3) it is considered too expensive to keep non-whites 
confined in "ghettos," "prisons," "barrios," "bantustans," "concentration 
camps," "on reservations" or "on welfare." Holocausts also occur when 
whites consider it necessary to relocate non-white peoples for labor 
purposes (e.g., Africans being brought to the Americas or Native 
Americans being moved off the land because whites want it). Presently, 
a holocaust is occurring in the jungles of Brazil, and the victims are the 
native peoples of the area, so-called Indians. 
The Semites of the Jewish religion always have referred to themselves 
as God's chosen people. However, they have debated amongst them­
selves the reason they were chosen and what they were chosen to do. I 
have answered these questions in the following way: they were chosen 
to help all of the other non-white peoples of the world living under white 
supremacy domination to understand that no matter how much you may 
mix with and intermarry with people who classify themselves as white; 
no matter how light-skinned you may become through loss of , .. .., ...... ~ .. , 
pigment, no matter how straight your hair may become, no matter 
much you may shrink the size of your nose, no matter how many uv\.-Lv•~ •• ~~ 
lawyers, judges, professors, scholars you may produce, no matter 
many Einsteins, Freuds, Marxs or Rubensteins you produce, no 
how much money, diamonds and gold you may obtain, if you are "'"""u'" 
as non-white under the conditions of white supremacy domination, 
the hammer of white supremacy falls, you will be under that hammer. 
228 
The Cress Theory o-~'the u l 
'I uo ocaust 
. The Semites of the Jewish reli . 
Important moral and that . . gion were chosen to teach a . ' 1s, never disres very genetlc heritage oif.Afr. pect or be ashamed of the B/ "· lea, and speak u fi ac"' 
that heritage with your very life h ~d or, own up to,protectand defend 
up~>n. you to do so. Be proud to~: ~~ck conditions and events ever can 
Ttus IS a profound lesson in self. and be proud to be non-white 
-respect for all of the people . th . m ewodd. 
229


--- PAGE 36 ---
19 
The Neurochemical Basis for Evil 
(1988) 
The American philosopher William James has stated, "There is no 
doubt that healthy mindedness is inadequate as a philosophical doctrine, 
because the evil facts which it positively refuses to account for are a 
genuine portion of reality, and they may after all be the best key to life's 
significance, and possibly the only openers of our eyes to the deepest level 
of truth." 
The Kabbalah, which literally means "lradition," is the sum of Jewish 
mysticism, the tradition of things divine. The Book Bahir, an 1180 A.D. 
document on the Kabbalah concerning Satan, states, 
It teaches that there is in God a principle that is called 'Evil', 
and it lies in the north of God, of it is written [Jer. 1:14]: 'Out 
of the north the evil shall break forth upon all the inhabitants 
of the land,' that is to say, all evil that comes upon all the 
inhabitants of the land breaks forth out of the north. And what 
principle is this? It is the form of the hand [one of the seven 
holy forms which represent God as the original man], and it has 
many messengers, and all are named 'Evil' .... And it is they that 
fling the world into guilt for the tobu is in the north, and the 
tobu means precisely the evil that confuses men until they sin, 
and it is the source of all man's evil impulses. 
In early Egyptian (African) tradition, evil was associated with Set, the 
. brother of Osiris ("Lord of the perfect black"). Set eventually killed his 
brother Osiris and dismembered his body, which his sister/wife (Isis) 
231


--- PAGE 37 ---
The Isis Papers 
helped restore to life. Osiris was the great Egyptian God figure. Set is 
considered the white brother. 
In contrast, the early Christian religion and the Bible related evil to the 
fallen angel Lucifer, a word that means light and that can be construed to 
mean white. However, in the Middle Ages, for some Europeans, the devil 
took on an appearance of a Black man with a long phallus, which has been 
modified as the present red colored figure with a long tail and a longfork. 
In keeping with each of the above perspectives of evil, Webster's 
Dictionary defines "evil" as: "1. morallybadorwrong; wicked, depraved, 
2. causing pain or trouble; harmful; injurious, 3. threatening or bringing 
misfortune; unlucky; disastrous; unfortunate; as an evil hour, 4. resulting 
from or based on conduct regarded as immoral; as an evil reputation." 
The Cress Theory of Color Confrontation and Racism (White 
Supremacy), links whites' unjust behavior towards people of color (black, 
brown, red and yellow) to whites' inability to produce melanin skin 
pigment in the skin melanocyte. The whites' numerical minority status 
in the world and, ultimately, their fear of global white genetic annihilation 
by the genetically dominant, skin melanin producing, non-white world 
majority are pointed out as additional reasons for white aggression 
towards people of color. This thesis helps to explain the evil "kill or be 
killed" behaviors of the global white collective in relation to non-white 
people. 
In 1972, I presented a paper entitled, Melanin:_ The Neurochemical 
Basis for Soul, at the annual meeting of the National Medical Association 
Section on Neurology and Psychiatry. I theorized that the presence of 
melanin in high concentrations in Blacks accounted for some of the 
observable differences in behavior between Black and white people (ie., 
religious responsiveness, rhythm, emotional responsiveness, sensitivity 
levels), noting the familiar saying amongst older Black people, "The 
blacker the berry, the sweeter the juice; if it ain't got no soul, it ain't got 
no use." Also, I emphasized the song by James Brown, "We Got More 
Soul." Further, I pointed out that the most sensitive body areas are the 
areas most highly pigmented. 
232 
Neurochemical Basis for Evil 
Fifteen years ago in a paper entitled, "Blacks, Hypertension and the 
Activ~ Skin Melanocyte" (Journal of Urban Health. 1975), I posited 
melanm, among other things, as a possible neurotransmitter and the skin 
melanocytes as the foundation of the sixth sense- the basis for know ledge 
of the unseen, including a deeper knowledge of "bad." I explained that if 
the melanocytes were sense receptors and melanin was a neuro transmit­
ter, then the darker the skin, the higher the levels of hypertensions found. 
Primarily, this is true because people with darker skins are more sensitive 
to the energy currents around them. If those energy currents are stressful 
they will be more stressed, increasing levels of hypertension. ' 
In 1987, at the first Melanin Conference, I discussed The Cress Theory 
on the George Washington Carver Phenomenon, suggesting that the skin 
melanocytes of this very Black-skinned scientist (high level concentration 
of melan~n skin pig~ent) enabled him to communicate with the energy 
frequencies emanatmg from plants. Thus, he was able to learn their 
secrets and purposes. 
Since my 1972 presentation on the neurochemical basis for soul the 
neuroche~ical basis of evil has periodically come to my mind, beg~ing 
that I outlme my thoughts on evil as the anti-thesis of soul. I relate soul 
to order, spirituality and the affirmation of life. I equate evil with chaos 
and destruction, especially the destruction of life. (The word evil when 
spelled backward is, live.) The discussion of evil takes on even more 
sig~ificant proportions in light of the increasing number of persons in this 
soc1ety who openly are proclaiming themselves to be worshippers of the 
Devil- Devil being the arch doer of evil- in contrast to worshipping God. 
Reportedly, these persons participate in the ritual murder of human 
beings. 
. The concept of evil is not at all unusual in religious and philosophical 
discourse. Also, evil has been a frequent subject for literary exploration. 
~e n~vel M oby Dick by Herman Mel ville is an example of the symbolic 
dlscussion. of evil in classical American literature.) Evil is approached 
less often m the natural sciences, including modem medicine. However 
psychiatry is the one branch of modem medicine that has major antece~ 
233


--- PAGE 38 ---
The Isis Papers 
dents in both religion and philosophy and thus, the topic of evil has found 
discussants who consider themselves scientists and scientific. 
The role of the psychiatric-physician or physician-scientist is to attempt 
to comprehend, bringing greater clarity and insight, the total spectr~ of 
human behavior, which would include the special category ofbehav1oral 
phenomena recognized as evil. Further, I believe that the challenge of 
modern psychiatry, like the challenge of modern physics, is to approach, 
if possible, a view of the "unified field." . 
Modem physics, since Albert Einstein, has sought to umte the spec~m 
of forces - gravity, electromagnetism, weak and strong forces - m a 
unified field, viewing these separate forces as out~owt_hs from or 
manifestations of a whole (a unified force field). Likew1se, modem 
psychiatry should seek to discover if there is a united _behavioral ~orce 
field that can explain evil as well as other dommant behav10ral 
phenomena. 
For the ant, the greatest evil consists of killing ants. For the h~~an 
being, the greatest evil consists of the obsessional degrading and ~ill~g 
of other human beings. All lesser evils are simply added to thlS (~e., 
destruction of other life forms, destruction of the planet and destruct10_n 
that extends beyond planet Earth). With evil so defmed, clearl~ there lS 
an overwhelming atmosphere of evil in the world. In fact, the e~tlre plan~t 
exists in an atmosphere of degradation and murder. To 1gnore th1s 
evidence of evil, this obsession with mass killing and death, is _only ~ 
participate in the establishment and the maintenance of its reahty - m 
effect, to participate in evil. On the other hand, to address this obsess~on 
with mass death and the degradation of human life in hopes of countenng 
it is to afflrm the dignity of human beings and the universe. 
Ernest Becker, in his book Escape From Evil, had the followin~ to say 
about evil: "All organisms want to perpetuate themselves, co~tlnu~ to 
experience and to live .... For all organisms, then, opposing and obbteraung 
power is evil- it threatens to stop experience." He continues, "So w~ see 
that as an organism man is fated to perpetuate himself and as a c~nsc1ous 
organism he is fated to identify evil as the threat to that perpetuation. And 
234 
Neurochemical Basis for Evil 
what then would be the highest development and use of those [man's] 
talents? To contribute to the struggle against evil." 
However, before there can be effective struggle against evil, the 
following questions must be answered: 1) What are the dynamic condi­
tions in a society or culture that would stimulate such activity as an­
nounced as devil worship? 2) What are the dynamics in a society and 
culture wherein increasing numbers of Black males are being killed 
daily/yearly at epidemic levels? 3) What are the exact causation dynamics 
in a society and culture wherein the greatest percentage of its resources 
are used in the development and production of instruments of death and 
destruction? 4) What are the exact dynamic conditions in a power system 
or culture wherein 50 million people can be destroyed in the course of 
slave trade, as on the continent of Africa? 5) What are the exact dynamic 
conditions in a power system or culture wherein six million Semites of 
~e Je~ish religion can be destroyed deliberately or 20 million people 
killed m the course of a war, such as in the Soviet Union during World 
War II? 6) What are the dynamics in a society and culture in which 
hundreds of thousands, possibly millions, are doomed to die of infection 
with a virus that increasing numbers are concluding was deliberately man-made? 
These are questions that the psychiatrist should be motivated to answer 
in the context of understanding the issue of evil, especially when it is 
recalled, as stated by Thomas Mecton in his Raids on the Unspeakable that, 
~ne of the ~ost disturbing facts that carne out in the [Adolph] 
Etchman trial was that a psychiatrist examined him and 
pronounced him perfectly sane. We equate sanity with a sense 
of justice, with humaneness, with prudence, with the capacity 
to love and understand other people. We rely on the sane 
people of the world to preserve it from barbarism, madness, 
destruction. And now it begins to dawn on us that it is precisely 
that sane ones who are the most dangerous. It is the sane one, 
the well adapted one, who can without qualms and without 
nausea aim the missiles and press the buttons that will initiate 
235


--- PAGE 39 ---
The I sis Papers 
the great festival of destruction that they, the sane ones, have 
prepared. 
·n his nationwide best selling book, People 
Psychiatrist M. Scott Peck, 1 E 'l contends II Science has also 
Th H for Healing Human vt • ' of the Lie. e ope f il because of the immensity of the 
steered clear of the problem o ehv body of scientific knowledge of 
. 1 ed we do not yet ave a mystery mvo v .... . h 1 
II He also states, 
human evil deserving of bemg called a psyc o ogy. 
Caucasians seem to have fewer 
Those of. us who ~~ blacks or Indians or Orientals than 
comp~cu~n.s about kil~:; white men. It is easier for a white 
we do m ktlhng our fe , d eck' The matter of the 
1 h 'nigger' than a re n .... man to ync a . . killing is yet another one 
racial aspects of mtraspe~•es. . . 
deserving significant scientific mvesugatiOn. 
f · 1 pride 
1 d "War today is at least as much a matter o nauona He cone u es, 
as of racial pride." . nee has steered clear of the subject 
Even though Peck suggests that scte . lved II Herman Melville, the 
ofevilbecauseofthe"immensemysterymvo ' . t1 thesub'ect 
19th century novelist, pe.~ha~~ :~:n~c~eu:~~=~:::~ th~ ~bite w~le, 
of evil. He approached evil g . . d him Ahab . and the crippled white shtp captam who pursue , . 
Moby Dtck, ed S tan) Melville uses an entire chapter of hts 
(who is often compar to a · 11 H b · s 
book to discourse on "The Whiteness of the Whale. e egm ' 
Wh. hale was to Ahab, has been hinted; what, at 
What the tte w . . · d Aside from those 
times, he was to me, as yet rematns u~sru . Dick which 
re Obvious considerations touchmg Moby • 1 mo ak · any man's sou some 
could not but occasi~all~awgh:no~ rather vague, nameless 
alarm, there wa~ anoh. er oh~ ch , at times by its intensity 
horror concernmg tm, w t . al d d all the rest; and yet so mystic ~ 
completely overpowere . th t I almost despair of putting ll m 
well nigh ineffable was tt, a h' f the whale that h 'bl form It was the w tteness o a compre e~st e all. d me But how can I hope to explain above all thmgs app e · 
236 
Neurochemical Basis for Evil 
myself here; and yet, in some dim, random way, explain myself 
I must, else all these chapters might be naught. 
Melville proceeds to detail many positive associations with whiteness: 
"and though this pre-eminence in it [whiteness] applies to the human race 
itself, giving the white man ideal mastership over every dusky tribe." He 
continues, 
.. .yet for all these accumulated associations, with whatever is 
sweet, and honorable, and sublime, there yet lurks an elusive 
something in the innermost idea of this hue, which strikes more 
of panic to the soul than that redness which affrights in blood .... 
That ghastly whiteness it is which imparts such an abhorrent 
mildness even more loathsome than terrific, to the dumb 
gloating of their aspect. So that not the fierce-fanged tiger in 
his heraldic coat can so stagger courage as the white-shrouded 
bear or shark. 
Further on, Melville contemplates, 
What is it that in the Albino man so peculiarly repels and often 
shocks the eye, as that sometimes he is loathed by his own kith 
and kin! It is that whiteness which invests him, a thing 
expressed by the name he bears, The Albino is as well made as 
other men - has no substantive deformity - and yet this mere 
aspect of all-pervading whiteness makes him more strangely 
hideous than the ugliest abortion. Why should this be so? 
. Again referring to whiteness, Melville writes, " ... it is at once the most 
meaning symbol of spiritual things, nay, the very veil of the Christian's 
and yet should be as it is, the intensifying agent in things the most 
"I'I""Uli&F, to mankind, 
11 
Melville's Captain Ahab sees the white whale as all evil of which he 
in pursuit. In a letter to Nathaniel Hawthorne, Melville referred to Moby 
as a "wicked book." My own interpretation of the symbolism in this 
which has been regarded as the greatest of all American novels, is 
237


--- PAGE 40 ---
The Isis Papers 
that the crippled white Captain Ahab represents the mutant (global) white 
population, afflicted with albinism (whiteness). The white whale is 
symbolic of racism (white supremacy), the major pursuit of the global 
white collective- the evil destructive goal of the global white collective. 
This furious, evil pursuit in Moby Dick ends in a disaster for all: a deadly 
end in which the white ship captain and all of his crew, whites and 
non-whites alike, are destroyed. Yet, one survived to tell the tale, foretell­
ing the end of white supremacy as a specified power dynamic. 
It is not surprising that this novel containing the symbolism of albinism 
and white supremacy was written prior to the great bloody conflict (The 
American Civil War) that had so much to do with the relationships 
between white (albino) and Black people. This conflict ended the power 
of the share holders as well as the formal enslavement of Black people by 
whites. 
Melville's linkage of evil and dread with the condition of albinism 
parallels my own thesis that the absence of the neuropeptide melanin -
the absence of this black pigment in the skin and other aspects of the 
nervous system - critically impairs the depth sensitivity of the nervous 
system and the ability to tune in to the total spectrum of energy frequencies 
in the universe. This deficiency of sensory awareness sets the stage for 
the absence ofhannony (the chaos and destruction), which is evil. Thus, 
the injustice and evil of white supremacy not only has its foundation in 
the numerical minority status of the global white population and its 
genetically recessive status in terms of melanin pigment production, but 
the very absence of melanin in the nervous system in significant degrees 
(deereasing sensory input and thus sensitivity) is an additional contribut­
ing factor in the problem of white supremacist injustice. White 
supremacy is the greatest known evil on Earth. Likewise, racism (white 
supremacy) is the Wlified force field that encompasses all of the lesser 
evils we now recognize. Indeed, if the absence of melanin obstructs the 
nervous system's ability to tune in to the total spectrum of frequencies in 
the universe, rendering those lacking melanin incapable of acting in 
harmony with those frequencies, then it becomes incumbent upon those 
possessing melanin to counteract the evil. 
238 
20 
Black Children and the Process of 
Inferiorization 
(June 1974) 
Black peopl~, as a collective, are becoming increasingly sophisticated. 
We are becommg strong enough to face many unpleasant realities and 
~ths about. ourselves and the social system and world that we live in, 
Without demal or panic. This ability to analyze ourselves, our behavior 
and our ~eality critically is one of the signs of true mental health. Another 
equally .u~~ortant aspect of mental health is our full acceptance of the 
respons1 bil1ty for reorganizing our own behavior in order to change things 
that are wrong. 
B~ck children are our most valuable possession and our greatest 
potential resource. Any meaningful discussion of the survival or the 
future o~ Black people must be predicated upon Black people's plan for 
the.maxtmal development of all Black children. Children are the only 
fu~e of any people. If the children's lives are squandered, and if the 
children of a ~ople are not fully developed at whatever cost and sacrifice, 
the people wtll hav.e consigned themselves to certain death. They will be 
de~troyed fr_om wtthout or from within - by the attack of their own 
children ag~nst them. And they may be destroyed by both. Black people 
now are ~mg attacked in the streets (from within) by our own youths, as 
we~ as bemg attacked (from without) by our collective oppressor. This 
reality reveals. the central questions of this essay, which Black people must 
answer: 1) Will Black children in the U.S. ever develop to their maximum 
239


--- PAGE 41 ---
The Isis Papers 
genetic potential? 2) If so, who will assume ultimate responsibility for 
bringing about that maximal development- Black pe~ple themselves or 
white people? 3) If Black children are not to be maximal~y developed, 
what do Black people really think is going to happen to tlns large Black 
undeveloped mass of human beings? And, 4) Are white peopl~ in a~y wa; 
looking to Black people for the maximal development of white chtldren. 
In trying to understand precisely what is happening to us, let us be very 
clear about the following: The function of the encounter b~tween the 
b m child and the various elements of the social/envrronmental new o · 'd al · experience, which continues throughout the life of the indtv~ u • IS .to 
shape and mold the newborn child to fit his or her pre~etermm~ socwl 
role. In effect, this is achieved by the total social expenence acting.upon 
the child's genetic potential. Any established social system has. asstgned 
social roles for every child born into the system, inasmuch as children are 
born to parents who already are occupying "their place" in the structured 
social system. Social roles are related most fundamentally to how much 
true power one will or will not have in a given social system. ~rue ~wer 
is the key factor in the determination of "identity," whtch ts the 
individual's relationship to actual power. In an oppressive social system, 
one's identity is either that of the oppressor or that of the oppressed. 
In a social system designed to achieve white domination, th.e e~- · 
perience of that system molds white children so that they may funcuon ~ 
the role of the oppressors, or the "functional superiors" (becaus~ th~t ts 
what white supremacy is supposed to mean: that whites will functiOn I~ a 
superior way as compared to non-whites). Through structur~ supenor 
functioning whites will be able to oppress others. The same soctal system 
simultaneo~sly will mold all children classified as "non-whites" or 
"others" to play the role of tlle "functional inferiors," or th~ OPIJires!;eu,-, 
This is why a white racist social system is completely mcapable 
providing total equality of opportunity to Blacks. Sue~ a. system 
for its maintenance, produce differential levels of funcuonmg .for 
and non-whites. If, for example, apparent equality is granted m the 
of education, it is denied in family background. If it is given in 
it is denied in housing opportunity. If it is granted in health care "'"'' •. ,....,,. 
240 
Black Children 
it is denied in terms of fathers' income levels. If it is granted by law 
(Brown, 1954), it is denied through social practice. Etcetera 
We must stress the use of the term "functional inferiority," which is in 
con~st to "genetic inferiority." "Functional" is uSed because the genetic 
m~terial of non-white children actually is not impaired, but the pre-deter­
mmed and established racist social experience is designed deliberately to 
destroy the genetic potential for social functioning. The destruction of 
non-white genetic material (which is the fundamental meaning of the 
word "genocide"- killing genes) leads to the appearance of inferiority in 
the non-whites. 
To describe the social process by which Black genetic potential is 
destroy~, thus profoundly influencing the whole life experience of every 
Black child, the term "inferiorization" is used. lnferiorization is the 
co~scious: deliberate and systematic process utilized specifically by a 
rac~t (white supremacy) social system, as conducted through all of its 
maJor and.minor institutions (including the institution of the family), to 
mold specific peoples within that system {namely, all peoples classified 
by ~e racist system as non-white) into "functional inferiors," in spite of 
therr true genetic potential for functioning. Under the white supremacy 
system, the more melanin pigmentation present in the skin and thus the 
darker the. individual, the greater the "inferiorization" pressure imposed 
by the racist system. Thus, amongst all non-white peoples, Blacks are 
.most victimized by this process. Particularly, darker Black people receive 
extreme victimization - even amongst Black people themselves. This 
skin coloration code established by the global white collective, like other 
methods of Black subjugation, is essential to white genetic survival. This 
same code causes Black people to say "Don't marry anyone darker than 
yourself," preferring light-skinned persons as mates. Such socially im­
~sed ~att~ms of thinking yield the Black infant its frrst direct experience 
With rejecuon and negation by the racist social system he or she is born 
Jnto; tllis negation will continue for the entire life span. 
Simply, inferiorization means that through the structuring of thought 
, ·Ul•ur::"'" and social experiences such as poor housing, poor healtlt care, 
school systems, broken families and low income levels, a 
241


--- PAGE 42 ---
The Isis Papers 
Black or other non-white child- who could be a genius based upon genetic 
endowment- can be turned into a criminal who must spend his productive 
years locked behind the bars of a prison cell. Inferiorization deliberately 
turns a Black child, who could become a brilliant, universal statesman, a 
strong supporting father and a loving, canng protector for his wife, into a 
drug addict. It turns a Black female child, who could become a physician, 
scientist and excellent mother, into a prostitute. It turns Black parents, 
who could be mature, supporting, loving and kind to their offspring, into 
immature child-batterers and sexual abusers of their own children. It turns 
some Black teachers, who could love and educate Black children, into 
teachers who hate and cannot educate. It structures the total social 
experience of Black young people so that they believe it is "cool" and 
more important to smoke marijuana, use foul language and learn to dance 
than to learn to read and become expert mathematicians. It turns Black 
people into "clowns," rather than into true nation-builders. It shapes many 
Blacks, who could give maximwn service to Black people, into persons 
whose major concern is the accwnulation of money and material posses­
sions. It makes men care more about wearing "Superfly" clothes than 
about learning to be excellent fathers and guides to their offspring, 
especially their sons. It makes Black people see themselves as sex 
machines rather than builders of a higher humanity. 
This social process of destructive distortion is achieved through the 
imposition, from birth todeath,ofastressful, negative and non-supportive 
social/environmental experience upon the people who are to be in­
teriorized. The negative and stressful social experience, which is struc­
tured to affect every aspect of life activity, leads to the development of a 
negative self-concept, a loss of self-respect and the development of self­
and group-destructive behavioral patterns. Some of these negative be­
havioral patterns rampant among Black people today include showing off. 
material possessions, gossiping about one-another, name-calling, cursing, 
squabbling, snitching and being discourteous and disrespectful to one . 
another. When these behaviors are directed toward people who are a 
reflection of self (i.e., Black people towards other Black people), they 
indicate self -dislike and self -dissatisfaction. The high rates of Black male . 
242 
Black Children 
homicide and suicide are extreme, but all-too-common examples of this 
phenomenon. Black people using drugs and selling them to one another 
is another example of the same homicide and suicide pattern. 
All of these patterns of self-and group-negating behavior, in addition 
to many others, become the invisible chains and shackles around the necks 
and ankles of the Black oppressed, holding all of us in a continuously 
destructive enslavement. With full justification, we can call all of these 
behaviors mental illness since they imply self- and group-destruction. 
These behaviors prevent group unity and efficient group effort. When 
parents, teachers and other adults practice these behaviors towards one 
another, they teach children how to practice them also. Black children 
learn that Black people do not respect each other, which also means Black 
people do not and should not respect themselves. The children, in turn, 
will teach those of following generations how to disrespect themselves 
and each other - thus, how to remain oppressed. 
Inferiorization is essential to the process of oppression. It ensures that 
the oppressors need not be troubled to hold the oppressed constant! y under 
gun and key to keep them in the oppressed state; it keeps the oppressed 
from effectively challenging the oppressive process and system. In this 
way, the oppressors mold the oppressed to share fully in the process of 
their own oppression. In the final analysis, the process of inferiorization 
is designed specifically to prevent the maximal development of the 
genetic potential of the non-white oppressed. Black people must learn 
that no system of oppression ever maximally develops those whom the 
system is specifically structured to dominate. Such a system only permits 
the oppressed to survive so that they can continue being oppressed. No 
system of oppression is structured consciously to destroy itself. The 
maximal development of all Black people would prove false the ideology 
of white superiority. Thus, if Black children and Black people as a whole 
are ever to be developed fully, Black people themselves will have to enact 
that development. Sufficient data and evidence are in: after 127 years of 
so-called emancipation, the white collective has demonstrated that it does 
not intend to develop Black children maximally. Still, whites are talking 
about Black children and Black people as being genetically inferior to 
243


--- PAGE 43 ---
The Isis Papers 
themselves, and they are developing extensive social policies based solely 
upon such a pattern of reasoning and logic. 
Instead of developing behavior patterns for further useless protest, 
Black people should be cultivating patterns of self-help for self-develop­
ment. Since the Black family setting is the first social institution under the 
racist system in which the Black child begins to experience inferiorization, 
it is of key importance that all Black people begin to understand I) the 
true function of family life, 2) how some of the most important aspects of 
inferiorization can occur there and 3) that the Black family is the one social 
institution over which we as Black people can begin to exercise some 
control. Control of the Black family will be evident once we gain some 
mastery over our individual lives. We will learn that dysfunctional 
behaviors can be changed through theexerciseofwillpower. Thus, within 
the family setting, Black people can begin to alter the inferiorization 
dynamic and create a process for the maximal development of Black 
children. 
The functional family unit is composed of the father, mother and 
offspring. The ultimate role of this vital social unit is to instruct the 
children as to how adult males and females function, usually and har­
moniously together for the maximal development of a people. Individual 
family units are but cellular units of a whole organism called a people or 
a nation. All of the units must function efficiently and effectively if the 
whole organism is to live a healthy existence. If a family unit cannot 
instruct the young in harmonious patterns of relating between adult males 
and females, then ultimately the people will perish because adult male and 
female alienation eventually leads to the end of the procreative process. 
Without the young, the people will have no future. 
The process of instructing the young in harmonious, mutually respect~ . 
ful patterns of relating as well as in appropriate and constructive patterns 
of functioning is called socialization-the molding of their behavior for 
maximal development and functioning in a given environmental setting .. 
The father's major task in relationship to the children is to teach adult 
male role-functioning through daily example, with love and kindness 
expressed towards the children - love and kindness being essential to 
244 
Black Children 
efficient learning. The adult male's major responsibility is "breadwin­
ning" and protection of the family unit and the total people. The mother's 
major task in relationship to the children is to teach adult female role­
functioning through daily example, love and kindness. The adult female's 
major responsibility is child socialization and care of the home. These 
divisions of labor are fundamental and necessary for efficient and effec­
tive family functioning under hostile social/environmental conditions, 
and racism is a hostile and aggressive social environment. 
Today there is much yelling and screaming about such role-functioning 
priorities, mostly by white women. However, we as Black people cannot 
allow whites to continue to set our priorities. If we ignore these necessities 
as Blacks, we will do so at our peril. And it serves well to remember that 
the intellectual performance of white children is directly proportional to 
the time their mothers have spent with them in socialization during the 
frrst five years of life, while white fathers play the role of primary family 
"breadwinners" and family and group protectors. White power has been 
predicated upon white male aggression and "breadwinning" activity, 
while white females take care of fundamental home and family-life 
responsibilities. 
Nature has endowed men with the greater muscle mass, which makes 
maJes more efficient and effective aggressors and protectors of people, 
just as females are more effective and efficient at giving birth and nursing 
the young. In the framework of any hostile and aggressive external 
environment, such as oppression, the most important family unit member 
is the one to whom nature has given the greatest muscle mass to ward off 
external physical attack, should that ever be necessary. The racist social 
system has understood that the most potent method for oppressing and 
inferiorizing a people is to attack the family unit structure, thereby 
decreasing its ability to function as a fundamental unit for developing and 
socializing the young. If there is deficient socialization, the behavior of 
the young will be chaotic and disorganized with dependent, weak and 
immature personality structure. This can be accomplished best through 
attacking and weakening the family unit's primary support and ultimate 
defense - the adult male. Females can be controlled by male oppressors 
245


--- PAGE 44 ---
The Isis Papers 
once the males of the oppressed group are weakened and/or destroyed. 
This is troe no matter how many college degrees the females may have; 
no matter how tough, loud or coarse their language may become; no matter 
how "strong" they may appear. In the final analysis, females must depend 
on the physical strength, discipline and willpower of their men for ultimate 
proteCtion. Thus, always the males represent the major potential threat 
and challenge to male oppressors. 
The system of racism in the U.S. specifically has labeled its number 
one target of attack as the Black male. The Black male is n~t only to be 
intimidated and oftentimes physically destroyed, but more Importantly. 
he must be destroyed functionally through the negation of his major 
breadwinning activity for the Black family. When men are not permitt~ 
to become the major breadwinners and troe functional protectors for their 
families, a major imbalance is created between the importance of the adult 
Black male and adult Black female roles. Likewise, the importance of 
male functioning is discredited and thus subtly disrespected. As a result, 
chaos and disorganization befalls family-life, leaving the family as .a 
dysfunctional "survival-unit," where mothers are forced to engage m 
full-time bread winning and protector activities and are not free to perform 
their major tasks of child-care and socialization. 
The subsequent imbalance produced between the money power and 
the pseudo-social (and family) power of the Black female, when com­
pared to the Black male, eventually leads to ~ienation be~ween the two 
of them. This alienation, followed by separauon and/or divorce, causes 
the imbalance that leads to the now epidemic Black social-pathologic 
· syndrome: the so-called strong Black female and weak Black male. The 
fundamental cause of the syndrome is the white supremacy power system. 
Also, this system leads to the "Black male womanizing syndrome," 
wherein Black males seek to compensate for a lost sense of manhood by 
attempting to prove they are still men via the number of women they can.··· 
seduce and conquer. But this syndrome only heightens the au•~""'"'V"'·~ 
between the Black male and female, and it fails to convince the male 
his manhood. 
246 
Black Children 
Increasingly, Black females are being left alone to rear the children. 
They, along with the myth of the so-called "strong Black female" are 
crumbling under this impossible burden. Nonetheless, the survival~units 
bec~~e dominated by adult female presence and all of the children are 
femm~ed, mal.es and females alike. Even when there is no physical 
separation or divorce (because the racist social system never attacks the 
Black female with the same ferocity as it does the Black male), a relative 
Black male passivity is produced, leaving an overall tone of greater female 
power than male power amongst Black people. 
This analysis should not be viewed as a condemnation of the Black 
male or the Black female. It is only a description of the intent of the 
op~essive system of racism. Most profoundly affected are Black 
children who grow up in this system, especially Black male children 
Black male children systematically are deprived of stong male model~ 
throu~h whom they can develop pride, useful self- and group-supporting 
behaVIoral patterns, and true respect for the Black adult male position. 
Lar.ge numbers of young Black male children can tell you that it is far 
easier and more rewarding to be a Black female than a Black male. (See 
Chapter6.) 
The racist social system can survive only if Black manhood is 
destroyed. It steadily has removed strong Black male images, such as 
. those presented by Malcolm X and Martin Luther King, Jr. Initially, it 
replaced those powerful, progressive and constructive images with the 
powerful television and movie images of "Geraldine" and "Superfl " 
The racist media then followed with the message to Blacks that it is "goy .d 
( " 0 . 1mes to see a pathetic Black adult male who never can seem to find a 
d~e~t paying .job and a teenage Black male son who is a clown and a 
~nmmal s~oplifter who never studies, but who now has an intense interest 
· m academic subjects. Innumerable like-examples followed. These weak 
male media images persist into the present. We return to the "pitiful 
. . of real life to face the fact that the average college-trained Black 
.female has a salary scale only $300 lower than her white college-trained 
. . whereas the Black male college graduate earns $3,000 less 
the white male high school graduate. 
247


--- PAGE 45 ---
The Isis Papers 
All of these factors are responsible for the now epidemic proportions 
of Black male passivity, effeminacy, transvestism, bisexuality and 
homosexuality (see Chapter 6), the root cause of which is the racist 
system's necessity to stamp out Black manhood through distorting the 
dynamics of Black family life. Black people should not view these 
patterns of behavior as isolated criminal o~ .immoral acts. ~ey must be 
recognized as the by-product of social/poliucal warfare agamst the max­
imal development of Black people as a whole. 
Black people can begin to halt the process of Black inferiorization if 
the now dysfunctional female-dominated survival-Wlits can be turned into 
true family units. A balance must be established between the adult male 
role ofbreadwinning and the female role of child socialization, with equal 
respect maintained for both roles. This cannot be accomplis~ed by m.ales 
attempting to force females to walk seven paces behind. Neither can it be 
achieved by males forcing females into silent submission. It can be 
achieved by Black males refusing to remain content with less than 
adequate breadwinning roles. Thus, all Black males will have to refuse 
being passive, dependent and female-supported to any degree. They will 
have to demand from the oppressor, and will to achieve, the right to be 
equal breadwinners with white males before white or Black females. are 
given equal breadwinner roles with white male~. There mu~t. begm a 
Black men's liberation movement for salary and JOb opportumues equal 
in all respects with that of white males. As a collective, Black males must 
realize that they have been fooled into believing that white females are 
their most loving allies. While white females are luring Black men into 
bed and to the altar, the white female collective is depriving Black men 
(through the white female's liberation movement) of their opportunity 
function fully as breadwinners and not just as "sex-machines." 
Black females must begin to struggle to achieve the "'•""",.tnnlTli>~c 
enjoyed by white females - to stay home while being adequately 
ported by their husbands, to proyide adequate socialization and 
care and attention to the children. Black females must not be fooled 
believing that a women's liberation movement is their salvation. 
must cease believing in the myth of the "strong Black female" who 
248 
Black Children 
capable of doing everything (breadwinning and socializing) all alone. 
Black females must understand that we always will be oppressed, as will 
our sons and daughters, unless Black men are liberated to defend them-
~elves, Black females and Black children from any and all attacks and msults. 
When these fundamental issues are placed in perspective, when Black 
men and women are struggling together for these objectives that have 
ev~rything.to do with the development of Black family-life, Black male 
children Will be able to grow up respecting themselves as future men. 
Thus, ~ey will recognize the pwpose of disciplined study to achieve 
academlCally, and they will cease desiring to be females. Black female 
children will grow up respecting themselves as future women supported, 
protected and respected by their own men, and they will learn to respect 
Black men as men. Focusing on these external common objectives, Black 
m~n and women will be freed from the present destructive competition 
Wtth one another and will, instead, learn to work as a team in order to 
compete successfully with their common oppressors for the maximal 
development of themselves and their children. 
. ~u~, B~ack people must not only commit themselves to combating 
mfenonzauon through the struggle for maximal development, we must, 
as ~ pan of that struggle, begin to establish standards of academic 
achievement and codes of behavioral conduct for Black children. These 
standards and codes will serve as the fundamental basis for developing 
Bla~k self- and group-respect. Without true self-respect, all efforts for 
achievement will be in vain. In keeping with that goal, all Black children, 
before the age of six, should be taught the following fundamental exer­
cises in Black self-respect by Black adult examples in the home school 
. church and neighborhood: ' ' 
Stop name-calling one another. 
Stop cursing at one another. 
Stop squabbling with one another. 
Stop gossiping about one another. 
Stop snitching on one another. 
249


--- PAGE 46 ---
The Isis Papers 
6. Stop being discourteOUS and disJeSpeCtful towards 
one another. 
7. Stop robbing one another. 
8. Stop stealing from one another. 
9. Stop fighting one another. 
10. Stop killing one another. 
11. Stop using and selling drugs to one another. 
12. Stop throwing traSh and dirt on the streets and in 
places where Black people live, work and learn. 
With this behavioral foundation in self-respect, Black children would 
be taught that academic achievement is the highest priority. Each neigh­
borhood should give annual awards for the children in each age group, 
based upon public performance in reading and math achievement. This 
would indicate to Black children that knowledge and information are the 
important bases of power, along with self -respect. 
Additionally, by age six, Black children must learn that Black people, 
as a nation, do notlook highly upon young people fathering and mothering 
Black children before they achieve emotional maturity and are capable of 
completely caring for the new Black life. Making a baby should no longer 
remain the criteria of Black manhood or womanhood .. Black manhood 
and womanhood should be determined solely on the basis of one's ability 
to be self-supporting and to function effectively under the pressures of 
white supremacy; These objectives are only a beginning, but they can be achieved if every 
Black adult views himself/herself as one of the many parents of all Black 
children. These parents must assume responsibility for the maximal 
development of each and every Black child. That responsibility can be 
expressed in as simple a manner as never displaying to any Black child 
any form of self-or group-negating ~havior. In effect, this practice will 
teach the child the most important lesson of all: that Black people respect 
themselves. 
250 
21 
Racism·and Black Child and Youth 
Inferiorization 
(July 1987) 
As we approach the 21st century, it is essential that Black physicians 
-scientists, researchers, clinicians, pediatricians and child psychiatrists­
understand exactly what is happening to the behavioral, emotional and 
physical health of Black people, specifically of Black infants, children 
and youth. We must know precisely where we are going and what we 
must do. Now, more than ever before, we need to apply a systematic 
understanding to our work in helping to solve the multitude of health 
problems (physical, emotional and behavioral) impacting Black infants, 
children, youth, parents and, thereby, families. By developing such a 
systematic approach in our perception of the seemingly myriad problems, 
it is possible to focus more effectively on what must be done to move 
towards problem solution, what must be done by ourselves as members 
of the healing profession, and what must be done by Black people to 
establish a level of health and total functioning (for the Black collective) 
that is second to none on this planet. 
It is now 1987. It is impossible to pick up a newspaper in the United 
States without seeing one or more articles and references addressing the 
ever-worsening plight of Black people across the entire age spectrum. 
There are seemingly non-reducible levels of infant mortality and mor­
bidity. There are Black infants being born with AIDS to parents who are 
:!rug-addicted and who have AIDS. There are massive numbers of Black 
;infant~; being born to children (teenagers and pre-teens) who never will 
251


--- PAGE 47 ---
The Isis Papers 
be able to parent them effectively. The same infants and children will 
experience physical, social and psychological neglect. These children 
will experience physical and sexual abuse. They will experience being 
inadequately housed, clothed and fed. They will experience abandonment 
to welfare systems and foster homes. They subsequently will experience 
failw-e to achieve academically, and then fail to perfonn adequately on 
scholastic achievement tests. Because of their frustration from being 
stressed and inadequately cared for, they will fail to attend school. 
Eventually they will drop out of school. Many Black children and youth 
will become involved with drugs- either to medicate often unrecognized 
major depression, or to sell drugs to solve their own or their family's 
financial difficulties. Perhaps both. The drugs will be used to suspend 
briefly a grinding sense of hopelessness and doom. Then addiction sets 
in. Other Black children and youth will become obsessed with sexual 
activity to compensate for a profound sense of unmet dependency needs 
that immature and overwhelmed parents could not and cannot address. 
The outcome from this will be AIDS, other venereal diseases, male and 
female prostitution and another generation of teenage pregnancy and 
inadequate parenting. The destroyed sense of self, the negative self­
image and self-concept that derive from these overwhelming and stressful 
circumstances lead these children and youth (who have been baby-sat by 
the television set), to conclude that it is acceptable to use drugs and to sell 
drugs to one another. And, in ever-increasing numbers, Black children 
and youth are concluding that it is perfectly alright to shoot and kill one 
another when drug deals go badly, or to kill one another for an expensive 
pair of shoes or sunglasses, designer sweat suits, leather gold chains or 
clothing. Both these activities lead to their certain incarceration. 
By now, every thinking Black person is familiar with these all-too­
common reports and their accompanying statistics. However, scientists 
and clinicians, as opposed to mere technicians, should not simply gather 
statistical data. The statistical data must be examined, understood and 
interpreted in depth, then placed in proper perspective. Such a process . 
allows for the problems that are reflected in the statistical data to be solved ·. 
and prevented from occurring in the future. 
252 
Racism and Black Child I nferiorization 
Generally, it is assumed that a society or soc· l 
support the development of all of .ts . f: ~ power system seeks to 1 m ants, children and th Th. . a totally erroneous assumpti' . . you . 1s IS on m a SOCial pow . for the purpose of h. . er system bmlt upon racism w Ite genetic survival. Th . . even when the white s e assumption IS erroneous 
Thus far Black 1 uphremacy system is highly refmed and masked 
' peop e ave failed to decoct f1 • 
established to maintam' wh't . e Ully the power system I e genetic survival And that we have failed to d . · • to the same extent un erstand white ge ti . supremacy we have r:·~aed t ne c survtval or white 
' I:Ul o control the sym to th . destructive power dynamic h' h . . . P ms at anse from this , w IC IS positioned . th . development of Black geneti d . . agamst e maxunal In . c an constitutional potential 
. a SOCial power system established fi . . . 
chtldren classified as non- h't (bl or white genetic survival, 
. 
. . w I e ack, brown red and 11 ) mfenonzedsystematically so thatth '11 ' ye ow are 
and susceptible to control throughoeuyt Wthl. becl' omeandremaindependent 
Erik err tves In the te · 1 H. Erikson, author of Childhood d S . . rmmo ogy of 
environment supports the de I . ~ an . OClety, when the social ve opmg 1etus mfant hild . adult existence, the child. s s ch . ' ' c and youth mto 
the following eight stages: PI~ b o~soctal development advances through 
industry, 5) identity 6) t'nu· a7st)c trust, 2) autonomy, 3) initiative, 4) 
' macy, genemtivity d fi 
However, each one of these eight sta es . 'an mal~y, 8? integrity. 
society fails to support the child g ~ Its counterpart m failure when 
systematically Inste d th . system subjects the infant child d · a • e socrnl power 
stress. Instead of basic m:st th an. y~uth to ~n overwhelming degree of 
. . ' ere ts mtstrust; mstead of au ton 1s shame and doubt· instead of . . . . omy, there 
cannot" "I ' . mttlative, there is guilt (the sense of "I versus can"); mstead of industry th . . . . gy); instead of ·d · . • ere Is mfenonty (or lethar-
• 1 entity • there ts role confusion· · d . . 
IS isolation; instead of generat' 't the . , mstea ofmtimacy, there 
tegrity, there is despair. lVI y, re IS stagnation; instead of in-
This process of failed psycho- . 1 d . 
by all levels of envrr· tal SOCia evelopment, whtch is brought on onmen stress that oc d . domination and impact Bla k 1 cur un er white supremacy c peop e most heavily fi . hers of Black infants hildre . ' orces massive num-' c n and youth mto th d · events that I have referred to th e estructtve chain of 
as e process of inferiorization: mistrust, 
253


--- PAGE 48 ---
The Isis Papers 
shame and doubt, guilt, inferiority, role confusion, isolation, stagnation 
and. fmally, despair. Thus, while large numbers of white infants, children 
and youth receiving societal and environmental support progress through 
the eight stages of psycho-social development, their Black counterparts. 
the recipients of high level environmental stress, progress through the 
stages offailed psycho-social development, or inferiorization. It is within 
this schema that the deteriorating picture of Black life (from infancy to 
adult age) must be understood. This is not the accidental development of 
an underclass. This is planned inferiorization for the purpose of white 
genetic survival. Most important, clinicians caring for Black infants, 
children, youth and their families must understand that this destructive 
dynamic is historicallY and solidly situated, and it is on-going. 
However, it is not possible to comprehend the process of inferiorization 
of Black youth and the seriously compromised functioning of the Black 
adult without a specific understanding of racism as the struggle for genetic 
survival on the part of the genetically recessive global white minority 
population that currently controls power in the world. Because few 
Blacks or other non-whites understand racism at this level, they fail to 
understand white supremacy as actual systematic warfare being con­
ducted by people who classify themselves as "white," against people 
whom whites classify as "non-whites." 
Few Blacks or other non-white people are aware that white people are 
conducting major discussions on the white birthrate. Few Blacks or other 
non-white people are aware that white scholarS and experts are discussing 
the projection that by the year 2073, whites will represent fewer than 3% 
of the people on the planet. Few Blacks or other non-white people are 
aware that white experts are projecting that within six to nine generations, 
non-white people will represent the majority of people in U.S. Few 
Blacks or other non-white people are aware that these white experts are 
concluding that they will be left in a state of peril if these facts are ignored. 
The war for white genetic survival is conducted simultaneously on nine 
battle fronts: economics, education, entertainment, labor, law, politics, 
religion, sex and (militarY) war. The war is conducted through all forms 
of behavior. In addition, within each of these areas of activity there have 
254 
Racism and Black Child lnferiorization 
evolved myriad institutions . supremacy. , all of which further the goal of white 
Because Blacks and other non-white I . racism as white . . peop e have faded to understand 
geneuc survival the could be integrated · to th .' y erroneously have believed that they 
m e white supremac depend upon whites to maximall de Y syste~ and that they could 
youth in the same mann thaty velop BJack infants, children and 
er white peop1 
development of white inf ts h" e promote the maximal an ' c ildren and youth Bla 
non-whites have failed to unders . . · cks and other 
it would mean active whi"te "",..; ~. tha~ if white people were to do this, _ ... cipaUon m white · 
must master this perception of racism genocide. Black people 
genetic survival, a system into whic(local and ~Iobal) as a war for white 
integrated. h non-white people never can be 
Under the stress of white su re possibility of adequately meet! r;;;cy, numerous offspring prevent the 
each child crowds out the oppon!u etineeds o~ each individual child, as 
Th
. ty or emotional nurture f th th 
IS crowding prevents high l I . o e o ers. taking place Th" . eve psycho-social development from 
• lS promotion and insuran . 
development is the process of inferio . . ce ~f ~ailed psycho-social 
ensures local and global wh'te ~on, which m tum promotes and 
1 genetic survival 
What then is to be done? What sho - . tactics do Blacks need to empl . d rt and long-range strategies and 
supremacy thrust for whi' te oy ~ o~ e~ to neutralize the ongoing white geneuc survival whi h · . Black infant, child and th inti . . . • c IS achieved through . . you enonzauon? As · · .al 
~s Important question, all Black le . an Iruti ~sponse to 
mtegration and face the diffi 1 ~p must abandon the Illusion of . ICU t reality that Bl Ignore: you do not win a ches if most ack people prefer to 
exact objective and rules ofth s game . ~ou have no knowledge of the e game. It IS 1mperati tha al 
understand they are not in a beni n en . ve t IBlackpeople 
support, and that the surro din h. g VITOnment of benevolence and 
a very specific warfare is:in g Ighlystru:turedenvironmentisdeadly; 
classified as non-white in this !:ged against Blacks and other people 
that the specific war is raciS· fi th system. Further, all must understand m or e purpose f h' . by any and all 0 w Ite genetic survival-necessary means . 1 . ' me usive of chemical and biological 
255


--- PAGE 49 ---
The Isis Papers 
warfare. (Chemical warfare is designer drugs, such as crack and PCP. 
Biological warfare entails the production of cultural and ethnic organisms 
in viruses such as AIDS.) 
Additionally, Black people must recognize the following points: 
1) The war of white genetic survival achieves a major effect through 
inferiorization or failed psycho-social development,creating dependency, 
negative self-image, negative self-concept and vulnerability. 
2) The war of white genetic survival attacks the functioning of Blacks in 
general, but most specifically attacks the Black male, as it is the Black 
male who most specifically threatens white genetic survival at a level the 
Black female is unable to approach. 
3) Blacks must learn to counter the thrust of white supremacy and Black 
inferiorization effectively. 
4) Blacks must discuss openly those means by which Black male infants, 
children and youth can be supported and developed maximally in order 
to counter the attack of white supremacy on Black male development and 
functioning. 
5) Black male infants, children and youth need their fathers constantly 
present to support the behavior and identity of Black male children. And, 
beCause of the historic removal of Black fathers from homes, classes are 
needed to promote high-level functioning of Black males in their roles as 
fathers. 
6) The white supremacy attack upon the Black male causes a collapse of 
Black family life and a distortion in the role of the Black female. This, in 
tum, causes a distortion and collapse of the support system for Black 
infants, children and youth, thereby beginning the process of inferioriza-
tion. 
256 
Racism and Black Child lnferiorization 
7) Blacks must think about and o n1 . people to stop racism (because wh: y disco~, not how to beg white 
efforts for white genetic . al) ~pie will have to continue their surviv , but Instead h B organize their own beha · . • ow lack people can v1oron an ongomg b · . white supremacy and its . asts, specifically to neutralize unpact on the development of Black offs . pong. 
8) It is futile to beg white people to . 
maximal development of Black five grants ~d funds to foster the 
to commit white genocide. peop e. To do so IS to ask white people 
9) Blacks must be able to disc . inferiorization in whites' struu glss ~penl~ the logical necessity for Black g e 1 or white genetic survival. 
10) The singing of "We Shall Overcom " . supremacy or Black infe . . . e will not combat white nonzabon any more than . . 
help to solve a problem in medi . . smgmg any song will cme or physics. 
11) Immature and overwhelmed fathers an 
psycho-social development and counter Bl d ~o~e~ ~nn~t promote generation. ack mfenonzabon m the next 
~2) Single female teenagers cannot romo . m male or female offs . p te psycho-socml development pnng. And, most certainl th 
~ale offspring. They only can re are y, e~ cannot develop 
hves in penal institutions hilp p these male offspnng to spend their • w e preparing th · teenage mothers. err own daughters to become 
13) No Black female should beco Black male should become a fath me :e mother before 30 years of age. No 
. family should have no more thane:Wo f~~~ 35 years of age. Each Black 
three years apart. And both dren, no closer together than 
. . • Black males and fi 1 mmunum, complete high sch 1 d ema es should, at a 
marriage and parenthood Thoo an become fully self-sufficient before 
. ese structures are specifically for the pur-
257


--- PAGE 50 ---
The Isis Papers 
. . . d failed psycho-. e thruSt of Black infenonzauon an 
pose of countenng th th ditions of white supremacy. 
social development, under e con 
collective Black genetic and constitu-
14) Maximal development of the th fforts of Black people alone-
. al otential will take place by e e . uon P d tanding and behaviOr. through their knowledge, un ers 
Black person in the healing 
It is my hope that eventually d:ve~f the etiologic chain that leads 
profession will master an understan m~t learly would be to the benefit . . . Furthermore, 1 c to Black infenonzauon. . ls . their efforts of healing, pass on 
of Black people if Black professi~na , m bl' the patients to neutralize · Bla k pauents- ena mg this knowledge to theu c . l' s and achieve a development . emacy on therr tve the impact of white supr . . al potential, second to none. 
of their Black genetic and consutuuon 
258 
22 
Black Child-Parents: 
The New Factor in Black Genocide 
The levels of collective self-consciousness and self-respect that a 
people carry can be determined accurately by the standard of care and 
development it demands for all of its young- the future of the people. It 
is virtually impossible, in the final quarter of the 20th century, for 99.9% 
of Black teenage male and female persons to raise children who will be 
emotionally strong, stable and capable of functioning effectively under 
the stress of a racist society. The very dynamic that produces the 
pathological situation wherein children attempt to have and rear children 
is designed to ensure Black functional inferiority. Yet, 25% of all Black 
children born today in the U.S. are born to Black teenagers. This means 
that, at the very least, 25% of all Black children will suffer in terms of 
their development and will be impaired in their potential to function 
effectively under the stress of racism. I refer to the failure to ensure the 
maximal development of the genetic potential of all Black children, as 
well as the ultimate waste of this genetic potential, as Black genocide. 
During the American slave era, Black teenage females were forced to 
breed baby after baby and were prevented from actively caring for the 
development of these slave babies. There was no concern for these human 
beings reaching maximal levels of their genetic potential. This lack of 
concern for the development of these young human beings was enforced 
by racist slavemasters and slavemistresses. Today, just as in the slave 
society, Black teenage girls are caught up in a similar destructive dynamic: 
producing human beings who subsequently are subjected to low-level 
. development and treated in inhuman ways. 
259


--- PAGE 51 ---
The Isis Papers 
. s stem beComes, the higher the level of 
The more complex a social y . needed to negotiate that system . · d formal education emononal matunty an . mate level of functioning reached by children 
successfully. Often, the ulu . a1 turity achieved by the parent(s) 
is correlated ":"ith the level ?f er:~~:f :;otionally immature and poorly 
prior to the birth of the child. h ' ore likely to fail than children · children w o are m educat~ parents rruse ell-educated parents. Although income is an 
of ernouonally ma.~e and w. rtant factor than emotional maturity in 
important factor, It IS a less Impo. h't child living under 
successfully rearing a child- particularly a non-w I e 
the conditions of white supremacy· d by Black teenagers . hvebeenmaetome 
Th~ followmdg chaomm::amae parents or are contemplating becoming 
who either alrea Y ve 
parents: , wn " 
1) "Dr. Welsing, I'm sixteen, I know I m gro . 's onna take my 
2) "Dr. Welsing, I'm gonna have my baby. No~dy !ab I'm not 
b f e I'm not going to let those doctors kill my Y. bayromm. 
gonn3)a'~Drave;~~:~grti:;~f my friends have babies; I wan~ something of 
· ' · I'm gomg to love my my own too. I'm not going to have an abortiOn. 
baby." . b b 's gonna love me. I want somebody to love 4) "Dr Welsmg, my a Y M 
M ~other and father don't love me. Nobody loves m~. "y 
me. Y , kn hat they are domg. 
ts . li've t"""fwgers they don t ow w paren acr ~ ""' ' b b t" 
" "Dr Welsing, I kriow I can take care of a a y. . ' 
~ "N~, Dr. Welsing, my boyfriend doesn't have an~J?\~ut~:.: 
of me and my baby. He says he can. e s . 
gonna take care t No we dido 't finish school; we don't go to 
nna get us an apartmen · ' , go but we don't go to no classes. 
school anymore. I mean we go, . I wouldn't have no baby 
7) "Dr. Welsing, if I had it to do over agam;, 
1 · didn't know no better. when I'm young. JUSt . ' e I thought he wanted the 
8) "Dr. Welsing, my boyfnend, he s gon . 
baby too." 
260 
Black Child-Parents 
9) "Dr. Welsing, l'm19 . My boyfriend, he's 19. He gets mad at my 
baby- it's our baby- when he cries. He hit the baby one time. Some­
times I feel like hitting the baby, too." 
10) "Dr. Welsing, I just didn't know how to be no father. I never had 
my own father at home." 
11) "Dr. Welsing, my girlfriend can take care of that baby by herself 
with the welfare." 
12) "Dr. Welsing, my mother had me when she was fifteen. I don't 
see why she's telling me I don't want my baby_ I don't see why I can't 
do what she did." 
All of the above statements have been made by teenage children. These 
are not unusual statements. Teachers, social workers, doctors and coun­
selors working with young people have heard similar comments as they 
talk to Black teenagers in the U.S., where the incidence of Black children 
parenting children has reached epidemic proportions. 
Elaborate programs are being established to counsel teenage parents 
(especially teenage mothers); special education and prenatal, obstetric and 
gynecological programs are being established to assist the child-mothers; 
classes on nutrition are being organized; courses on sex, anatomy and 
physiology are given. And, while all this is happening, no one is raising 
the most critical question: "Can Black children (teenagers) be effective 
mothers and fatt'iers i:o persons who must function in a highly complex, 
technological society that is extremely racist and oppressive to Black and 
other non-white peoples?" Another critical question that has not been 
answered is: "Why are so many teenage children engaging in this high 
degree of sexual activity and producing children f()r whom they are unable 
to provide sufficient care?'' Is there an underlying social dynamic that is 
forcing on children this pattern of destructive behavior that borders on 
homicide-most certainly, emotional and psychological homicide? If so, 
what is it? What are the implications for future generations if this pattern 
of behavior continues? Are we prepared to reap the whirlwind? 
In my clinical view, having functioned as a psychiatrist for adults and 
children for the past decade, I have found that there is an absolute 
261


--- PAGE 52 ---
The Isis Papers 
. . ·ve of the extent to which these The following stausucs are reflecu be of Blacks. 
. amongst large num rs limited definitions are operauve half of the out-of-wedlock children 
Teenage mothers account:.or a_bo~~76 Approximately 25% of all Black 
born to both Blacks and w ttes m the. Virtually all unwed teenage be. born to teenage mo rs. 
children are mg . . Twen -five percent of teenage mothers 
mothers (93%) k~p ~e~ babtes. after th~ir first baby and 15% within the 
get pregnant a gam Wltinn a year . . demns many girls to a life of This tendency of repeuuon con 
second year. . lf In all too many cases, teenage educauon and we are. 
poverty, poor . . hool and they fmd it more difficult to get 
mothers do not fimsh htgh sc d' d to lives of poverty and stress. 
jobs. Their children also are :::::~ny serious complications. Large 
Teenage motherhood P and i norant of medical needs. 
numbers of these teenage mothers are~ edicalgcare or nutrition. Those 
They do not receive adequate prenata m th s are not physically fully . 1 who become mo er girls in therr ear Y teens bl to bear the physical strains of th £ e they are less a e developed and, ere or ' fi from the Department of . Accordirlg to recent tgures 
havmg a baby. thers have higher death rates, · d Welfare, teenagemo . Health, Educauon an . h hage and lower-weight bab1es . ore toxemia, more emorr 
more anemm, m . AI th babies of teenage mothers are 
than women in their twe~ues.. ~·£ ~ than those of women irl their 
more likely to be born With buth ebeec . ed l·n the context of what is tat' sties must vtew twenties. The above s_ I . 've of the age of their mothers. For 
happening to Black children rrrespecu . bo . the U.S. during 
th n half of the Black children rn m example, more a ding to a new report by the · ed women accor 1976 were born to unmarn . . ' ears a 
0 
26% of all Black 
National Center for Healtll Statistics. Just 13 YToda g ~OCR of all Black 
arried women. Y • 0 
children were born_~ unm compared to about 12% for 
children live in families headed by w<Jme:,r Blacks was 30%. Female-
white children. Six years ago, the figure o . the U S 
bee the new poverty group m · · headed households now have orne . e benefits from Aid to 
Almost 33% of all Black children now recelV 
·li ·m Dependent Children. 
1 Famt es Wl . of the roblem facing Black peop e 
Another indicator of the magmtude o· ~ t of Columbia has a higher is reflected irl the facts that follow. The lStnc 
264 
Black Child-Parents 
percentage of Black citizens than any other major political unit in America 
today. It has a Black mayor and a city council that is predominantly Black. 
It has the highest percentage of educated Black people of any city in the 
world; it has a university that is referred to by some as "the capstone of 
Black education," and it has the major Black medical center and Black 
college of medicirle in the world; it has all of the highest level elected 
Black officials in ali of the U.S. working every day. Yet, this same city 
has the highest rate of infant mortality of any state in the country. Even 
the state of Mississippi has a lower rate of infant mortality. Further, there 
is a wide disparity in Washington, D.C. between Black and white irlfant 
mortality; 27.7 Black babies die for every 1,000 born, while there are 
only 7.5 white infant deaths per 1 ,000 births. This high number of infant 
deaths is not caused by teenage pregnancies alone. However, they do contribute. 
The point of this discussion about teenage parenthood is not to imply 
that teenage people engaging in sexual activity are dirty or immoral or 
that sex is dirty or immoral. This discussion is concerned with questioning 
whether Black children are capable of fully understanding and carrying 
forth effective parenthood. Particularly, are Black children prepared to 
function together as mothers and fathers under the conditions of racism, 
which is exceedingly complex and creates high-level stress for non-white people? 
Greater insight into this question is provided by the following con­
clusions: 1) Examining numerous case histories of current Black teenage 
parents, I have noted one major common denominator- a great percentage 
of the mothers of the current teenage mothers were themselves teenagers 
when their first children were born, just as their own mothers were 
teenagers when they were born. In other words, the prior generations 
consisted of child-parents. Many believe that parenthood, when it occurs 
· in childhood, causes the child-mother to achieve emotional maturity 
rapidly. 2) In actuality, the child-mother's emotional development stops 
progressing when she becomes responsible for another life. It may not 
resume until the child-mother is relieved of all responsibility for parenting 
and can continue her own maturation with the guidance and support of 
265


--- PAGE 53 ---
The Isis Papers 
mature adults outside of the family circle. If this burden is not removed, 
there even may be emotional regression due to the overwhelming sense 
of frustration brought on by the responsibility and stress for which the 
child-parent is unprepared. The child-parent may begin to act more 
immature than she did prior to the delivery. Any level of responsibility 
towards the newborn then becomes too great for the child-parent to 
handle. Some child-parents show a very short period of seeming respon­
sibility towards the newborn child, only to collapse after 6 to 12 months 
of "imposed" responsibility. Many of these child-mothers begin to 
develop resentment, anger and hatred towards their children. The 
children are aware of these negative feelings, although they are unable to 
articulate their experiences of emotional rejection and deprivation. 
The impact of this rejection and deprivation soon is displayed in the 
children's disturbed behavioral patterns, particularly in the school setting, 
where attention and behavioral controls are required. Eating problems, 
extreme temper tantrums, stubbornness, excessive activity and excessive 
crying may manifest before these children reach the age of school atten­
dance. This vicious cycle begins when the mothers, due to their own lack 
of emotional maturity, fail to meet the dependency and emotional 
demands of their newborn children. In 10 to 14 years, the new emotion­
ally starved children begin to act out sexually, attempting to have these 
long-standing dependency needs met via sexual intercourse. If it is a 
female child, very shortly thereafter she becomes pregnant. She blindly 
believes she needs and wants a baby to satisfy her needs. As a result, 
another generation of emotional starvation is set in motion. Another 
generation is prevented from achieving emotional growth and maturity. 
Often, the emotionally starved male child turns to drugs, frequently 
heroin. The penis in the vagina for the female child and the heroin needle 
in the vein of the male child are both symbolic substitutes for the desired 
breast or bottle in the mouth that failed to take place sufficiently in early 
infancy and childhood. When these methods fail, often the young person 
turns to alcohol. Sometimes alcohol is used from the beginning. All of 
these symbolic substitutes for the mother's care are destructive. 
266 
Black Child-Parents 
. Beyond these activities, the child who eventually is abandoned by the 
child-mother becomes convinced that he/she is worthless and not worthy 
of deep "mother-love." The child concludes that something must have 
been wrong with him/her from birth for the mother to have abandoned 
him/her. Either the mother released the baby to the care of relatives, the 
welfare agency, the adoption agency or foster parents. The child is not 
able to understand that the mother was too emotionally immature to 
become a parent The child only recognizes that 1) he/she was given away 
by the mother, 2) the mother could not provide him/her adequate care or 
3) the ~other ph ys~cally abused him/her (or allowed a boyfriend to do so). 
The child summanzes it all as "I must not be worth anything." All the 
substitute care in the world by grandparents and others does not remove 
this wound and deep-seated doubt about the self that remains with the 
child for the length of his/her life, producing a severe distrust of and 
alienation from others. This is one of the major reasons that many persons 
enter psychotherapy as adults, primarily with symptoms of depression 
Childre? m~st enter psychotherapy because of the same problem, but th~ 
depression Is masked by disturbed patterns of behavior. 
The emotional and psychological underdevelopment of an entire 
people can become chronic and permanent once this dynamic effects a 
sufficient pe~entage of the population. As I have previously stated, 25% 
of B~ck children being born in the U.S. are a part of this cycle of 
emotional underdevelopment-the basis for functional inferiority. Blacks 
would be horrified if anyone suggested the outright slaughtering of 25% 
of Black children. Again, Blacks scream genocide when outspoken white 
supremacists suggest sterilization of25% or more of the Black population. 
: et, the aforementioned pattern of child-parenting, presently widespread 
~~ the Bla~k popu~tion, achieves exactly the same results. The only 
difference IS that wtth Black child-parents, the Black child's death is more 
painful and ~awn out- a living death. It is a living death in this highly 
complex SOCtety to be left unable to sit still in school and achieve 
academically because of incorrect socialization. It is a living death for a 
~~ld to be shifted repeatedly from one foster home to another. It is a 
livmg death for a child to walk the streets addicted to drugs or alcohol. It 
267


--- PAGE 54 ---
The Isis Papers 
is a living death to be a school drop-out It is a living death to walk the 
streets as a prostitute. It is a living death to sneak around the street as a 
thief. It is a living death to suffer the depression of unemployment 
because you are uneducated and unskilled. It is a living death for a child 
to be attacked by teachers and others for being "bad," meaning his/her 
behavior is unsocialized. It is a living death for a child to be confined to 
a psychiatric hospital. It is a living death to spend. a lifetime locked. up 
behind the bars of a juvenile detention center or a pnson cell. Depress10n 
that results from not having had sufficient, patient and confident mother­
ing is also a living death. Many of these syndromes of living dea~ l~ad 
to forms of actual death such as suicide, drug overdose and hoffilclde. 
More often than not, these deaths are the direct result of children parenting 
children. 
All of the above are related directly and indirectly to the dynamic of 
white supremacy, which necessitates Black functional inferiority. How­
ever, many of the above patterns of living death can be controlled, 
countered and combated effectively only if the Black community - the 
entire Black collective - is determined to re-program its individual and 
collective knowledge, understanding and behavior toward the total 
elimination of Black child-parents. This re-thinking will increase the 
educational and emotional maturity levels of all Black parents maximally, 
f'mt by elevating the acceptable (meaning, acceptable to Black people) 
chronological age of Black parents for first births. In this way, B~ck 
people consciously can start to neutralize the emotional and psycholog1cal 
basis of Black functional inferiority that can begin as early emotional 
deprivation based on parental emotional immaturity. By solving the 
emotional and psychological basis of Black functional inferiority, we will 
be placing ourselves in the best possible position to solve the socio-~oliti­
cal basis of Black functional inferiority- racism. By flrst consc10usly 
controlling the emotional and psychological basis of functional in­
feriority, Blacks can begin to consciously and scientifically control and 
determine the future of the Black collective. 
All age groups in the Black population must understand that the ~ost 
critical factor in the development of a child is the level of emononal 
268 
Black Child-Parents 
maturity achieved by the parents prior to the year of birth of the first child. 
This level of emotional maturity is proven by tlle parents' mastery over 
the external conditions of racism, as expressed through patterns of be­
havior that are self- and group-supporting in all areas of people activity. 
The levels of emotional maturity of the mother and father, coupled witll 
their levels of functional respect for and cooperation with each oilier 
provides the foundation upon which emotional and psychologic~ 
development occurs in the child. The level of emotional maturity in the 
motller determines the degree of sustained patience witll which she can 
relate to the infant. The level of emotional maturity achieved by the father 
prior to the birth of the child determines tlle level of emotional support he 
is able to give the mother so tllat in tlle fust several years of life she can 
give high-level emotional support and attention to the child. This support 
will allow the mother to meet the child's dependency demands complete­
ly. Also, it is important that the father is capable of exercising patience 
with the child and capable of meeting the child's dependency demands. 
For example, oftentimes a person 14 to 18 years of age has achieved 
only three or fewer years of emotional maturity, particularly in the Black 
population where there have been many child-parents in previous genera­
tions and where many single mothers must leave young children in poor 
~are in order to go to work. In the event that the mother is emotionally 
Immature, she will be incapable of meeting the dependency demands of 
tho nh;l-1 cl·~;larl 'f th c •'- . . 1 . '"" """"· 0 uu y, 1 e 1au1er iS emotional y Immature, he will ex-
perience the child's dependency demands as an irritation and will fmd 
himself competing with the infant child for the mother/wife's attention. 
These two immature parents often place inordinate demands upon one 
another, as each is looking (unconsciously) to the oilier to be the idealized 
mother that he/she never had. These demands cannot be met, and thus 
these two child-persons end up witll extreme frustrations and irritation 
towards one another. Not only were they urutble to provide emotional 
support for one anotller at mature levels, but they were unable to provide 
a basis for the emotional and psychological growtll of the new generation. 
If the parents lack the emotional maturity 11eeded to meet the depend­
ency demands of the new born child throughout its early years of develop-
269


--- PAGE 55 ---
The Isis Papers 
ing. No teacher, no matter how highly motivated, can meet the unmet 
dependency demands of a classroom one quarter full of children who have 
been parented by children. Yet, these dependency demands must be met 
if the children are to pay full attention and learn. 
Further, it is the exceptional child-parent who can help a child with 
his/her homework patiently or encourage that child to be patient while 
he/she learns to read, write or do mathematics. And, it is the rare 
child-parent who is able to sacrifice personal desires in order to attend 
PTA meetings so that teachers and parents can work together in helping 
children to learn. The immature child-parents will find it far easier to get 
lost in the fantasies of television, drugs, alcohol or in the rhythmic beat 
of rock and roll music- the "rock" music being used, I am certain, in the 
attempt to make up for the mother's failure to hold, cuddle and rock the 
child in infancy and childhood. Child-parents, in general, are concerned 
with the normal interest of most children - simply fun and games and 
parties. Also, child-parents who have their own unmet dependency 
needs, often will find themselves too preoccupied with having these needs 
met through constant sexual activity. They are then useless for meeting 
the continuing needs of young children. 
Blacks, as a people, must understand that Black child-parenting under 
the stress of racism is group-destructive behavior, and as such it cannot 
be condoned by the people; it must be controlled. Only older Black 
persons can parent and instruct Black children toward success under the 
stress of racism. In others words, correct behavior for Black people 
attempting to end their oppression under racism is to prevent, by all 
possible means, children from giving birth to, or parenting, chi~dr~n. 
When the Black collective begins to understand that power 1s duectly 
related not to money but to correct behavior pattern organization, behavior 
discipline and behavior control on the part of the individual and the 
collective, the Black collective will be well on its way towards a new level 
of political understanding (power) and maturity. These attempts to ev~lve 
correct patterns of behavior under the specific circumstance of raclSm 
become the tactics and strategies in all areas of life activity to achieve the 
ultimate goal of liberation and justice. 
272 
Black Child-Parents 
It is inc~be~t u~n every Black person to begin to see the long-and 
short-range liDphcanons of all patterns of behavior in which Black in­
dividuals and the collective engage. This recognition is necessary in 
order to evaluate accurately whether the given pattern of conduct aids or 
detracts from the goal of Black liberation. If the behavior detracts from 
the long-range objective, it must be eliminated. If the behavior enhances 
the achievem~nt of ~e. ultimate goal, it must be reinforced among the 
people by theu own mdiVidual willpower. 
The Black collective must fmd ways to surround all Black children and 
young people with sufficient emotional support, warmth, encourage­
ment and consllllctive activity. When this is done, they will not have to 
abuse the act of self-reproduction, and they will mature to the point that 
they eventually will be able to dignify the birth of every Black child and 
lead those children toward full development. If Black people wait for 
grant funds to become available for this to be achieved, all will be lost. 
We should take it upon ourselves to establish a five-year plan for the 
to~ elimination of Black child-parenting, so that by the year 1984 there 
Wlll ~no Black child-parents in the U.S. Simultaneously, we should 
take It upon ourselves as a collective to decrease Black infant mortality 
and Black maternal illness and death drastically. We cannot say that we 
respect ourselves until such fundamental objectives have been achieved 
as they constitute the basis for developing a future for the collective. w: 
~ot state that we have reached maturity as a people until we are ready, 
WI~mg and able to take 100% internal responsibility for achieving our 
articulated goal of libertaion and justice. We cannot teach the children a 
level ~f maturity and responsibility that we, as older persons, have failed to achieve. 
273


--- PAGE 56 ---
23 
The Crisis in Black Male/Black Female 
Relationships: Is it a False Problem? 
(July 1985) 
Disenchantment with the institution of marriage. Disharmony. Dis­
respect. Separation. Divorce. Single female-headed households the 
nonn. The absence of male models for developing Black male children 
and youth. Epidemic levels of teenage pregnancy. Thousands of children 
abandoned to foster care and adoption. Black male bisexuality and 
homosexuality. Black female bisexuality and homosexuality. Increasing 
numbers of Black females with more education and income than their 
Black male counterparts. Hardly any Black persons knowing five happy 
Black couples. 
Given these dynamics as ever-present realities in the Black community, 
it would seem that there is a crisis of immense and serious proportions in 
the Black male/Black female relationship in the final decades of the 20th 
century. This crisis has far-reaching ramifications that touch every aspect 
Black life, extending into facets of the larger social order. During the past 
decade, this apparent problem has been seminared, dialogued, discussed, 
debated, probed and shouted about from every conceivable angle. In­
numerable remedies have been proposed. No matter from what angle this 
issue is approached, the problems don't disappear. Instead, they seem to 
multiply, and the alienation between the Black male and the Black female 
just increases. If Black male/Black female alienation is not resolved, is 
there hope for a meaningful future for the Black race? 
275


--- PAGE 57 ---
The Isis Papers 
Case in point: Already some Blacks are discussing "the relationship 
between the Black male and the white female" or "the Black female and 
the white male." These discussions indicate that alienation has grown to 
the point of Black racial suicide. 
In the title of this chapter, I ask if this dilemma between the Black male 
and the Black female is a "false" problem. Are we, perhaps, focusing on 
the wrong issues in the attempt to end Black male/Black female aliena­
tion? A "false" problem is one that, on the surface, appears to be valid, 
but upon closer scrutiny is only a symptom of the true problem. In the 
present discussion, this means that the discord between Black males and 
Black females and the failure to establish long-lasting harmonious 
relationships are caused by another problem. When the underlying 
dynamic is exposed, analyzed and understood, it is possible to remedy the 
symptom (false problem). Only then can short-term and long-term tactics 
be developed. When the underlying cause is discovered, addressed and 
neutralized, the false problem begins to wither away. If we are successful 
in finding the true cause of the alienation and neutralizing that cause, then 
Black male/Black female alienation will yield to true harmony. 
The largest unified movement presently occurring amongst Black 
people is the demonstrations against "apartheid" in South Africa. Al­
though many people use the word "apartheid" only in reference to South 
Africa, the fundamental meaning of apartheid is white supremacy- white 
rule and domination over Blacks and other non-whites. This very same 
dynamic (with its many variations depending upon the particular 
geographic location) - in its more highly refined forms - exists 
worldwide, wherever and whenever whites have come into contact with 
peoples who possess the genetic potential to produce melanin in their skin; 
Amongst many other horrible things, the system of white minority rule in 
South Africa "legally" enforces prolonged separation of the Black male 
and the Black female, causing fragmentation of Black family life. 
Similarly, under the American slavery system (a phase in the estab­
lishment of the white supremacy dynamic), Black males and Black 
females were forbidden by law to marry and stabilize their relationships. 
276 
Black Male/Black Female Relationships 
!o. further prevent their unity' often Black males and fi 
mtimate were sent to diffi I . emales who became B . d h erent p antattons by their slaveholders 
esi es t e example of South Africa th . 
rule, during the past 125 years ha be. ' e surface appearance of white 
tal • s en altered However th ti dam 
£ dynamic of white supremacy has remained ~touched 'T e ~~1 en-
ew people wish to come to tenns w'th . . ragic y, too 
behavioral phenomenon of h 'te I an m-depth analysis of the global 
of the world's people (non-:hi~) supr~m~~· although the vast majority 
life activity: economics educau· are VICbr~uzed by it in all areas of their 
1. . ' on, entertainment labor la li . re Igion, sex and war. • • w, po tics*, 
Failure to analyze the white su remac d . 
because this dynamic is the fu da p 1 y ynamtc deeply is a tragedy 
between Black males and Blac~ fe:~n: cause of the fail~ relationships 
males and Black females d . . ~tpreventedmarnagesofBiack 
separates the Black male and :n:la:;ncan slavery, and it currently 
year in South Africa Th' . emale for 11 months out of each . IS same whtte suprem d . Nelson and Winnie Mand 1 ti acy ynamic has kept B . e a apart or over 20 years. 
ecause whites fear white genetic 'hila. 
males can initiate sexual . te annt lion, and because only m rcourse forcefully duri Ia males were oppressed more harshl th. • ng s very Black 
Y an Black females Thi greater pressure on the non-white mal . . . . s pattern of 
explains why Black males are victimiz~~~ histone and ~ontinues. This 
arrest and also illuminates wh th . ~~Y by pohce brutality and 
educational system. Because :f the~ are vtctim~ed most harshly by the 
err extreme VICtimizatio · th areas, Black males have the highest levels of n m ese two 
employment, the highest rates f . . unemployment and under-
. 0 pnson mcarceration th h · h . c1dence of school failure d h • e tg est m-
of alcoholism, the highe: ra~~s ':-1 :p-::; rates, th~ h~ghest incidence 
homicide rates the most ra . dl . ~ and addiction, the highest 
' PI Y mcreasmg suicide rate and the shortest 
*Here the word "politics" includes 
male/female relationships are inclu: people ~elatio~ships. Black 
under the heading of sex Oth under thts headmg as well as 
any of the other heading~.. er aspects of these relationships fall under 
277


--- PAGE 58 ---
The Isis Papers 
life span. Also, the Black male most often fmds himself outside of the 
Black family structure in the epidemic condition of homelessness. 
This excessive and disproportionate pressure on the Black male by the 
global white supremacy system produces a grave imbalance between the 
Black male and the Black female, even though both are victimized by 
white supremacy. This imbalance has produced what some incorrectly 
call"the Black matriarchy." However, this is not Black matriarchy, but 
white genetic survival necessity and its fear of the potential for genetic 
annihilation that the Black male represents. 
This conscious and unconscious struggle for white genetic survival by 
the global white collective necessitates certain basic and specific relation­
ship patterns between whites and Black males and whites .and Bla~k 
females in all areas of life activity. An appropriate analogy iS found m 
the game of chess. The white king, the companion whi~ quee~ and al~ of 
the other white pieces on the chess board must move m certatn specifiC 
patterns against the black king, the black queen and all of the other black 
pieces if the white king is to checkmate the black king. That is, of co~, 
the main objective of the game of chess. And in the game of chess, white 
always makes the opening (aggressive) move. . . 
The black king and the black queen must move in tactical and strategic 
harmony with one another if they are to counter the white assault success­
fully and defend their side of the chess board effectively. This harmony 
is particularly crucial if they are to checkmate the white king! . 
If someone with no in-depth knowledge about the game of chess Sits 
down at the chess board to play the black side of the board while an expert 
in the game of chess sits down on the white side of the board, the play~r 
on the black side of the board surely will lose the game. He or she will 
be checkmated repeatedly. The player on the black side simply does not 
understand the game. 
If, however, that same person, who repeatedly has lost all previous 
games, takes it upon himself/herself to sit down and master the game of 
chess (and then to master playing on the black.side of the board), through 
continuous hard work and study, he/she will have an excellent chance of 
278 
Black Male/Black Female Relationships 
being victorious. With consistent and continuous study, he/she can be­
come ~ expert, establishing a pattern of continuous wins and successes. 
It Is much easier for white supremacy to control female-headed 
hous.eholds, wherein Black females must confront a white male­
dO~mated power system alone. Further, these female-headed survival 
unns event~lly p~oduce more passive and effeminized male offspring or 
male offspnng With dysfunctional behavioral patterns, who, in many 
cases, eventually will be incarcerated as anti-socials, continuing the 
necessary Black male/Black female separation. 
Stabilized union between the Black male and the Black female means 
the even~ual end to white supremacy. When the Black male and the Black 
~em~e SI~ply defme their joint struggle in terms of achieving education, 
ousmg, JObs an~ money, ~ather than as specifically countering the global 
and local dynamic for whne genetic survival (white supremacy) we are 
attempting to function with the wrong game manual and with ~I of th 
wr~ng rules. While we have remained confused, the global and loca~ 
White. collec.tives consciously and/or unconsciously have mastered white 
geneuc SUfY1 val strategies-in all areas oflife activity. Thus we as Bla ks 
are be~ng "checkmated" continuously by the local and 'global w~te 
colle~tives. We are the victims of white supremacy who spend most of 
our llme squabbling, struggling and fighting with one another. Thus, 
matters go from bad to worse, especially in such critical areas as the Black 
male/B~ack female relationship, the very foundation of the Black nation. 
Until now, we have attempted to function as united Black males and 
. Black ~emales w!th no knowledge of exactly how the white supremacy 
dynamic must drive the Black male and the Black female apart. There­
[;re, we have failed ~n the past and we continue to fail in this relationship. 
. we understood White supremacy, the number one priority for each Black 
~e and Black female would not be to reach out for one another with 
designs of dependency, love, lust or marriage. Instead, we would seek to 
mast~r specific patterns of perception, logic, thought, speech, action and 
e~ou~nal response that would counter the white supremacy dynamic 
SCien~cally. We would codify such behaviors and practice them day 
and filght. We would become single-minded in our activity, knowing that 
279


--- PAGE 59 ---
The Isis Papers 
unless global and local white supremacy is attacked continuously and 
effectively, the Black male/Black female relationship has no chance of 
surviving. 
Black males and Black females would be in a continuous exchange of 
information, knowledge and understanding (like true team members) 
about how to counter white supremacy more effectively. This quality of 
exchange could take place as much as we exchange phone numbers, jokes, 
dance steps, trivia and (in all too many instances) drugs. There would be 
much less time to look into each others eyes and become bored, and then 
start quarreling and fighting. Instead, both persons would be looking 
outward, beyond themselves, to counter local and global white 
supremacy, which is the real problem annihilating the Black collective. 
Actually, people grow closer together as long as they remain focused 
outwardly in the same direction. By maintaining a like-minded focus, 
Nelson and Winnie Mandela of South Africa have evolved possibly the 
strongest marriage known to Black people worldwide. They deserve 
recognition as the model for the Black male/Black female relationship. 
They are looking outward, beyond themselves, to fight white supremacy. 
By specifically fighting white supremacy, they prevent that force of 
injustice from driving them apart. 
When both the Black male and the Black female take up the struggle 
for justice against white supremacy, they are endowed with the strongest 
possible insurance that they will remain united. They are united in a 
common effort against injustice, and simultaneously they express the 
strongest possible statement about respect and love for themselves as 
individuals. In doing this, the Black male and Black female are declaring 
that they have conferred upon themselves the highest possible value, 
which is essential if there is to be self-and group-defense. 
The new answer to the Black male/Black female relationship dilemma 
is for the Black male and the Black female to make serious, conscious 
struggle against white supremacy their number one priority. Fortunately, 
Neely Fuller has written a textbook for victims of white supremacy (The 
United Independent Compensatory Code/System Concept) that details 
specific behaviors that the Black male and female must adopt in order to 
280 
Black Male/Black Female Relationships 
combat effectively the force that is driving them apart. Fuller suggests 
that the most critical question is how Black males and Black females 
spread their time (energy), how they use each of the 24 hours in the day. 
He recommends: 1) constructive conversation, 2) constructive work, 3) 
sufficient eating and sleeping, and 4) sexual intercourse no more than 
twice a week. These suggestions deserve our full consideration. If energy 
use was limited to just these activities by each Black male and Black 
female, certainly we would become more responsible towards ourselves 
as individuals, which would translate into more responsible interaction 
with one another. It is critical that we realize our present patterns of 
behavior permit white supremacy to exist. Directed radical change in 
Black behavior, as suggested above, will alter permanently the face of 
white supremacy, its victimization of the Black male and the Black female 
and the destruction of the Black male/Black female ielationship. 
281


--- PAGE 60 ---
24 
Black Women Moving Towards the 
21st Century 
(May 1975) 
Today, the world is going through a period of great turmoil and change. 
Individually, we are aware of this tunnoil because social and environmen­
tal chaos brings an attendant increase in the stress we feel in our daily 
lives as women workers in all capacities: wives, mothers and individual 
members of a total collective that for 400 years has been oppressed. Yes, 
this is a difficult period for all of us "hue-man" beings, and it would not 
be an exaggeration to say that we are in a time not only of tunnoil, but of 
crisis. 
During periods of crisis and stress, the ~asiest thing to do as an 
expression of our pain, despair and hopelessness is to moan, groan, cry or 
attempt to escape through alcohol, other drugs, fantasy, laughter or just 
fun and games. However, another possible behavioral response, which 
channels the body energy upward and onward as opposed to downward, 
is the use of the crisis as a stimulus for analysis, challenge, responsibility, 
growth and great creativity. 
The word crisis evolves from the Greek word, "krisis," which means 
decision. A period of crisis is a time for decision: an unstable or crucial 
time or state of affairs when the decisions that are made and acted upon 
become all-important for determining future events. Both men and 
women throughout the world have key roles to play in the resolution of 
this crisis, but my singular emphasis here is on the role of Black women. 
283


--- PAGE 61 ---
The Isis Papers 
Before specifically defming our present period of crisis and our 
response to it, we must contemplate our identity, the self-image that we 
carry in our brain-computers. For all that we can imagine doing and all 
that we will do or fail to do is a result of that picture of "self," derived 
from our total experiences from birth onward. That picture becomes the 
basis for all our behavioral patterns. Unfortunately, a major part of these 
self- and group-images for all too many of us Blacks consists of a brief 
and inaccurate history. Accordingly, this history began 400 years ago 
when we were brought to North America in the holds of slave ships by 
the "very advanced" Europeans (whites); it continues with the "advance­
ment" that we have made since our emancipation in 1863 in becoming 
full-fledged "Americans"; and, finally, this history insists that many of us 
now are just like the whites. There is a proverb that states, "The tree grows 
strong and tall only to the extent that its roots are deep and fmnly planted 
in the soil." If Black people are at all disappointed in our present level of 
achievement, it may be because our roots are not planted deeply enough 
in the past- resting upon such a shallow, inadequate and faulty data input 
of only 400 years of history. 
The facts of our true identity are that we, as Black people, are persons 
whose dominant genetic and historic roots extend to Africa, "the Ian~ of 
the Blacks." Men and women of science today, with few exceptions, are 
satisfied that Africa was the birth place of humankind and that for many 
hundreds of centuries thereafter Africans, meaning Black people, were in 
the forefront of all human progress. As John Henrik Clarke states, "It can 
be said with a strong degree of certainty that Africa has had three Golden 
Ages. The first two reached their climax and were in decline before 
Europe as a functioning entity in human society was born." 
Factually speaking, this means that Black women and Black men are 
the parents of the entire family of people -black, brown, red, yellow and 
white varieties. Black people can and have produced all of the colors of 
mankind, including white. White skin is simply the product of a recessive 
genetic mutation to skin albinism. Whites cannot be the parents of 
humankind because whites can only produce white. But Blacks can 
produce a range of colors from as black as the proverbial ace of spades, 
284 
Black Women Moving Towards the 21st Century 
to as white as the proverbial driven snow. Not only are Blacks the genetic 
parents of all people in the world today, but Blacks produced the first 
scientists, architects, musicians, Diathematicians, astronomers, 
astrologers, philosophers, statesman, priests, prophets and generals. In­
deed, Africa produced some of the first fighting women generals. 
I am reminded of some ancient and important wisdom of Africa, as 
seen in the following two proverbs: 1) "When you educate women, you 
educate a nation," and 2) "The hand that rocks the cradle rules the nation 
and its destiny." With this wisdom of our Black ancestors in mind, let us 
examine the current world crisis and the role of Black women in its 
resolution. What is the nature of this crisis? 
Critical in the history of white supremacy was the decision not to 
control Black and other women of color, but to control the men of color. 
Men are the initiaters of the act of reproduction. Ultimately, women are 
dependent upon their men for protection because of the greater physical 
strength of men compared to women. If one simply controls the men of 
a people, the women are controlled also. Thus, the white collective went 
about the business of systematically developing a plan and power 
mechanism worldwide to bring all of the world's men of color under their 
ultimate control. Once this was established, the men of color were 
informed overtly as well as subtly that if they ever should seek to alter the 
power relationship of white over non-white, they would have to fight and 
many would die. Thousands upon thousands of Black men in the U.S. 
were lynched and castrated to drive home the message that white men 
intended to control the "balls" in this world, both on and off of the court! 
White males understood that they needed white women as well as 
Black women to help them achieve and maintain this power relationship. 
White women always have known what they stood to gain - their own 
survival as whites. Black women have been confused and less clear in 
fully understanding how they have been led to cooperate in this deadly 
power game of white supremacy. Further, Black women do not under­
stand fully that they have nothing to gain and everything to lose if this 
deadly game continues. 
285


--- PAGE 62 ---
The Isis Papers 
The first lessons to Black women were harsh and cruel ones of sexual 
assault and abuse, taking their children away and forcing them to watch 
their men being lynched and castmted. But then these harsh lessons were 
followed by milder treatment of Black women as compared to Black men. 
Black women were given extra food, money, clothing and other gifts for 
their special personal favors to the masters. They were rewarded for 
correctly teaching their children to conform to the masters' wishes, as well 
as for telling their men to calm down and be patient so that they too could 
be rewarded. Perhaps we (Black worn:en) really became seduced by the 
illusion of power, being so close to white males. 
We have told ourselves that these behaviors were survival tactics and 
the only way that we could have "come this far." But as our survival 
increasingly is becOming threatened, we are forced to wonder if we have 
been mistaken in our analysis and our strategy. But, again, there is 
something to be learned from our African past. And we must never forget 
that those who do not learn from "history," "their-whole story," are bound 
to repeat it. 
The specific story to which I refer is that of the African (Black) queen, 
Cleopatra. Bam in 69 B.C., Cleopaua came to the throne that she shared 
with her brother, Ptolemy XIII, when she was 13 years old. Egypt was 
then a Roman proteCtorate. It was beSet with internal strife and intrigue. 
Cleopatra aligned herself with the Roman general, Julius Caesar, whom 
she thought would reinforce her power and help her people. She saw her 
political and sexual relationship with Caesar as a maneuver to save Egypt 
from the worst aspects of Roman domination. This maneuver failed in 
spite of her second Roman lover Mark Anthony, who came after Caesar's 
death. Her suicide is a profound statement about the series of decisions 
that she made. Egypt fell and became a Roman colony. And all of the 
harSher aspects of Roman rule, which Cleopatra had sought to prevent, 
settled over Egypt and the Middle East. 
'There were other Black queens in Africa who fought the white invaders 
to their death; they did not submit or cooperate with their oppressors. 
Instead, they moved to resist and destroy that oppressive process. They 
urged their men to do likewise, thus leaving their marks as heroines and 
286 
Black Women Moving Towards the 21st Century 
warriors for their people who died in honor These Black ha . • women ve 
not. been kn.own Simply as "beautiful" queens who committed suicide in 
therr own diSgrace. 
. This ~ngs us to the pertinent question: Should we continue our 
alliance With the present "Romans," or having learned from the past 
~auld we choose an alternate course? In the context of all that we rna; 
ant to call progress and material prosperity' we must face the reality that 
today, Black men die younger than white men, white women and Black 
warne~. B~k men are the most frequent victims of homicide and they 
are bemg killed by one another in increasing numbers. The suicide rate 
for y~ung Black men is the only Black suicide rate greater than the rates 
of whites. Black women and Black children are the most frequent victims 
of ra~ and other physical assa!Jll and violence. Black infant mortality 
remams two to three times the figure for whites. Black women are more 
often left alone to care for their children than any other female group in 
the country. Nearly one-third of our so-called "Black family units " hi h Irti " ,we e ~r to as survival-units," are single-parent families. In the 
W~hmgton, D.C. metropolitan area, there are over 60,000 Black male 
children growing. up in homes without fathers or other surrogate father 
figures. We contmue to have the highest rates of separation and di 
and, thus, family dissolution. We continue to have some of the hi;:r 
rates of teenage pare~thood, and thus, immatme and inadequate parenting 
of ~e next generation. We continue to have high levels of juvenile 
~elinquency, gang wars and drug addiction. Young Black people con­
Unue to leave school in record numbers prior to high school grad . Th · virtual uat:Ion. 
ere IS a epidemic of low reading and math scores amongst our 
young ~ple, and as a result, these youngsters are leaving school with 
total~ y mad~uate preparation for this highly technological, computerized 
and mdustrtalized social system. 
Bl~k people are in a very serious economic depression, while whites 
are s~l at ~e stage of recession. Blacks remain the last hired and first 
fired.' m spite of the supposed achievements of"affirmative action." Th~ 
relau ve le~els of Black unemployment and white unemployment have not 
changed smce 1945. The housing situation for urban Blacks is not 
287


--- PAGE 63 ---
The Isis Papers 
irnproving. Black men continue to be sent to prison in record numbers, 
out of proportion to our population percentage. Black men presently 
constitute 90% of the state prison population. And we now witness the 
nationwide retum of the death penalty. 
What must we as Black women do? It is my conviction that the African 
proverb "The hand that rocks the cradle rules the nation and its destiny" 
is troe. Black women are the mothers and, thus, the first teachers of Black 
females and Black males alike. With increased consciousness of their 
importance as the first teachers, Black women can determine whether 
future generations of Black children will be warriors or if we will continue 
to be slaves living in a highly refined state of psychological oppression, 
which is no less a death than direct physical destruction. Black women 
as mothers and teachers can teach the first powerful lessons in pride and 
respect for cultural, historical and genetic Blackness, while steadfastly 
refusing to impart any part of the white oppressors' lesson in Black 
self-hate that we learn as children: "If you're Black, stay back; if you're 
brown, stick around; if you're yellow, you're mellow; and if you're white, 
you are all right." Black mothers must cease making their first concero 
whether or not their babies will have light skin and straight hair. 
The newborn infant can tell from the mother's first touch whether she 
is pleased or disappointed with its color, appearance and gender. Certain­
ly later the child can tell the mother's respect for Blackness by the 
comments she makes about who is a pretty girl, who is a handsome boy 
and who has the proverbial "good" and "bad" hair. All of these lessons 
that we have been taught by our white oppressors to teach our young we 
must refuse to teach ever again! 
But Black women as mothers and first teachers can take their con-
sciousness to an even higher level. They can give the first lesson in what 
constitutes Black manhood. They can teach all of their sons that they are 
not their "babies" or their substitute lovers. Black women can be the first 
to inform their sons, with loving kindness, that they did not bring them 
into the world to be oppressed. Rather, they brought them into the world 
to be free men, warriors who have to war to be free, and to die if they so 
happen to die in the fight for their right to be full men under the starS. 
288 
Black Women Moving Towards the 21st Century 
Black women must cease saying to child psychiatrists, "I'll never tell my 
'baby' anything like that!" 
Black women can teach their sons and their daughters that the defmi­
tion of a Black man is not simply someone who can buy things (a nice 
home, a car, a yacht and clothes), but rather someone who will respect, 
support, protect and defend himself, his woman and his children. And 
fmally, Black men are those who will do whatever is necessary to ensure 
their families' respect, support, protection and defense. 
Black women as mothers and teachers consciously can teach their 
daughters that Black women, as the mothers of all mankind, are the alpha 
and the omega of women on this planet. They were here in the beginning, 
and if humankind remains, they will be present in the end. Black mothers 
can teach their daughters that they should never seek to look like or be 
like anything other than themselves. They can set the standards of what 
women will be like on this planet. For this is their responsibility, coming 
from the tradition of the first mothers and queens. Black women can teach 
their daughters that respect is not given to women by men, but that Black 
women carry in themselves the highest possible level of self-respect that 
commands respect from men and women of all races. Black women can 
teach their daughters how they possibly assist in the destruction of Black 
men and Black people by allowing Black men to hide out in the vagina. 
To allow this hiding out (attempts to climb in the womb to be babies or 
fetuses again) when they know the men should turn and face their 
oppressors, is an extreme level of self-destruction. 
Likewise, Black women can teach their daughters never to refer to 
Black men as "baby" and never to allow Black men to refer to them, when 
adult women, as "mamma." Thus, they systematically can refuse to 
reinforce the image the white man wants reinforced: an adult Black male 
baby and thus the proverbial "mother-fucker." It is clear that a "baby" 
will never track down "The Man." Finally, Black women can teach their 
daughters that they can change the tide of Black destiny by only giving 
their most intimate pleasures to the providers who also prove themselves 
as warriors against all enemies of the Black collective. 
289


--- PAGE 64 ---
The Isis Papers 
remote. Already the Nazi outburst has become historical. But this is 
a strange page in history. Few events of modem times were so filled 
with unpredicted action and unsuspected death. A primordial impulse 
had suddenly surfaced among the Western nations; it had been 
unfettered through their machines. From this moment, fundamental 
assumptions about our civilization have no longer stood unchallenged, 
for while the occurrence is past, the phenomenon remains. 
Before the emergence of the twentieth century and its teclmology, a 
destructive mind could not play in fantasy with the thoughts that the 
Nazi were able to translate into action. The administrator of earlier 
centuries did not have the tools. He did not possess the network of 
communications; he did not dispose over rapid small arms fire and 
quick working poison gases. The bureaucrat of tomorrow would not 
have these problems; already, he is better equipped than the German 
Nazis were. Killing is not as difficult as it used to be. The modem 
administrative apparatus has facilities forrapid, concerted movements 
and for efficient massive killings. These devices not only trap a larger 
number of victims; they also require a greater degree of specialization, 
and with that division of labour the moral burden too is fragmented 
among the participants. The perpetrators can now kill his victims 
without touching them, without hearing them, without seeing them. 
He may feel sure of his success and safe from its repercussions. This 
ever growing capacity for destruction cazmot be arrested anywhere. 
... we saw how the Nazis had built upon the experiences of the past. 
Now there are means which will allow still others to seize upon the 
Nazis' experience, so that it in tum may yet become a precedent for 
the future. 
... in the words of President Truman, 'Hitler's persecution of the Jews 
did much to awaken Americans to the dangerous extremes to which 
prejudice can be carried if allowed to control government actions.' 
With uncommon perception, ~e President saw that the retention in 
mid-twentieth century of discriminatory barriers signified the 
maintenance of a springboard, and the preservation of a target, for 
destruction. 
The New York Times editorial r~~iewing And the Band Played On, by 
Randy Shilts, states: 
292 
AIDS Holocaust 
And the ~and Played On applies withering hindsight to society's 
shortc~~~s, almost. none to its successes. It (the book) overlooks 
the. scientific fea~ of I~entifying _the AIDS virus and developing an 
an~~dy te~t, achi~ved m record tmle. It gives no credit to the equally 
striking SOClal achievements. Most Americans have so far refused to 
panic in the face of a terrifying disease, or to oppress the barely 
tolerated milwr ities that are its focus." (Emphasis mine.) 
In another article, The New York Times reported: 
Geneva, November 14 (Reuters)- The World Health Organization 
has raised it estimates of AIDS cases throughout the world by 50 
percent and says finding a vaccine may take longer than experts 
thought. 
.. :Halfdan Mahler, the organization's director general, painted a bleak 
picture at the ~tart of the conference on acquired immune deficiency 
syndrome, which destroys the body's ability to fend off disease and is 
always fatal. 
'My scientific sources tell me that a vaccine may be even further away 
than we thought a year ago, and development of therapeutic agents 
has been frustratingly slow,' he said. 
Mr. Mahler said, 'Available evidence irtdicates that the virus is 
continuing to spread and the number of AIDS cases climbs steadily. • 
The he~th agency estimates that 5 to 10 million people in the world 
are earners of the human immuno-deficiency virus, which caused 
AIDS, but have not as yet developed the disease . 
"If you do not understand White Supremacy (Racism) .:.. what it is and 
how it works - everything else that you think you understand, will ~nly 
confuse you." 
-Neely Fuller, Jr. 
The United Compensatory Code/System/Concept 
In the size of the lie there is always contained a cenain factor of 
c~e~ibility, since ~e great masses of people - will more easily fall 
VICtim to a great he than to a small one, since they themselves ... lie 
sometimes in little things ... Thus such an untruth will not at all enter 
293


--- PAGE 65 ---
The Isis Papers 
their heads ... therefore, just for this reason, some part of the most 
impudent lie will remain and stick. 
-Robert G L. Waite 
The Psychopathic God: Adolf Hitler 
"What's past is prologue." 
-William Shakespeare 
George Santayana, the American philosopher, has left to posterity the 
challenge, "Those who do not know history and do not learn from history, 
will repeat it." 
From the aforementioned information, I conclude the following: 
If you attempt to understand biological and chemical warfare without 
understanding white supremacy, you will only be confused. 
If you attempt to understand the killing of gypsies in Germany. under 
the leadership of Adolph Hitler, without understanding white supremacy, 
you will only be confused. 
If you attempt to understand the killing of homosexuals in Germany, 
under the leadership of Adolph Hitler, without understanding white 
supremacy, you will only be confused. 
If you attempt to understand the holocaust of Semites of the Jewish 
religion in Europe from 1933 to 1945, wherein 6,000,000 Semites were 
slaughtered under conditions of mass deceit with the awareness of other 
Western (white) powers, without understanding white supremacy 
(racism/anti-Semitism), you will only be bewildered and totally confused. 
Anyone who has not mastered an understanding of GermanY under the 
Adolph Hitler's leadership and the holocaust of Semites, cannot possibly 
understand the AIDS holocaust of 1980 to 1991, wherein 50,000,000 to 
75,000,000 deaths of Black people on the continent of Africa and else-
where have been planned and projected. 
If you attempt to understand the AIDS holocaust, without under-
standing white supremacy, you will only be confused; and you may be 
dead. The word holocaust is defined in this paper as "the massive, planned 
slaughtering (by whatever necessary means), under conditions of major 
294 
AIDS Holocaust 
dece~tion, of people classified as non-white, conducted by people who 
classify.themselves as white, for the specific purpose of depopulation of 
non-~hl~ people, under the specific conditions of white supremacy 
dommauon." 
All information, events and data that are not placed in proper context 
or do not establish precise relationships are only nonsense. Nonsense 
because it dec~ives and causes confusion, can be used for deadly purposes: 
~uch of the discussion heretofore about AIDS and much of the informa­
tion that has appeared in the electronic and print media about AIDS are 
expe~enced as largely nonsensical to increasing numbers of people, 
especially Black people, including those in the U.S., which thus far has 
the largest number of documented cases of AIDS, but also in Africa, which 
has the largest number of projected deaths. 
Most disturbing and most nonsensical is the obsessive insistence on 
the ~art of people who classify themselves as white, that Black peopl~ in 
Afnca caused the spread of the AIDS virus throughout the world from 
their contact with the Mrican Green Monkey (the Vervet Monkey). 
My effort, therefore, is to place the discussion of AIDS in what I 
consid~r to be its only proper and logical context. I am attempting to 
neutraliZe much of the nonsense that has developed worldwide concerning 
. this ~pic in the past five or so years. AIDS is a deadly disease, which 
aft~r ~~ su~den a~pearance has already killed thousands of people. The 
projection 1s that 1t will kill many, many thousands more indeed man .ll. , Y 
~~ IOn~. I hope thtat by cutting through the nonsense surrounding the 
diScusston of AIDS and taking a more logical approach to the epidemic 
(and now pandemic) disease, many lives throughout the world will be 
saved. 
. From 1933 to 1945, Germany- a leading coWltry in Western civiliza­
tio~ .u?der the leadership of Adolph Hitler - with the assistance of 
poliucu~ns, doctors, lawyers, professors, judges, scientists and the general 
~pulauon, _conducted open warfare against and planned the extermina­
tion of Semttes of the Jewish religion who were citizens of Germany and 
other countries of German-occupied Europe. 
295


--- PAGE 66 ---
The Isis Papers 
As persons who were referred to in Germany and throughout Europe 
as Semites, the Jews were not considered to be white people or aryans. 
As Semites they were considered to have their genetic roots amongst 
Africans- Black people on the continent of Africa. 
Indeed, the word Semite is derived from the Latin preflx "semi," which 
means half. Semites were the products of the genetic mixture produced 
when white Greek and Roman soldiers invaded Africa and raped African 
women, who of course were Black. Semite means the same as mulatto. 
Thus they were considered to be half Black and half white, or colored 
people. Thus, a yellow colored star was placed on their outer clothing by 
the German government in the Hitler era. 
The terms anti-Semite and anti-Semitism most fundamentally refer to 
a destructive ideological, psychological and behavioral state of "anti­
color" waged by people who classify themselves as white against those 
who are classified as non-white, even when those non-whites have lost 
much of their skin coloration in some instances. 
Semites who left Africa and eventually attempted to settle in Europe, 
miscegenated further with white-skinned people on the continent of 
Europe and continued to lose much of their melanin skin -pigmentation. 
However, because of the dominant character of the African (Black) 
genotype, including hair texture and type and facial features, there con­
tinued to exist evidence of African genetic heritage. Because of the 
dominance of African or Black genetic heritage, genetically recessive 
white-skinned people of Europe continued to fear the possibility of white 
genetic annihilation caused by the Semites. Thus, there was a 2,000 year 
history of white hostility towards Semites, or coloreds, of the Jewish 
religion on the continent of Europe, in spite of short periods in which the 
hostility of whites towards the Semites was less intense. 
Following Germany's loss of World War I and the major decline of 
the German economy, which caused a sense of extreme and profound 
dislocation and vulnerability amongst the German people, latent hostility 
began to escalate towards the Semites. Again, these people were long 
recognized as being able to cause white genetic annihilation because they 
296 
AIDS Holocaust 
carried the dominant Black genetic material from Africa, although it had 
been much diluted over a 2,000 year period. 
It should be noted that the most fundamental of all vulnerabilities is 
white genetic vulnerability or the fear of white annihilation. 
Hostility against the Semites intensified even though the Semites 
sought to identify with and be accepted as white people. They wanted to 
be Germans or other Europeans, but they were told they were Semites 
even if one their parents was white or even if they were married to white; 
(aryans). 
Hostility also was directed against gypsies who were also darker­
skinned people and whose very name means "out of Egypt." In addition, 
h~stility was directed against homosexuals because, in the logic of Adolph 
Httler and other white supremacists, homosexuals represented weakness 
on the part of the white (aryan) male, who already was feeling vulnerable. 
Adolph Hitler, who carne to power in Gennany in 1933, became the 
most forceful articulator of that most fundamental of all fears of the global 
and local white collective- the fear of white genetic annihilation caused 
by people classified as non-white. 
Indeed, it can be said that Adolph Hitler was the highest crystalization 
of the white supremacy mind-set based upon the fear of white genetic 
annihilation and its companion thought, white genetic survival by any 
necessary and conceivable means. 
Hitler, because he tapped into the deepest fear, was able to have the 
support and sympathy of masses of other people who, like himself, 
classified themselves as white- then and now. They understood Hitler's 
call, at conscious as well as deep subconscious levels, for white genetic 
survival. This is the perceived threat that the Semites of the Jewish 
religion residing in Europe represented to Germans and other Europeans 
(whites). 
Hitler and his followers referred to the Semites as tiermensch (German, 
for"subhuman"). Amongst many other horrendous accusations, Hider 
accused them of carrying and causing disease. Indeed, he referred to the 
Semites as being "viruses." 
297


--- PAGE 67 ---
The Isis Papers 
From the book The Psychopathic God: Adolph Hitler by Robert G.L. 
Waite, I quote: 
Toward the end of February 1942, just after theW armsee C~nfer~nce 
h. h rgaruz' ed the • final solution' to the jewish problem, Httler listed 
WlCO • had' 1 ed himself among the great benefactors of mankind w~o · . ts~ at 
dangerous disease germs: 'The discovery of the Jewtsh VlfUS ts one 
of the greatest revolutions that has ever taken place. The fight we are 
carrying on is of the same nature as that waged by Pas_ture .~d .Koch 
during the last century. How many diseases have ~e~ ongm m th~ 
Jewish virus! We shall retain our health when we eliminate the Jew. 
Hitler further accused the government that preceded his own, the 
Weimer Republic, of "surrendering the Gennan nation to 'syphilization' 
by Jews and Negroes." . 
And thus, in Hitler's pattern of perception and logic (the .wh1te 
supremacy mind-set), he planned for the extermination of the Sem1te~ as 
the "final solution" to the problem of white genetic survival, by getung 
rid of the source of white genetic annihilation. . 
Through a monstrous pattern of lying and deceit, promoting the "B1~ 
Lie" through a very sophisticated government propaganda apparatus, 1t 
was propagated that the Semites were the source of all of the problems 
that threatened the German and European peoples: . This 
Thus, mass level destruction was planned agamst the Semites. 
process was participated in by all levels of the German and Europe~ 
societies. Adolph Hitler's leadership ofGennany from 1933 to 19~5 m 
the war against the Semites has become the standard for the ulttmate 
conduct of governmental and state white supremacy· . 
In 1932, the year before Adolph Hitler came to power i~ Germany • m 
Tuskegee, Alabama, U.S.A., another destrUction was bemg condu~ted 
against people who were classified as non-white by people who.classifi~ 
themselves as white doctors, scientists and government officmls. ThiS 
planned destrUction was the Tuskegee Syphilis Study· . 
From 1932 to 1972, a total of 40 years, United States Pubhc He~th, 
Macon County Health Department, Tuskegee Institute, Veterans Hospital 
in Tuskegee and private physicians in and around Macon County 
298 
AIDS Holocaust 
deliberately planned to withhold treatment from more than 400 Black men 
who were suffering from syphilis. It was verbalized that the progmm 
would be a means for getting rid of the Black people in the U.S. (This 
destructive deception recently ended, under pressure, in the year 1972.) 
Very shortly thereafter, the disease which we now refer to as AIDS 
began to surface in the U.S. The populations focused upon as being 
infected with the AIDS virus were first the white male homosexuals and 
subsequently Black and Hispanic people. More specifically, the projected 
source of the virus was/is said to be African people who had been bitten 
by the African Green Monkey or the Vervet Monkey. 
In 1969,a book entitled ASurveyofChemica/ and Biological Warfare, 
by John Cookson and Judith Nottingham; was published by the Monthly 
Review Press. The book is described on its cover as follows: "Derived 
from a three year study conducted by a British biochemist and geneticist 
and a British political scientist, the text affords a comprehensive review 
of materials used, and policies adopted by authorities in the U.S., Canada, 
Great Britain and West Gennany." It also states that it " ... provides one of 
the most comprehensive views on the subject of chemical and biological 
warfare written for the layman. The authors, who are well qualified, 
produced a vast amount of documentation of the use and research on these 
types of weapons." On p. 322 at the bottom of the page, the authors state, 
The question of whether new diseases could be used is of considerable 
interest. Vervet monkey disease (African Green Monkey Disease) 
may well be an example of a whole new class of disease-causing 
organisms. Hartdling of blood and tissue without precaution causes 
infection. It is unaffected by any antibiotic substance so far tried and 
is unrelated to any other organism. It causes fatality in some cases and 
can be venereally transmitted in man. In the words of Dr. C .E. Gordon 
Smith, 'It has possible potential as an infectious disease of man. It 
presumably is also ofBW (biological warfare) interest. New diseases 
are continually appearing (chikungunya and o'nyong-nyong fever for 
example). In addition to these there are the possibilities of virus and 
bacteria being genetically manipulated to produce 'new' orgartism. 
On p. 110 in the same book (bottom of page), they state, 
299


--- PAGE 68 ---
The Isis Papers 
Just recently a great deal of useful work has been done on the V ervet 
Monkey Disease (African Green Monkey Disease) which caused 
seven deaths in Germany. Reports of progress were: 'sent to 40 
laboratories all over the world; 9 of these have been supplied with 
infective material and/or antisera [vaccine]: 4 in the USA and one each 
in Germany, Panama, South Africa, Uganda and the USSR. A 
non-infective complement fixing antigen has been prepared to the 
WHO (World Health organization) reference laboratories.' 
-Hansard, May 1968 
In another book, A Higher Form of Killing (The Secret Story of 
Chemical and Biological Warfare) by Robert Harris and Jeremy Paxman, 
published by Hill and Wang (1982), on p. 219, the authors state: 
The claims continued. In January 1978, a correspondent with Reuters 
news agency reported from NATO headquarters that 'scientific 
experts' had informed him that the Russians were developing 'three 
horrific new diseases for warfare ... Lassa Fever, which according to 
the sources, kills 35 out of every 100 people it strikes, Ebola fever, 
which kills 70 out of every 100, and the deadly Marburg fever (Green 
Monkey Disease). 
Over and over again the name "African Green Monkey" shows up. 
This is not a "monkey" biting Africans and causing disease, but a weapon 
of biological warfare developed in laboratories by people who classify 
themselves as white. This charge, however, is denied, and blame is 
projected on to African (Black) people. 
Adolph Hitler propagated his "Big Lie" against the Semites of the 
Jewish religion, which became his pretext for the planned slaughter of 11 
million. He actually succeeded in killing six million, all in the name of 
white supremacy (racism/anti-Semitism) for the express purpose of white 
genetic survival. 
In the late 1980s, there has been grave concern throughout the world 
that the white birthrate is declining as the birthrates of all non-white people 
continue to increase. It is at this time that we witness the sudden 
appearance of AIDS, primarily effecting Black people in Africa and Haiti. 
300 
AIDS Holocaust 
A~ truth always surfaces, in time we will know the full details of the 
massive deception of the AID~ holocaust, when the current "B" L' ". 
oo~~ ~re~ 
Recommended reading 
Cookson, John and Nottingham, Judith. A Survey of Chemical Biological 
Warfare. New York: Monthly Review Press, 1969. 
Jones, James H. Bad Blood: The Tuskegee Syphilis Experiment New 
York: The Free Press, 1982. · 
Lifton, R?bert Jay. The Nazi Doctors- Medical Killing & the Psycholo g 
ofGenoczde. New York: Basic Books, 1986. y 
301

