=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: What is Nationalism Pan Africanism Compare the Similarities and Differences.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 26
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:15:41.184171
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Page 1 of 26 
 
Intro Afro-American Studies - eBlack Studies 2011 
 
What is Black Nationalism? Pan-Africanism? Compare the similarities and differences 
 
What is Black Nationalism? Pan-Africanism? 
 Compare the similarities and differences 
 
 
Nationalism and Pan-Africanism 
Toward a Paradigm of Unity in Afro-American Studies 
Source of text: http://www.eblackstudies.org/intro/chapter15.htm


--- PAGE 2 ---
Page 2 of 26 
 
Intro Afro-American Studies - eBlack Studies 2011 
 
What is Black Nationalism? Pan-Africanism? Compare the similarities and differences 
 
 
Ladies and gentlemen, I want you to realize that the Universal Negro Improvement 
Association and African Communities league, the organization which I have the 
honor to represent, is a worldwide movement that is endeavoring to unite the 
sentiment of our people. Our objective is to declare Africa a vast Negro empire. 
We can see no right in Belgium's retention of the Congo. We are going to wait until 
peace is completely restored, and then will we work Belgium out. And when we 
ask Belgium, "What are you doing there?" America will have nothing to do with it. 
Under the League of N ations when Africa revolts America will have to call upon 
Negroes to fight Negroes, therefore the League of Nations must be defeated by 
every Negro in America, or it will mean that Africa will have to fight the combined 
nations of the world.  
Marcus Garvey, Objects of the U.N.I.A. 
 
     Afro-American nationalism and Pan -Africanism have been historically 
legitimate responses by Black people to racist oppression. Nationalism seeks a 
solution to the problem s faced by Black people as its first priority. It focuses 
primarily on Black people in the United States. Some Black nationalists view all 
white people as the enemies of Black people. They argue that only complete 
separation of Blacks from whites will solve the problems that Black people face. 
Other nationalists seek unity with nationalists of other oppressed people of 
color (Native American Indians, Chicanos, Puerto Ricans, etc.) In general, 
nationalists make distinctions between the problems facing Blacks and whites 
and the solutions for eac h. In fact, many nationalists argue that a separate 
Black solution is needed even for a problem that Blacks share with whites.  
     Pan-Africanism is similar to nationalism. It holds that all Black people share 
common historical links to Africa, that the liberation of Black people is closely 
tied to the liberation of Africa, and that Black people should support the 
freedom struggle of African  people. More recently, some Pan -Africanists have 
claimed that freedom for Black people in the Unite d States cannot be won (and 
should not be our major goal) until the liberation of Africa has been completed. 
The extreme of this view states that all Black people in the United States should 
go to Africa.  
 
 
THE HISTORICAL BASIS FOR BLACK NATIONALISM  
The basis for Black nationalism is rooted in the historical experience of Black 
people. In the United States, two aspects of the Black experience molded Black 
people into a distinct nationality: Their shared material (economic and social) 
conditions, and the r acism they faced. The foundations for a distinct nationality 
were laid in the rural Black Belt South during the slave period. In this sense, the 
Black Belt South is the national homeland of Afro - American people. It is in the 
Black Belt South that Black pe ople have national rights that can be exercised if 
the masses of Black people make such demands in order to resolve the 
problems they face in the United States.


--- PAGE 3 ---
Page 3 of 26 
 
Intro Afro-American Studies - eBlack Studies 2011 
 
What is Black Nationalism? Pan-Africanism? Compare the similarities and differences 
     
 During the rural period, the common Black experience was tenancy, a semi -
free, semi-slave experience in which Blacks had control over the work process 
itself, but did not control the products of their work. Tenant farmers worked the 
land and often set their own work schedules, but they had to give up the fruits 
of their labor because they did not own the land. The tenancy system, like 
slavery, meant the economic exploitation of Black people.  
     In order to survive these material conditions, Black people formed 
cooperative social relationships. The social life of the Black community was 
centered mainly around the church and fraternal Organizations that took the 
form of mutual aid societies, burial  societies, etc. A common culture, including 
the development of a distinct dialect (speech pattern), also flowed out of this 
shared socioeconomic exp erience (see Chapter 9 for a discussion of the 
creolization process and Afro-American culture). Thus, a common economic life 
- based on exploitation and their mutual cooperation to combat it - served as 
the material basis for their national existence.  
 
  
     In addition, Black people have always experienced brutal and vicious 
racism. The main defense, though it has taken many different forms, has been 
Black unity. This unity frequently has been a call for Black nationalism 
(meaning that Black pe ople should unite as Black people to fight against their 
own oppression) and not a call for Black people to unite with people of other 
nationalities who are also committed to fighting against the oppression facing 
Black people. The appeal of nationalism is  facilitated by racism as it forces 
Black people to turn inward toward the strengths of their own community.  
     It should be pointed out that Afro -American nationalism is fundamentally 
different from white nationalism. Black nationalism is the nationali sm of an 
oppressed nationality and expresses the desire of Black people to be free. 
White nationalism is chauvinistic, includes racism, and is never a progressive 
force. Black nationalism can be positive or negative, but white nationalism is 
always reactionary.  
THE HISTORICAL BASIS FOR PAN-AFRICANISM  
     The historical basis for Pan -Africanism among Afro -Americans is found in 
the United States but is conditioned by events in Africa. The reasons for Pan-
Africanism are three -fold. First, racism and repression, which have been the 
common, everyday experiences of Black people in the United States, have led 
to the view that there can be no major change in the United States, that the 
hope for a better life  lies with Africa. The turn to Pan - Africanism has become 
particularly acute when there has been a downturn in the economy and a rise in


--- PAGE 4 ---
Page 4 of 26 
 
Intro Afro-American Studies - eBlack Studies 2011 
 
What is Black Nationalism? Pan-Africanism? Compare the similarities and differences 
political repression).  
     Second, African countries and personalities have been shining examples of 
Black achievement in a world dominated by white racism and imperialism. The 
most important person and country in this respect are the late - President 
Kwame Nkrumah and Ghana. Nkrumah was trained by Afro -Americans, W. E. 
B. DuBois and Horace Mann Bond, and received his po litical orientation from 
the decisive 5th Pan -African Congress (held in Manchester, England in 1945). 
He guided Ghana to independence (the first Black African country to gain its 
independence from a colonial power), and he led independent Africa in 
founding the Organization of African Unity (OAU) in 1963. Many Afro -
Americans went to Ghana to help in the development of this newly independent 
nation. Nkrumah will always be an important symbol of pan -Africanism  the 
middle of the 20th century.   
  
 
     The third basis for Pan -Africanism among Afro -American people is that 
Africa offers opportunity for enterprising Blacks from the U.S.A. Black people in 
the United States have acquired technical training and skills which can be of 
critical importance in  the development of Africa. This cuts two ways: while the 
African countries can use these technical skills, Blacks from the United States 
who go there with these skills can also seek to satisfy their own individual self -
interests (and the U.S. multi- national corporations they frequently represent) at 
the expense of Africans.  
THE IDEOLOGICAL AND POLITICAL CHARACTER OF 
NATIONALISM  
How can we assess the impact and potential of nationalism as an ideology and 
strategy in the struggle for Black liberation and social change? This ideology 
and political line has changed as the historical experiences of Black people 
have changed, but we must ask of any ideology how it sees the main problem 
that is faced by Black people. The main problems facing Black people are 
racism and economic exploitation caused by capitalism and imperialism.  
There, are three different types of nationalism and each calls for a different 
response from Black people engaged in the struggle for freedom: reactionary 
nationalism, reformist nationalism, and revolutionary nationalism.  
Reactionary nationalism  - This is Black nationalism based on a very 
conservative, pro -capitalist view. Politically, this has led some nationalists to 
openly support U.S. imperialism against the interests of Black people. 
Examples of this include support for Ronald Reagan, deep involvement in 
various Black capitalist schemes, and advertisements in the Black nationalist -
oriented magazine Black Collegian (distributed "free" throughout the United


--- PAGE 5 ---
Page 5 of 26 
 
Intro Afro-American Studies - eBlack Studies 2011 
 
What is Black Nationalism? Pan-Africanism? Compare the similarities and differences 
States) touting "the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) as an equal opportunity 
employer." This type of nationalism must be exposed, and those advocating it 
must be defeated in their attempts to d estroy the struggle against impe rialism 
or to lead the struggle astray. 
  
 
Reformist nationalism - This is based on the view that freedom for Black people 
is possible by leaving the basic economic and political system as it is (by either 
staying within it or leaving it). Propos als from nationalists of this type include 
the following: a separate Black state in the South, Black political and economic 
control of cities and Black communities, large and influential businesses which 
serve the interests of the masses of Black people, a nd even mass emigration 
back to Africa. These nationalists wrongly assume that the U.S. ruling class 
would grant these proposals or would allow them to develop without being 
dominated. Other nationalists, believing self -cultivation is the solution, have 
retreated into health foods, astrology, or prayer. This type of nationalism is a 
withdrawal from struggle and confrontation with imperialism. Those who hold 
this view should be won over to support the struggle for Black liberation and to 
get involved in it.  
Revolutionary nationalism - This type of Black nationalism maintains that the 
solution to the oppression of Black people will come only through their struggle 
to defeat monopoly capitalism in the United States. Defeating U.S. imperialism 
at home is viewed  as the most significant contribution that Black people in the 
United States can make to the African liberation struggle. Revolutionary 
nationalists view the interests of the ruling class as diametrically opposed to the 
interests of Black people.  
     Thus, while revolutionaries do fight for reforms that serve the immediate 
needs of the masses of Black people (e.g., community control of schools, 
daycare centers, an end to discrimination in hiring and college admissions, 
etc.), they recognize that these str uggles must be qualitatively transformed to a 
struggle to defeat imperialism if Black people are to gain their freedom. What 
makes this revolutionary is that it aims at the source which causes exploitation 
and oppression of everyone in the society.  
     Revolutionary nationalism is a positive position for Black people that 
emphasizes struggle and relies on the masses of people (as opposed to "great 
leaders;") for decisive action. The major problem with revolutionary nationalism 
is that it has not developed  a model for rebuilding all of U.S. society. Though it 
has successfully focused on destroying existing relations of domination and 
control over Blacks, i has fallen short of providing the necessary framework for 
a new socialist society.   
  
 
 Thus, while it provides revolutionary fervor and direction in a short -term sense,


--- PAGE 6 ---
Page 6 of 26 
 
Intro Afro-American Studies - eBlack Studies 2011 
 
What is Black Nationalism? Pan-Africanism? Compare the similarities and differences 
it fails to lay the groundwork for a long -term revolutionary struggle for Black 
liberation. If the liberation of Black people is to occur, Black nationalism and 
pan-Africanism must be combined with class struggle -in the USA as well as 
internationally.   
     This sums up the ideological and political character of nationalism and pan -
Africanism. It is necessary to have a general understanding of these two 
positions so that thei r continued recurrence can be understood within their 
specific historical context. The historical development of these ideological and 
political stands can be traced best in the context of the three fundamental 
stages of historical development of the Black experience.  
The Slave Period 
During slavery, pan -Africanism and nationalism manifested themselves in tow 
main trends: 1) emigration, and 2) militant resistance or the position that Black 
people should stay here and fight. some black people advocated leav ing the 
United States and going to Africa, but only a few succeeded. For instance, in 
1792 some 1,100 Black people went to Sierra Leone (where the British had 
resettled 400 Africans five years earlier), and in 1815 more joined them under 
the leadership of a Black petty -bourgeois capitalist named Paul Cuffee. Given 
the totally oppressive conditions of the slave system and the fact that many 
slaves were born in Africa, this action was a legitimate and progressive 
response. the main criticism of these efforts initiated by Black people is that 
they left the institution of slavery  intact. They thus served the interests of only a 
few Blacks, mostly middle-class free Blacks who could make the trip. 
     During the slave period, various emigration schemes were also  pushed by 
the ruling class, most notably those led by the American Colonization Society 
(ACS).  The ACS was founded in 1817 ostensibly so that Black people could 
develop themselves and Africa. While Cuffee had emphasized emigration as a 
self-help program, the ACS for many Blacks came perilously close to being a 
deportation scheme which they vigorously opposed. Though sometimes   using 
ACS resources, Black people carefully distinguished between emigration and 
deportation.   
 
 
     As Edwin Redkey p ut it in his study of nationalist and back - to-Africa 
movements, "Colonization was essentially a white man's solution to the race 
problem and emigration was a black nationalist answer." John Henry, in a 1977 
article, was even more pointedly critical of the  ACS's efforts to repatriate Black 
people:  
 
This was rationalized as a process to bring 'civilization and Christianity to the 
backward primitive condition of blacks in Africa. But the real intent was stated by 
the reactionary Henry Clay of Kentucky: "to rid our country of a useless and


--- PAGE 7 ---
Page 7 of 26 
 
Intro Afro-American Studies - eBlack Studies 2011 
 
What is Black Nationalism? Pan-Africanism? Compare the similarities and differences 
pernicious, if not dangerous portion of its population....."  
     Colonization efforts were intended to eliminate slavery as a backward fetter on 
industrial capitalism emerging in the North, to drain away a source of weakness for 
the slavocracy of the South (e.g., the slave rebellions), and to establish a 
beachhead in Africa for U.S. capitalist interests.  
In 1822, the ACS founded Liberia Oust adjacent to Sierra Leone) and helped 
former slaves go there. Henry, offers this criticism of the Liberian resettlement 
scheme and the colonization effort: in general:                 
 
Most people who went there either died, or became part of a Liberian 
aristocracy ("Americo -Liberians") who, in turn, forced the indigenous 
population into virtual slavery. On the other hand, the efforts by the U.S. ruling 
class, through state governments and the American Colonization Society, 
were reactionary because they often forced people to choose betwe en slavery 
and emigration. Their efforts were not in the interest of Blacks or the working 
class in the U.S., and certainly not in the interests of the people of Liberia.  
 
Nevertheless, by the 1850s there was a great deal of interest in emigration 
(whether to Africa, Canada, the West Indies, or South America). Conditions. for 
Blacks were rapidly deteriorating, particularly with the passage of the fugitive 
slave law in 1850.  
Most, however, chose to offer militant resistance by remaining in the United 
States and fighting to overthrow slavery. This position was held by such people 
as Henry Highland Garnet and Frederick Douglass (see Chapter 4 on "The 
Slave Experience"). It was the revolutionary way out of slavery and the main 
trend during the period. The ma ny slaves who sabotaged production, plotted 
slave revolts, escaped to the North, and later joined the Union army in armed 
struggle to defeat the slave system all testified to the revolutionary aspirations 
of the masses of Black slaves.  
It should also be r emembered that during the period of slavery some Black 
people were living in the urban environment. Facing rejection by the white 
society, free Blacks in the North were forced to concentrate on developing 
separate Black social institutions. This create d a race consciousness based on 
organized Black unity, particularly in churches, fraternal societies, businesses, 
and publications. 
  
 
     It is important to point out the difference here between rac e consciousness 
and nationalism. During the slave period, the main thing was race 
consciousness - Black versus white - with the historical identity of being an 
African accepted as a possible alternative to being a slave in America. Only 
after several gener ations - when there was a material and subjective basis for 
"national" identity --was race consciousness fully transformed into nationalism.


--- PAGE 8 ---
Page 8 of 26 
 
Intro Afro-American Studies - eBlack Studies 2011 
 
What is Black Nationalism? Pan-Africanism? Compare the similarities and differences 
The modal forms of nationalism developed most fully in the rural period.  
THE RURAL PERIOD  
Pan-Africanist and Blac k nationalist thoughts and actions began as direct 
responses to racist oppression. Generally speaking, when time are particularly 
bad the conditions are ripe for some form of Pan -Africanism. When times have 
been relatively good, there is an upsurge of Blacknationalisrn.  
     During the rural period, a consistent pattern of emigrations developed as a 
response to oppression and hard times. With the collapse of Reconstruction in 
the late 1870s, there was an emigration movement led by Blacks from South 
Carolina who tried to organize an exodus to Liberia. Though their scheme 
failed, it did mark the beginning of emigrationist efforts initiated in the South.  
     Emigration schemes reached a peak in the mid -1890s when the cotton 
economy failed and Black people we re disfranchised and subjected to 
unprecedent violence. The idea of going to Africa was particularly popular 
among Black peasants, who were eager to go anyplace that offered a 
sanctuary from the oppression they were experiencing.  
     Bishop Henry Turner of the A.M.E. Church in Georgia was one of the main 
advocates of emigrationism and inspired much enthusiasm among Black 
people of the South. But his efforts were doomed by transportation problems, 
reports of a harsh life in Africa, inadequate financial backing, and a lack of 
interest on the part of the Black middle class and the educated Black elite. 
Chief Alfred C. Sam from Ghana faced similar problems when he later went to 
Oklahoma and tried to organize an emigration plan for Black people who  had 
become disillusioned by the racism and economic subjugation they 
experienced in the Southwest.  
 
     Just as emigration "back to Africa" was a resettlement scheme, so too was 
the-Black town movement. This movement was led by enterprising an d 
ambitious people who wanted to use the all - Black town as the basis for 
economic and political power. More - over, they saw collective unity as a 
protection from racist oppression. A movement to Kansas (by "exodusters" as 
they were called) was led by Pap Singleton. This was a major attempt to 
escape repression in the South. Between 1860 and 1880, the - Black 
population of Kansas increased, from 840 to 43,000. Around the turn of the 
century, Edwin P. McCabe organized a movement of Black people to 
Oklahoma. Over twenty -five Black towns were founded there, including 
Langston (the first) and Boley. He   had visions of making Oklahoma an all -
Black state and becoming its governor or senator. Racism and an inhospitable 
economic environment soon dashed those dreams and led many to later 
embrace Chief Sam's emigration scheme.


--- PAGE 9 ---
Page 9 of 26 
 
Intro Afro-American Studies - eBlack Studies 2011 
 
What is Black Nationalism? Pan-Africanism? Compare the similarities and differences 
     During fairly good times, there is a tendency for bourgeois aspirations to 
dominate. The bourgeois nationalist perspective was reflected in Booker T. 
Washington and those who organized the National Negro Business League in 
1900. While these efforts engaged a small group of leaders, another form of 
nationalist action emerged during the rural period that involved the masses of 
Black people. This was the d evelopment and consolidation of national 
institutions.  
     During slavery, there was a clearly defined limit to Black social life, based on 
(1) the objective limitations of life requiring long hours of forced labor, and (2) 
the legal-violent methods of s ocial control to keep Black people powerless and 
unable to collectively deal with problems. The social life that did develop was 
significant but quite restricted. After the Civil War, however, new conditions 
allowed for a more developed collective social l ife. In this context Black people 
discovered that there was strength in unity: both the negative reason to protect 
oneself from enemies, and the positive reason to unite with people whose 
cultural tastes and behavioral preferences were the same as one's ow n. The 
church and fraternal organizations were the two main social institutions to 
develop during this period.  
 
     The first major political manifestation of Pan -Africanism during the 20th 
century was based on the historical links of Black people to Africa and was a 
reaction to the rising imperialist plunder of Africa. Simultaneous with the 
intensifying oppression of Black people in the United States after 1877, Africa 
was increasingly under attack by imperialist colonialism. Whereas in 1876 only 
10% of, Africa was under the control of the imperialists by 1900 this had 
increased to about 90%. As World War I drew to a close, it was clear that the 
imperialists intended to continue and expand their presence in Africa.  
     Black people were learning the valuable   lesson that Black liberation meant 
fighting against imperialist oppression. Simply   emigrating to Africa would not 
solve Black people's problems since imperialism had to be faced there, just as  
oppression had to be faced in the United States. The link between what was 
happening to Black people in the United States and what was happening to 
Africans was becoming obvious to increasing numbers of Black intellectuals. 
The struggle for Black liberati on had to take place not only in the United States 
but also in Africa.  
     The Pan -African Conference, initiated by DuBois and other middle -class 
intellectuals in 1900, and the Pan -African Congresses that subsequently 
emerged provided essential support i n the struggle for African liberation. The 
Pan-African Congresses focused on demands for self -government, education, 
freedom of religion and social customs, the return of land and resources to 
Black people, protection against the greed of capitalist invest ors, and the 
enrichment of the many rather than a few.  
     The Fifth Congress, held in 1945, was most important because for the first


--- PAGE 10 ---
Page 10 of 26 
 
Intro Afro-American Studies - eBlack Studies 2011 
 
What is Black Nationalism? Pan-Africanism? Compare the similarities and differences 
time it was composed of a majority of African delegates and took a militant anti -
imperialist stand. This laid the basis for the African independence struggle in 
the 1950s and 1960s and for the African liberation movements today. After the 
Fifth Congress, African students, intellectuals, and trade union leaders returned 
to Africa and helped to intensify the anti -colonial struggle. Their Afro-American 
comrades took up the struggle to force changes in U.S. policy toward Africa.  
  
 
THE URBAN PERIOD  
The urban period of the Afro -American experience resulted from the migration 
of Black people to the cities of the North and South and their concentration into 
factory jobs. The general crisis of adjusting to an urban/industrial pace, World 
War I, racial attacks, and the political fermentation of the post -war crisis all laid 
the bas is for the biggest mass -based nationalist movement among Black 
people - the Garvey movement. 
Marcus Garvey found6d the Universal Negro Improvement Association (UNIA) 
in Jamaica in 1914 and transplanted it to New York in 1916.. The UNIA was a 
movement built by the Black middle class of the cities   struggling shopkeepers, 
preachers, lawyers, and the like - and southern sharecroppers who had 
recently moved to the city. It rapidly grew to several hundred chapters and had 
a following estimated by some at several million. 
There were two sides to the Garvey movement. On one hand, Garveyism 
helped to crystallize the national consciousness of Black people. It sparked a 
greater interest and appreciation for the history and culture of Black people, 
and undoubtedly insp ired many Black people to set their aims higher to equal 
the past achievements of Black people. These were very much a part of the 
UNIA doctrines. On the other hand, Garvey's emigrationist back-to-Africa plans, 
which became the main aspect of his program, did not speak realistically to the 
problems facing the masses of Black people in the United States. Domestically, 
Garvey argued for Booker T. Washington's policies of accommodationism. He 
branded political struggle for full equality as impossible and dange rous, and he 
asked the ruling class to reject the "aggressive" program of DuBois and to 
accept his "reasonable" program of taking Black people back to Africa. Garvey 
outlined the objectives of the movement: 
 
The Universal Negro Improvement Association ... believes in and teaches the 
pride and purity of race. We believe that the white race should uphold its racial 
pride and perpetuate itself, and that the black race should do likewise....  
The Universal Negro Improvement Association seeks ... the creatio n of an African 
nation for Negroes, where the greatest latitude would be given to work out this 
racial ideal....


--- PAGE 11 ---
Page 11 of 26 
 
Intro Afro-American Studies - eBlack Studies 2011 
 
What is Black Nationalism? Pan-Africanism? Compare the similarities and differences 
The time is opportune to regulate the relationship between both races. Let the 
Negro have a country of his own. Help him to return to his orig inal home, Africa, 
and there give him the opportunity to climb from the lowest to the highest positions 
in a state of his own. If not, then the nation will have to hearken to the demand of 
the aggressive, "social equality" organization, known as the Nation al Association 
for the Advancement of Colored People, of which W. E. B. DuBois is leader, which 
declares vehemently for social and political equality, viz.: Negroes and whites in 
the same hotels, homes, residential districts, public and private places, a Negro as 
president, members of the Cabinet, Governors of States, Mayors of cities, and 
leaders of society in the United States. In this agitation, DuBois is ably supported 
by the "Chicago Defender," a colored newspaper published in Chicago. This paper 
advocates Negroes in the Cabinet and Senate. All these, as everybody knows, are 
the Negroes' constitutional rights, but reason dictates that the masses of the white 
race will never stand by the ascendancy of an opposite minority group to the 
favored positions in a government, society and industry that exist by the will of the 
majority, hence the demand of the DuBois group of colored leaders will only lead, 
ultimately, to further disturbances in riots, lynching and mob rule. The only logical 
solution therefore, i s to supply the Negro with opportunities and environments of 
his own, and there point him to the fullness of his ambition....  
     This plan when property undertake and prosecuted will solve the race problem 
in America in fifty years. Africa affords a won derful opportunity at the present time 
for colonization by the Negroes of the Western world.  
  
 
 
     Eventually, Garvey capitulated   to U.S. capitalism. His position was made 
clear when he urged Black people to believe that "white capitalists are Black 
people's best' friend" and to stay out of trade unions.  
     The UNIA's objective was a nation -state. The Black Belt had provided the 
foundation for a Black social and political life that many carried with them to the 
cities. Its objective reality continued to be a part of Black people's lives and 
consciousness. The UNIA was able to appeal to that consciousness and attract 
a following of like-mind nationalists.  
     The migrations that subsequently took place, especially during and following 
World War II, significantly altered the Black experience. As the urban 
experience came to dominate Black people's lives, the objective reality of the 
Black Belt South ceased playing such an importa nt role. Most Black political 
movements thus have been based in the city, including the latest stage of the 
nationalist-pan-African movement that arose in the 1960s.  
     The most recent explosion of the nationalist and Pan -Africanist movement 
came on the  heels of the Civil Rights Movement of the 1960s. The nationalist 
movement came first and was followed by a Pan -Africanist movement. This 
nationalism was based on two converging trends: (1) the rising Black middle 
class, which reaped the rewards of the civ il rights protests, and which was 
further encouraged by the Nixon -backed program of Black capitalism; and (2) 
the dispossessed Blacks, who saw their faith in the benevolent  role of the


--- PAGE 12 ---
Page 12 of 26 
 
Intro Afro-American Studies - eBlack Studies 2011 
 
What is Black Nationalism? Pan-Africanism? Compare the similarities and differences 
federal government betrayed and their dreams shattered with the assass ination 
of Martin Luther King, Jr., The middle class saw in nationalism a way to further 
its own interests. It needed the masses of Black people to make money and 
gain more power. The masses of poor Black people, at the same time, saw in 
nationalism collective protection from a hostile racist environment.  
 
 
     There are six major issues that should be discussed in summing up the 
major trends of nationalism and pan-Africanism since the 1960s.  
The Role of Malcolm X  
The most important ideologue of nationalism during this period was Malcolm X. 
Malcolm went through important personal and political changes that paralleled 
the growth and development of the Black liberation struggle. From a hustling 
pimp and drug dealer, he wa s transformed in prison by the teachings of the 
Nation of Islam (though he later broke with the stand -on-the-sidelines policies 
of Elijah Muhammad). He was attempting to organize a non -sectarian 
Organization of Afro-American Unity (OAU) when he was assassinated in 1965. 
Malcolm provided insistent opposition to the nonviolent, passive resistance 
philosophy of Martin Luther King. He proposed armed self -defense as the 
alternative. Until the last year of his life, he was an articulate spokesman for the 
view tha t all white people were the enemies of Black people. In a 1965 
interview, he stated his reason for rethinking his views:  
 
I used to define black nationalism as the idea that the black man should control 
the economy of his community, the politics of his community, and so forth.  
But, when I was in Africa in May, in Ghana, I was speaking with the Algerian 
ambassador who is extremely militant and is a revolutionary in the true sense of 
the wor d (and has his credentials as such for having carried on a successful 
revolution against oppression in his country). When I told him that my political, 
social and economic philosophy was black nationalism, he asked me very frankly, 
well, where did that lea ve him? Because he was white. He was an African, but he 
was Algerian, and to all appearances he was a white man. And he said if I define 
my objective of the victory of black nationalism, where does that leave him? 
Where does that leave revolutionaries in M orocco, Egypt, Iraq, Mauritania? So he 
showed me where I was alienating people who were true revolutionaries, 
dedicated to overturning the system of exploitation that exists on this earth by any 
means necessary.  
So, I had to do a lot of thinking and reapp raising of my definition of black 
nationalism. Can we sum up the solution to the problems confronting our people 
as black nationalism?


--- PAGE 13 ---
Page 13 of 26 
 
Intro Afro-American Studies - eBlack Studies 2011 
 
What is Black Nationalism? Pan-Africanism? Compare the similarities and differences 
 
 
 
When questioned at an OAU meeting in Harlem, he elaborated:  
 
I haven't changed. I just see things on a broader scale. We nationalists used to 
think we were militant. We were just dogmatic. It didn't bring us anything.  
Now I know it's smarter to say you're going to shoot a man for what he is doing to 
you than because he is white. If you attack him because he is white, you give him 
no out. He can't stop being white. We've got to give the man a chance. He 
probably won't take it, the snake. But we've got to give him a chance.  
We've got to be more flexible. Why, when some of our friends in Africa didn't 
know how to do things, they went ahead and called in some German technicians. 
And they had blue eyes.  
 I'm not going to be in anybody's straitjacket. I don't care what a person looks like 
or where they come from. My mind is wide open to anybody who will help get the 
ape off our backs.  
 
Malcolm was opposed to capitalism and imperialism, and he set the pace for 
the development of revolutionary nationalism among young Blac k people. His 
complete identification with and commitment to serving the needs and 
aspirations of Black people provided a positive model that many Black people 
sought to emulate.  
Politics 
 "Black    Power" was the most significant slogan to emerge in the nationalist 
movement of the 1960s. While it sounded revolutionary, it was essentially 
reformist in content. The phrase was first popularized by Stokely Carmichael of 
SNCC during a march to urge Black voter registration in Mississippi. This 
reformism was further elaborated in Carmichael. and Charles Hamilton's Black 
Power in 1967:  
 
This book presents a political framework and ideology which represents the last 
reasonable opportunity for this society to work out its racial problems short of 
prolonged destructive guerilla warfare.   
More importantly, the Black Power Conferences of 1967 (Newark) and 1968 
(Philadelphia) proposed no fundamental changes in the U.S. political and 
economic system. In fact, the first conference wa s chaired by an Episcopalian 
priest and invitations were mailed out on "Miss Clairol" stationery (obviously 
borrowed from the company where his brother was employed). The main aim of 
all of these efforts was to get for Black people a bigger piece of the ex isting 
American capitalist pie.


--- PAGE 14 ---
Page 14 of 26 
 
Intro Afro-American Studies - eBlack Studies 2011 
 
What is Black Nationalism? Pan-Africanism? Compare the similarities and differences 
 
     There were, however, revolutionary aspirations among the nationalists of 
this period. The Revolutionary Action Movement (RAM), officially organized in 
1963, sought "to free Black people from colonial and imperialist bondage 
everywhere and to take whatever steps necessary to achieve that goal!' Its 
philosophy was further elaborated by a Black revolutionary activist, Max 
Stanford:  
 
RAM philosophy may be described as revolutionary nationalism, black 
nationalism or just plain blackism. It is that black people of the world (darker 
races, black, yellow, brown, red, oppressed peoples) are all enslaved by the 
same forces. RAM's philosophy is one of the world  black revolution or world 
revolution of oppressed peoples rising up against their former slave masters. Our 
movement is a movement of black people who are coordinating their efforts to 
create a "new world" free from exploitation and oppression of man to man....  
 RAM feels that with the rise of fascism, the black man must not only think of 
armed self-defense but must also think aggressively. 
  Our black nation is still in captivity. RAM feels that the road to freedom is self -
government, national liberation and black power. Our slogan is "Unite or perish."  
 
     The League of Revolutionary Black Workers, centered on Detroit's auto 
industry, attempted to organize Black workers as the leading revolutionary 
vanguard. According to spokespersons: "The League of Revolutionary Black 
Workers is dedicated to waging a relentless struggle against racism, capitalism, 
and imperialism. We are struggling for the liberation of Black people in the 
confines; of the US as well as to play a major revolutionary role in the liberation 
of all oppressed people in the world:' (See Chapter 7 for a further discussion of 
the League.)  
     In the manifesto of the Black Re volutionary Party, James Boggs put forward 
ideas that reflected the perspectives and activities of several local and regional 
organizations:  
 
The role of the Black Revolutionary Party is, first, to develop and keep before the 
movement, the nation and the world the real meaning and objectives of the life 
and death struggle in which the Black community is now engaged; second, to 
bring together in a disciplined national organization the revolutionary individuals 
who are being constantly thrown up by spont aneous eruption and the 
experience of struggle; third, to devise and project, in constant interaction with 
the masses in struggle, a long -range strategy for achieving Black Revolutionary 
Power in the United States....  
The Black Revolutionary Party must be  distinguished clearly not only from the 
traditional civil rights organizations which have been organized to integrate 
Blacks into and thereby save the system, but also from the ad hoc organizations 
which have sprung up in the course of struggle, arousing the masses


--- PAGE 15 ---
Page 15 of 26 
 
Intro Afro-American Studies - eBlack Studies 2011 
 
What is Black Nationalism? Pan-Africanism? Compare the similarities and differences 
emotionally around a particular issue and relying primarily on the enthusiasm 
and good-will of their members and supporters for their continuing activity. By 
contrast, the Black Revolutionary Party must be a cadre - type organization of 
politically-conscious individuals, totally committed to the struggle for Black 
Revolutionary Power and the building of the Black Revolutionary Party as the 
only solution to the problems of Black people.  
     A revolutionary party cannot be made up of just enthusiastic and emotionally-
aroused individuals. Its essential core must be cold, sober revolutionaries who 
are bound together by a body of ideas, recognize the vital importance of 
disciplined organization and strong leadership to the revolutionary struggle, and 
are convinced that their own future and that of Black people can be assured only 
through Black Revolutionary Power...  
     The Black Revolutionary Party will pay special attention to the development 
of the political consciousness and revolutionary dedication of Black street youth. 
These youth have no place in the existing society except as mercenaries, 
preying on people of color in the far -flung imperialist armies of the United States 
or on their own people in the streets of the ghetto. On the other hand, under the 
leadership of the Black Revolutionary Party and imbued with the consciousness 
of the new society which Black Revolutionary Power will create, they are the 
best guarantee of the success of the Black revolution.  
     The Black Revolutionary Party will repudiate any tendency to Black male 
chauvinism or the tendency to relegate Black women to an inferior position in the 
struggle in order to compensate for the emasculation which Black men have 
suffered in white America. The extraordinary fortitude which Black women have 
brought to the struggle for survival of Black people in America is one of the 
greatest sources of strength for the Black Revolutionary Party...  
      The most difficult and challenging task is the organizing of struggles around 
the concrete grievances of the masses which will not only improve the welfare of 
the Black community but also educate the masses out of their democratic 
illusions and increase their consciousness that every administrative and law -
enforcing agency in this country is a white power...  
     The Black Revolutionary Party must devise strategies which give the masses 
of Black people a sense of their growing power to improve their conditions  of life 
through struggle and which enable them to create dual or parallel power 
structures out of struggle. Struggle therefore must be on issues and terrains 
which enable the Black community to, create a form of liberated area out of what 
are at present occupied areas. It is for this reason that struggles for Community 
Control of such urban institutions as Schools, Health, Welfare, Housing, Land 
and Police are such powerful steps on the road to Black Revolutionary Power...  
     Because of the nationalist character of the Black revolutionary struggle, the 
Black Revolutionary Party must be O-Black in its membership....  
     Finally, the Black Revolutionary Party must at   times keep before the 
movement the need to support the national liberation struggles in  Asia, Latin 
America and Africa, and the need for international support for the revolution 
inside the United States. No revolution was ever successful without international 
support. This truth ... is even more relevant today because of the basic unity 
which the Black Revolution in the United States has with the world Black


--- PAGE 16 ---
Page 16 of 26 
 
Intro Afro-American Studies - eBlack Studies 2011 
 
What is Black Nationalism? Pan-Africanism? Compare the similarities and differences 
revolution, because of the minority position of Blacks inside the United States, 
and because of the world character of -the American counter-revolution.  
     The Black Revolution in the United States is an integral part of the world 
revolution against American imperialism. Racism, like imperialism, is a 
totalitarian system for the dehumanization of one people by another... The 
revolution against racism and/or imperialism, therefore, is no t only to free the 
oppressed people or nation from the physical presence of their oppressors but to 
destroy the institutions of total dehumanization and to create in their place totally 
new relations between people, totally new relations between people and  their 
institutions, and totally new institutions.  
  
 
Revolutionary groups used this document as a programmatic statement, 
particularly on the role of "Black street youth." Whereas street youth 
traditionally had been viewed as undisciplined and totally lacking revolutionary 
potential, they were now seen as potential activists of insurrection. 
Revolutionary groups thus began to focus on developing this revolutionary 
potential.  
Culture and Art  
An important characteristic of a nation and of nationalism is a common cultural 
orientation which manifests itself in common values and behavioral  
preferences. This has been an  essential aspect of Black nationalism. Thus, a 
key slogan that  emerged during t he 1960s was "Black is Beautiful." This 
slogan was part of the process which raised the political consciousness  of 
Black people. It was, not color alone that was being spoken   of, but a shared 
historical experience - a history of common oppression (of which racism was an 
essential component) and collective resistance and struggle. The Black Arts 
Movement also developed during the Black Power period and it served to instill 
and deepen a collective consciousness among Black people (see Chapter 9). 
The rebellion after the assassination of Martin Luther King in 1968 revealed the 
depth of this collective or national consciousness among Black people.  
On the other hand, "Black is Beautiful" was a convenient cover for small -time 
(and some big -time) entrepreneurs in the Black community. They tried to cash 
in on the newly developing national market for 'African dashikis, Afro -combs, 
hair conditioners, and other products and artifacts that were in demand as the 
impact of the nationalist and Pan -Africanist movement sp read. "Buy Black!" 
became their rallying cry, a cry that conveniently fit in with the maintenance of 
the economic and political system.


--- PAGE 17 ---
Page 17 of 26 
 
Intro Afro-American Studies - eBlack Studies 2011 
 
What is Black Nationalism? Pan-Africanism? Compare the similarities and differences 
 
The Black Nation  
The national question will be explored more fully in the next chapter, which 
treats the relationship between national oppression (like the Afro -American 
nation) and class exploitation (i.e., the entire working class of all nationalities). 
In this chapter, the focus is on the particular problems of Black people as an 
oppressed nationality and the solutions proposed by Black nationalists. A 
separate and independent nation with the right of self determination    (or self -
rule) has been a key demand in the program of some nationalists. This was the 
meaning of the slogan put forward in the late 196 0s and early 1970s - "What 
Time Is It? It's Nation Time!" But there have been different views concerning 
the concrete existence of this nation.  
Both the Nation of Islam (Black Muslims) and the Republic of New Africa made 
common territory in the United Sta tes a criteria. Elijah Muhammad, leader of 
the Nation of Islam, declared in 1959:  
 
If they don't want us to mix with them in their equality, give us a place in America. 
Set it aside.... Give us three, four or more states. We have well earned whatever 
they give us; if they give us twenty -five states, we have well earned them. Give us 
a territory... Demand some earth. We have come to the point we must have a 
home on this earth that we can call our own.  
 
The Republic of New Africa later specif ically argued for five states in the Black 
Belt South on the following grounds:  
 
We have lived for over 300 years in the so -called Black Belt, we have worked and 
developed the land, and we have fought to stay there - against night riders and 
day courts, against cultural genocide and economical privation, against bad crops, 
and no crops, against terror and ignorance and the urgings of relatives to come 
North. In the Black Belt, running through the Five States that the R epublic claims 
as the National Territory of the Black Nation (Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, 
Georgia, and South Carolina), we have met all the criteria for land possession 
required of us by international practice, international law. We have, incidentally , 
met these tests too in cities of the North like Boston, Philadelphia, New York, 
Baltimore (though our precise locations in these cities have shifted through the 
years).  
What the Republic of New Africa says, however, is that we give up our claim to 
these cities as, national territory (that does not mean that all Africans have to 
move from them) in exchange for the five states of the Deep South.  
 
 
 
 
On March 28, 1971, the  Republic of New Africa consecrated land in Mississippi 
as the "first African capital of the northern Western Hemisphere." They 
continued in their efforts "to array enough power ... to force the greatest power, 
the United States, to abide by international law, to recognize and accept our 
claims to Independence and land."  
     Stokely Carmichael's All -African Peoples Revolutionary Party (AAPRP)


--- PAGE 18 ---
Page 18 of 26 
 
Intro Afro-American Studies - eBlack Studies 2011 
 
What is Black Nationalism? Pan-Africanism? Compare the similarities and differences 
argued for the acquisition of land in Africa as a Territorial base for Black 
liberation. Carmichael declared:  
 
In the final analysis, all revolutions are based on land. The best place, it seems to 
me, and the quickest place that we can obtain land is Africa. I am not denying 
that we might seek land in the United States. That is a possibility, but I do not see 
it clearly in my mind at this time. We need lan d and we need land immediately, 
and we must go to the quickest place for it....  
To seize any of the countries in Africa today that are dominated by white people 
who have physically oppressed us is to confront an armed struggle, a prolonged 
struggle.  
But once we have seized a base we will be on our way. We will then have to 
demonstrate our willingness to fight for our people wherever they are oppressed. 
I believe that people basically defend their own kind.... In the Middle East they 
[Americans] did it eve n in 1967 with Israel. People who didn't have any rights in 
that country were flying in from all over the world to fight. There's nothing wrong 
with our doing the selfsame thing. It can be done and, most important, we are 
trying to secure a political ideology as we seek a state.  
 
     For the Congress of African People (CAP), a Pan-Africanist Organization led 
by Imamu Baraka which emerged in 1972 to replace the nationalist Black 
Power Conferences, a separate land case was not the basis for the Black 
nation. CAP conceived the 31ack nation as more of a cultural entity to which all 
Black people would belong regardless of location. The "cultural nation" it 
proposed was to be based on Nguzo Saba, the seven principles of i Black 
value system that had been formulated by Maulana Karenga:  
 
UMOJA (Unity) - the commitment to the principle and practice of togetherness 
and collective action on crucial levels, i.e., building and maintaining unity  in the 
family, community, nation and race: This is the first and foundational principle 
because without unity our possibilities as a people are few and fragile, if existent 
at all.  
KUJICHAGULIA (Self -Determination) - a commitment to the principle and 
practice of defining, defending and developing ourselves instead of being 
defined, defended and developed by others. It demands that we build our own 
lives in our own image and interests and construct, thru our own efforts, 
institutions that house our aspirations.  
UJIMA (Collective Work and Responsibility) - a  commitment to active and 
informed togetherness on matters of common interest. It is also recognition and 
respect of the fact that without collective work and struggle, progress is 
impossible and liberation unthinkable.  
UJAMAA (Cooperative Economics) - a commitment to the principle and practice 
of shared wealth and resources. It grows out of the fundamental African 
communal concept that the social wealth belongs to the masses of people who 
created it and that no one should have such an unequal amount of wealth that it 
gives him/her the capacity to impose unequal, exploitative and oppressive


--- PAGE 19 ---
Page 19 of 26 
 
Intro Afro-American Studies - eBlack Studies 2011 
 
What is Black Nationalism? Pan-Africanism? Compare the similarities and differences 
relations on others.  
NIA (Purpose) - a commitment to the collective vocation of building, defending 
and developing our national community in order to regain our historical initiative 
and greatness as a people. At the core of this principle is the assumption and 
contention that the highest form of personal purpose is, in the final anal ysis, 
social purpose, i.e., personal purpose that translates itself into a vocation and 
commitment which involves and benefits the masses of Black people.  
KUUMBA (Creativity) - a commitment to the principle and practice of building 
rather than destroying,  of positive proactive construction rather than negative 
reactive destruction. Inherent in this principle is the commitment to leave our 
national community stronger, more beautiful and more effective in its capacity to 
define, defend and develop its interests than when we inherited it.  
IMANI (Faith) - a commitment to ourselves as persons and a people and the 
righteousness and victory of our struggle. Moreover, it is belief in and 
commitment to our brothers and sisters, to their defense and development, and to 
the fullness of our collective future. Inherent in the principle of Imani is the call for 
a humanistic faith, an earth -oriented, earth-based, people- centered faith in the 
tradition of the best of African philosophies and values.  
 
 
This "cultural nation" thus -was something less than the demand for the full 
political self-determination that was included in the call for a separate national 
territory.  
     Despite this lack of clarity over the concrete basis of the Black nation, or 
whether it even existed, the slogan "It's Nation Time!" provided a programmatic 
orientation for nationalists. This orientation was reflected, for instance, in the 
attempts of Black academics to organize the Black Studies movement and the 
Black caucus movement wit hin predominantly. white professional associations 
(e.g., the American Sociological Association and the African Studies 
Asi3ociation). These movements were primarily intended to open up new jobs 
and programs for the middle class, and to protect the ones th at had been won 
by the struggle of the masses. Most Black Studies programs and Black 
caucuses have not provided a revolutionary analysis of the Black experience or 
a direction for the Black liberation struggle.  
     Outside of academia, one group of natio nalists even started a business 
called Nationtime, Inc., which manufactured products adorned with red, black, 
and green - the colors of the Black nation's flag that had been resurrected from 
the Garvey movement. Owners of several large Black businesses in Chicago fly 
this flag next to the U.S. flag. In this case, Black nationalism and capitalism 
stand side by side.


--- PAGE 20 ---
Page 20 of 26 
 
Intro Afro-American Studies - eBlack Studies 2011 
 
What is Black Nationalism? Pan-Africanism? Compare the similarities and differences 
Two Lines on Pan-Africanism in Africa 
      Pan-Africanism historically has had its greatest impact on the African 
continent. It w as a unifying ideology that galvanized Africa in the fight against 
colonial domination during the days of Kwame Nkrumah. Today, however, Pan -
Africanism is undergoing careful analysis in Africa.  
There are two sides to pan-Africanism in Africa. On the one hand, within Africa, 
there are pan-Africanists who have embraced imperialism in order to serve their 
own selfish interests. Thus, freedom fighters in Africa have recognized that 
Pan-Africanism can serve as a tool of imperialism rather than as a tool for 
African liberation. There is a special danger that the imperialists will use Black 
people from the United States who may be well -received because they are 
Black. As John Henry, a critic of pan -Africanism, put it, "The line that Afro -
Americans are 'really' Afr icans enables lackeys of the imperialists to operate 
openly in Africa and make U.S. imperialism more palatable."  
On the other hand, pan -Africanism could be used to unite Africa in its struggle 
against imperialism and superpower intervention. The main prog ressive form of 
pan-African unity is emerging in contexts like southern Africa where the 
liberation fighters have united in the conduct of armed struggle against white 
minority rule, imperialism, and sell -out Africans. This is very different from the 
very early days when pan -Africanism took the form of mainly paper 
declarations. It is in this context of anti -imperialist struggle that revolutionary 
patriots will decide the future of pan- Africanism on the continent of Africa.  
Two Lines on Pan-Africanism in the United States 
      "We are an African People," emerged as the key slogan of the pan -
Africanist movement in the 1970s. Identification with African liberation struggles 
became particularly important as the Black liberation movement in the United 
States faced increasing repression at the hands of the state. There are two 
types of pan- Africanists, however.   
  
 
     Some, like Stokely Carmichael and the AAPRP, argue that the hope for 
Black liberation lies in Africa. They attribute these notions to the late Kwame 
Nkrumah. Carmichael has stated: 
 
Nkrumahism is reality grounded in our African experience....  
  Were they [critics of Nkrumahism] grounded in the reality of Nkrumahism, they 
would know the "total liberation and the unification of Africa under an All-African 
socialist government must be the primary objective of all Black Revolutionaries 
throughout the world. It is an objective which, when achieved, will bring about the 
fulfillment of the aspirations of Africans and people of African descent 
everywhere." . . . These heretics [critics) of Nkrumahism . . . see the primary


--- PAGE 21 ---
Page 21 of 26 
 
Intro Afro-American Studies - eBlack Studies 2011 
 
What is Black Nationalism? Pan-Africanism? Compare the similarities and differences 
objective of Black Revolutionaries in America as the transformation of the 
American society; an obvious conclusion if one has an a-historical analysis....  
     We know that any ideology concerning African people, who have been 
maliciously scattered all over the world, during the calculated period of the 
disruption of our society, must consider all the component parts while maintaining 
"the core of the Black Revolution in Africa."  
     This view suggests that Blacks in the United States should work primarily for 
African liberation rather than for their own liberation. The theoretical 
underpinnings of this sort of pan - Africanism are faulty, as John Hen ry points 
out:- 
 
In regard to Afro -Americans, Pan Africanism negates historical change in two 
major ways: it maintains that they are Africans as they have always been, and 
that Africa is the focus of the struggle of black people all over the world and it has 
always been. This view relegates the historical struggles of Afro-American people 
to being misguided and misinformed, because the goal has been to transform this 
country into a just society for all people and not primarily to transform Africa.  
 
     The second type of pan -Africanism argues that there should be a fight 
against the oppression of Black people in the United States and in Africa. 
Imperialism is seen as an international system headquartered in the United 
States that exploits Black people "at home and abroad:' These pan -Africanists 
and nationalists argue that defeating U.S. imperialism at home is the basis for 
the liberation of Black people in the United States and a contribution to the 
liberation of Africa, as well  as Black people in the "diaspora" (a Yiddish term 
which means "to scatter" and refers to Black people dispersed throughout the 
world by the slave trade). 
  
 
THE PROSPECTS FOR PAN-AFRICANISM AND NATIONALISM  
John Henry, who is neither pan -Africanist nor a nationalist, makes these 
observations concerning pan-Africanism in Africa:  
 
On the international scale, Pan Africanism can be a positive force if it contributes 
to the united front. . . . But the struggle is sharpening up in Africa, particularly 
southern Africa, and becoming more complicated. It is especially complicated 
because in many cases there is the task of overthrowing reactionaries in the U.S. 
camp while also defeating the "wizard of Oz" social - imperialists, who can bribe 
opportunist elements or mislead honest forces into vacillating on opposing their 
superpower hegemonic plans. Pan Africanism as an ideology won't provide the 
answers to these complex problems because it fails to correctly and concretel y 
analyze the forces at work. It does not base itself on the analysis of different class 
forces within Africa, or on the fact that Africa is not an undifferentiated whole but a 
continent divided. into countries facing some common problems but also differen t 
conditions. It also has no clear analysis of the nature of different countries, 
including the Soviet Union. Clearly Pan Africanism cannot lead the struggle for 
liberation in Africa.


--- PAGE 22 ---
Page 22 of 26 
 
Intro Afro-American Studies - eBlack Studies 2011 
 
What is Black Nationalism? Pan-Africanism? Compare the similarities and differences 
Nor does he see pan-Africanism leading to Black liberation in the United States:  
 
There are aspects of the Pan Africanist movement that are positive and have 
contributed to struggle. Pan Africanism has led to the mobilization of people in 
support of African liberation, provided increased awareness of U.S. imperialism in 
Africa and promoted the will to fight it. This is clearly the case when we examine 
the impact of Pan Africanism on the militant Black youth, and some Black workers. 
But ... the development of this movement and the consolidation of forces within it 
can turn into its opposite and become a force for reaction.  
 
     Pan-Africanism in both Africa and the United States has contributed to 
revolutionary struggle insofar as it has focused on imper ialism and the fight 
against national oppression. However, it has also led away from Black 
liberation because it has failed to base itself in an analysis of class forces within 
the context of national struggles. Thus, in both Africa and the United States, 
pan-Africanism has served reactionary as well as revolutionary forces. Whether 
it encourages or retards revolutionary action in the future remains to be seen  
     Nationalism will remain a force in the Black liberation struggle. This is so 
because of the  escalating racist oppression that Black people will continue to 
suffer under U.S. capitalism. In addition, nationalism will continue to be the 
ideological prop of the aspiring Black middle class which needs the masses of 
Black people as allies in its ques t for individual advancement - as customers, 
as voters, as militant foot soldiers who can "shake up the establishment."  
The main question is whether Black nationalism will be reactionary, reformist, 
or revolutionary. We have the lessons of history to understand that the political 
character of Black nationalism can change. Nationalism started out as 
reformist. The spontaneous rebellion of the masses during the 1960s led to the 
development of revolution ary nationalism (though a few turned toward 
reactionary politics). The repression of the Black liberation movement in the 
early 1970s led to pan -Africanism and again reformism. Black people today 
face a deepening social and economic, and political crisis. There is an 
increasing need to escalate the struggle against the oppression of Blacks. The 
future will reveal whether Black nationalism will return to the forefront of the 
revolutionary struggle for Black liberation and social change or be swept aside 
as incapable of contributing to the total liberation of Black people.  
 
 
KEY CONCEPTS  
 Black-is-Beautiful  Nguzo Saba  
 Black Power  Race consciousness 
 Black town movement Red-Black-Green 
 Emigration/Back-to-Africa movements Pan-Africanism  
 Nation/Nationalism Self-determination


--- PAGE 23 ---
Page 23 of 26 
 
Intro Afro-American Studies - eBlack Studies 2011 
 
What is Black Nationalism? Pan-Africanism? Compare the similarities and differences 
STUDY QUESTIONS  
1. What is nationalism? Pan-Africanism? Compare the similarities and 
differences between the two.  
2. Compare the theories of Marcus Garvey, Malcolm X, James Boggs, Stokely 
Carmichael, Maulana Karenga, and John Henry.  
3. What are the differences between reactionary, reformist, and revolutionary 
nationalism?  
4. Is Black nationalism in the U.S.A. likely to survive into the 21st century? How 
about pan-Africanism?  
SUPPLEMENTARY READINGS  
1. E. U. Essien-Udom, Black Nationalism. A Search for an Identity in America. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1962.  
2. Tony Martin, The Pan African Connection. Boston: Schenk- man, 1983,  
3. Alphonso Pinkney, Red, Black and Green, Cambridge: Cam- bridge 
University Press, 1976.  
4. Edwin Redkey, Black Exodus: Black Nationalism and Back-to- Africa 
Movements, 1890-1910. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1969.  
5. Sterling Stuckey, ad., The Ideological Origins of Black Nationalism. Boston: 
Beacon Press, 1972.


--- PAGE 24 ---
Page 24 of 26 
 
Intro Afro-American Studies - eBlack Studies 2011 
 
What is Black Nationalism? Pan-Africanism? Compare the similarities and differences 
 
 
Editor’s Summary and Commentary  
 
We accept all aspects of our history from the beginning of civilization on the Afrikan continent, 
to the present stages of technological development of Afrikan nation -states, and the continued 
struggle of Afrikan people throughout the world against tyranny and imperialist oppression. 
 
With this conception of history, we view the material basis in which history evolved to its 
present and ongoing developing modes of history; as Afrikan people relate and interrelate with 
one another, o ther people of color i n the Third World, and the European races. This 
understanding and materialist outlook of history, notes that dialectically, our present condition 
and struggle is based on our past experiences in a continuing development of an Afrikan history. 
The New Afrikan experience in America is not separate from the Afrikan experience on the 
continent, rather, they are linked in a chain of events which imposes socioeconomic, political and 
historical realities encompassing the criteria by which New  Afrikan struggle for independence 
must be developed. 
 
We call ourselves New Afrikan because of the degree of force breeding and miscegenation we as 
a people have suffered, as well the cultural imperialism and the psychological plunder and rape


--- PAGE 25 ---
Page 25 of 26 
 
Intro Afro-American Studies - eBlack Studies 2011 
 
What is Black Nationalism? Pan-Africanism? Compare the similarities and differences 
of our a ffinity to Afrika - stripping away our Afrikan language, art and world, outlook, and 
national oppression, which in our efforts to combat have created a national heritage rich in 
resistance based on two ideals of integration and/or separation. These experie nces which left us 
stripped of our Afrikanist perspective despite miscegenation and cultural imperialism, 
encompassing those experiences into an Afrikan national heritage in Diaspora, creating the New 
Afrikan Independence Movement. 
 
This conception of his tory in a dialectical materialist perspective provides the means to 
formulate a program and strategy to conquer racist oppression and national subjugation, utilizing, 
the truth of our entire history as a guide to enlighten our practice. For instance, in te rms of a 
(foreign) policy of Afrikan intercommunalism with our people on the Afrikan continent, it is 
essential to know what our relationship had been in history -providing a substantial foundation to 
develop principled relations today... For New Afrikans,  it is important to know that slavery did 
not begin as an American phenomenon, but rather, American chattel slavery of Afrikans is a 
direct outgrowth of Afrikans enslaving Afrikans on the Afrikan continent. Many of our ancestors 
had been enslaved by Afrikans due to internecine struggles, border wars of territorial imperative- 
amongst tribes and wars of aggression between Afrikan nation -states. The prisoner of wars, 
and/or because of denture, were placed in bondage, and often sold or traded.  
When the Europeans (Portuguese, Dutch, Spanish, British, etc.) made contact with Northern and 
Western coastal areas of Afrika, they not only raided villages and kidnapped Afrikans, but more 
often and productively (numerically) brought already enslaved Afrikans from Afrik an chieftains 
and traders. Hence, for the most part, our existence in the Western hemisphere is as much a 
consequence of Afrikan history as it is of European history. 
 
Thus, as we conceive ourselves in history, we must place responsibility of our conditio n in 
context to the actual historical development leading to our present situation. In this regards, we 
don't expect assistance from our Afrikan brothers nations simply because we are of one people -- 
only separated by distance -- but because history deman d recompense for a people (New 
Afrikans) whose existence and suffering is based on our unfortunate relation in the history of 
slavery mutual to us all, and the commonality of our fight against mutual enemy -- imperialism.


--- PAGE 26 ---
Page 26 of 26 
 
Intro Afro-American Studies - eBlack Studies 2011 
 
What is Black Nationalism? Pan-Africanism? Compare the similarities and differences 
This same conception and relation to history is binding on any relationship established with other 
past enslaver, such as the Dutch, Portuguese, British, Spanish, etc. 
 
As we struggle against continued U.S. colonization, New Afrikans must have a determined sense 
of history in regard to th e New Afrikan Nation relationship to the world. Without this common 
national consciousness and perception of our existence, based on history, our practice will 
continue to be confused and chaotic, without historical continuity which serves to give practica l 
guidance on the road to independence. As an oppressed nation, we have a rich history of 
resistance to bondage; revolts on slave ships during the middle passage; revolts and rebellions for 
hundreds of years on slave plantations; fighting for freedom in th e War of Independence, War of 
1812, and Civil War; and fighting in the U.S. Army in the name of U.S. democracy (hypocrisy) 
can also be considered part of the national determination to be free. 
 
From:  FROLINAN-Historical Conception and Overview 
 
For more like this see: RBG FROLINAN STUDIES COLLECTION

