=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: What is Religion and What is an African Religion.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 33
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:15:39.389278
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Page 1 of 33 
 
 
 
What is Religion and What is an African 
Religion? 
By Muata Ashby 
©2008-08-28 
 
Excerpt from the book 
AFRICAN ORIGINS OF CIVILIZATION, 
RELIGION, YOGA SPIRITUALITY AND 
ETHICS PHILOSOPHY 
By Muata Ashby 
©2002 
 
www.Egyptianyoga.com


--- PAGE 2 ---
Page 2 of 33 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Introduction: Where is African Religion From and Who are the African Peoples? .................................. 3 
Religion and Culture and their African Manifestations .............................................................................. 9 
Overview of African Religions\\\\ ............................................................................................................ 10 
Manifestations of African Religion in Latin America and the Caribbean ............................................ 16 
The Common Fundamental Principles of African Religion ................................................................. 18 
Principle of Stages of Religious Practice and Spiritual Evolution ............................................................ 20 
The African Definition for the Word “Religion”..................................................................................2 2 
Principle of One Supreme and Transcendental God and Many Gods and Goddesses ............................. 23 
Changes in the Way Lesser Beings (Spirits) are Viewed in African Religion Over Time ................... 29 
Manifestations of African Religious Expression and Transmission to the Next Generation................ 30 
INDEX ......................................................................................................................................................... 32


--- PAGE 3 ---
Page 3 of 33 
Introduction: Where is African Religion 
From and Who are the African Peoples? 
 
 
   
 
ost people consider that African religion relates to the peoples who today live in 
the area of the continent of Africa referred to as sub-Saharan. The term “Sub-
Saharan Africa” relates to the geographic area sout h of the Sahara desert. This 
term denotes the countries of Africa that ge nerally are not consider ed as part of North 
Africa. This term may also be expanded to include some areas in West Africa due to the 
change from African culture to Islamic culture  in those areas. In the 19th Century many 
Europeans referred to sub-Saha ran Africa as “Black Africa” or as “Dark Africa,” or the 
“Dark Continent.” The assignment of the term was partly due to the dark skin of the 
indigenous inhabitants and also because mu ch of Sub-Saharan Africa had not been 
explored and fully mapped by Europeans.  
 
M


--- PAGE 4 ---
Page 4 of 33 
Those terms [“Black Africa” “Dark Africa” or  the “Dark Continent.”], are presently 
considered as obsolete and even  derogatory and therefore al so offensive. Another term, 
“African Uplands,” has been devised to substi tute for the derogatory terms but they are 
still used in some quarters.  Yet, that phrase mostly refers to the African interior and not 
to coastal regions. 
 
After the last Ice Age, the North part of Africa and sub-Saharan Africa were separated by 
the climate changes that altered the Sahara region from populated and full of vegetation 
to harsh climate and sparsely populated with  low vegetation. The N ile River basin was 
the only place where life could be supported. The inhabitants of the ancient region now 
called the Sahara migrated north, east, west  and south. It has been determined by 
climatologists that it was no later than 10,000 B. C.E. to 7,000 B.C.E. that there were any 
substantial rains in that area of the world. 
 
Most of sub-Saharan Africa is within the tropics. Tropical Africa is an ecological term 
relating to the location of the land territory on earth which would exclude South Africa if 
strictly applied since South Africa lies outside the Tropical zone. 
 
The reference to Sub-Saharan Africa in one  way relates to the ecological situation 
because the Sahara desert separates North Af rica and Sub-Saharan Africa. However, the 
term also applies ethnically since North Af rica is now populated by Arabs, coming from 
Asia Minor, who moved there af ter the early conquest period of Islam after its inception 
by the Prophet Muhammad in the late 1
st millennium A.C.E. Previous to that period the 
inhabitants of north Africa were native Africans who rese mbled the population of the 
south and were culturally and ethnically rela ted to other native Africans. Some scholars 
and politicians classify the present day North Africans as “Caucasoid.” However, the 
"Caucasoid" and "Arab" populations that curre ntly reside in North Africa often possess 
swarthy and other “Africoid” type physical characteristics due to miscegenation with the 
indigenous “blacks” that originally resided in the region. 
 
The Nile valley was the only region where life  could be sustained but the Nile also 
provided regular floods that fa cilitated farming. The peoples  of that region, sometimes 
referred to as Nilotic (encompassing an area from Uganda at the source of the Nile to the 
Mediterranean), migrated north and created civilizations that were later referred to as 
Kush and Kamit (Ancient Egypt). It has b een adequately demonstrated by many scholars 
that the Ancient Egyptians were indige nous African peoples, dark-skinned, black 
Africans. Therefore, Ancient Egyptian religion should be considered as a member of the 
family of African religions.  
 
In the 19
th century, European countries set out to  colonize Africa and that led to the 
“Scramble for Africa,” a period of rapid pro liferation of colonies  in Africa that was 
mediated by the Berlin Conference (1884 - 1885) where the imperial competitors decided 
how to divide Africa and what constituted a vi able colonial claim. This process almost 
completely destabilized the soci al order of African nations,  the traditional practice of 
civilization, social order, religion, etc. was sometimes st opped or completely changed 
from what it was in favor of the culture of the invading European cu lture. In some cases


--- PAGE 5 ---
Page 5 of 33 
the practice of traditional reli gion was changed to incorporate western beliefs or it might 
have been abandoned altogether.  
 
African spirituality encompasses many original forms of religious practice, many of 
which are related. However, the study of Af rican religion should make a distinction 
between what constitutes African religion or an  extrinsic form of spirituality due to the 
special circumstances that were experienced in the African continent. Unlike some other 
colonial locations, most of th e African colonies were expos ed to harsh racism and the 
inhabitants were forced to abandon most customs as well as the indigenous language. 
Many village priests and griots were lost in the period of colonialism. So much of the 
knowledge that was passed on orally was also lost. In the case of Ancient Egypt we have 
an unusual situation since it is the only pre-colonial African civilization that left a written 
record of their activities and spiritual culture.  It provides a record of religion in ancient 
Africa. From that record we can derive many aspects of pre-colonial African religion and 
establish the fundamental prin ciples of African religion through comparative studies. 
Kamit and Kush are the only African nations th at left extensive written records of the 
culture, civilization and religi on. Other nations used the oral  tradition, which is more 
susceptible to damage or interruption due to social disruptions such as war or 
colonialism. 
 
Throughout the history of Africa’s countless social changes, migrations, invasions, 
disease, war, slavery, colonialism, neo-co lonialism, and other changes through Africa’s 
history, many African societies and systems of religion have been dispersed or disrupted. 
Many people in Africa and the peoples of A frican descent in the Diaspora feel that 
African religions are separate and distinct. Yet, many features of pre-colonial African 
religions appear to be simila r in their fundamental tenets , rituals or traditions. The 
fundamental tenet of any relig ion is it’s concept of thei sm. Many, if not most, African 
Traditional Religions employ Henotheism. Th is study seeks to explore the concept of 
henotheism in African Traditional Religion.  
 
     The appearance of African religions  would seem to point to disintegrated and 
primitive individualized cultural manifestations of spirituality and that would support the 
idea that African religions are separate and competing religious ideologies as opposed to 
parts of a greater overall theistic whole that would support the idea of a central or original 
source that spread out throughout Africa and a ffected it generally. This problem is both 
religiously and culturally important. If the fundamental principles  of African religion 
were a product of individual a nd separate developments arrived at through speculation or 
random chance, they could be seen as disjoint ed practices. The approa ch to the study of 
religion can be affected by the context in wh ich that religion presents. A limited religion 
that could be seen as being followed by a distinct group of people in a particular 
geographical area would be approached in one  way. However, if it could be seen in a 
wider context, as an expression of a relig ion that is also follo wed by other groups in 
adjacent geographical areas or even a vast c ontinent it could be approached in another 
way, taking into account the expressions of th e other groups in order to derive insights 
that could be drawn from apparently distinct traditions that actually contribute to a whole.


--- PAGE 6 ---
Page 6 of 33 
     Culturally, the determination of African  fundamental religious principles could be 
important to many peoples within and outsi de of Africa who coul d be benefited by 
learning about the religious principles of ot her Africans. They c ould learn about their 
own religions so as to fill in gaps in thei r own knowledge that might have been lost over 
time. These researches could also affect cultural interactions between cultures with 
practitioners of African religions and practitioners of other religions.  
 
     I am not aware of specific studies th at may have been accomplished relating to the 
specific question of comparative theism in African religions focusing specifically on the 
henotheistic principles. In the study of Afri can Religions there has been a difference of 
opinion among scholars about whethe r or not the practi ce of religion in Africa should be 
referred to in the plural or the singular. That is , do African religions have fundamental 
features that make them compa tible even across countries or  are they distinct forms of 
religious expression? 
 
The author John V. Taylor noted that ther e are a great amount of  similarities between 
sub-Saharan African religions. E. Bolaji I dowu expressed the line of reasoning more 
forcefully. John S. Mbiti advocated the opp osite argument, that African traditional 
religions are distinct and unique. Authors su ch as Benjamin Ray and E. Ikenga-Metuh 
supported the opinion of Mbiti. 
 
Studies that focus on the nature  and attributes of a God or Deity in an individual African 
tradition are readily available. Additionall y, there are Journal Articles and individual 
studies on the theism of particular Afri can Traditional Religions. However, this study 
seeks to engage in an exploration and iden tification as well as comparative study of the 
henotheistic manifestations of the presentation of the divinities in the religions in order to 
determine the exact parameters of the theistic perspective of the religion(s) and if 
possible also the relationship(s) theologicall y, philosophically or cross culturally of their 
respective theistic perspectives. 
 
 
What are Religion and Spirituality? 
 
The way religion is practiced in  modern times it is  often not spiritual. From a political 
perspective it is often used as a tool to cont rol others. In the fiel d of religious studies 
many scholars approach religion from a spiritual activity w ithout ultimate purpose 
besides a social pastime. Many practitioners of religion in the masses follow their 
religions as a faithful endeavor not requir ing ethical conscience. The English term 
“religion” is derived from the Latin “releg are” (“re-link,” or “link back”), meaning a 
process for human beings to rel-ink (reconnect) with God (a deity, divinity) or whatever a 
people consider to be a Supreme Being or cau se behind existence. Theology is the study 
“ology” of “theism” a belief in a divinity as  opposed to atheism whic h is disbelief in the 
existence of a god, deity or divinity. In its fu ll form religion has three steps: Mythology, 
Rituals and Metaphysics. Most people know something about the myth and rituals but not 
about their true meaning. This is when religion becomes degraded and loses its 
spirituality.


--- PAGE 7 ---
Page 7 of 33 
 
The African definition would be similar in that  religion is a process of reconnecting with 
the “Higher Self” the Supreme Being. Howeve r, while the supreme being concept of 
western religion is monotheistic, and relating to a phenomenal1 divinity, the African, East 
Asian, Native American is based on a Henotheistic 2 conception. In the higher perspective 
of the African, Indian and Buddhist as well as Native American practice of religion the 
Supreme Divinity is not just a phenomenal personality as in Western monotheism, but 
rather a phenomenal and transcendental di vinity; this means that God appears as a 
personality, as nature and al so transcending forms and name s, beyond Creation itself; so 
religion is a process for attaining spiritual development by re-linki ng one’s soul with 
God, or the Divine. In Ancient Egyptian te rminology, the term “Shetaut Neter” means 
“Hidden (mysterious) Divine Essence” this te rm has been rightly interpreted as the 
“religion” of the Ancient Egyptians. However, in the strict application of the grammatical 
meaning, the term “Shetaut Neter” is a known while the term religion is a known 
referring to a process. In Ancient Egyptian la nguage the term “Shedy” is more applicable 
as it means: “process of penetrating the my steries (i.e. the “Hidden (mysterious) Divine 
Essence”). 
 
The term “Spirituality” is defined as: “that which pertains to what is incorporeal or 
pertaining to the supernatural as dis tinguished from the physical nature”: a spiritual 
approach to life.  “Spiritology” is the study of the spir itual aspects of the soul and or of 
life (aspects that tran scend the physical). However, in popular culture “spirituality” can 
also has been applied to mean something pertaining to sacred things or matters; religious; 
devotional; the sacred or the sp irit or soul. So the term religion specifically relates to a 
theistic
3  perspective on spirituality: it relates to  the soul and a Divinity. The term 
“spirituality” may or may not relate to a Divinity and may relate to incorporeal matters or 
concerns with non-physical matters. Religion wi thout the three steps may be considered 
spirituality but in the strict in terpretation it is not true re ligion. Thus, while true religion 
(religion that contains the three steps or leve ls of practice) will incorporate spirituality, 
we cannot say that all spirituality is religious, related to a Divinity (theistic) or even that 
it is enlightening. The term “mystical” is sim ilarly misinterpreted by the popular culture 
just as the term “spiritual” is automatically confused with something sacred, altruistic, or 
even purer or sometimes even as a belief syst em or practice that is  better than religion, 
etc. in the strictest terms we cannot say that a person worshippi ng a tree is practicing 
religion since religion is wors hipping a Supreme Divinity un less that tree is an access 
point to the Higher Divinity. We cannot say th at a person had a religious experience if 
they had an out of body experience. The OB  experience may be spiritual but not 
specifically religious unless it relates the person to the Supreme. 
 
 Mysticism relates to the achievement of consciousness wherein th e individuality is 
evolved into universality, a one ness of soul with the Divine , like a drop with the ocean. 
So we cannot say that we had a “mystical” experience by “going to a movie,” “falling in 
love,” “traveling,” “seeing a celebrity” or “h aving a child,” as is  expressed often in 
                                                           
1 Existing in time and space and appearing with name and form 
2 There is a Supreme Divinity with lesser gods and goddesses that emanate from it. 
3 Belief in a god or goddess


--- PAGE 8 ---
Page 8 of 33 
modern culture, unless we are meaning that those experiences have led us to discover 
higher consciousness by transcending our physi cal reality, time and space and becoming 
one with the universe and what transcends it!  
 
What is the proof that religion is a reality; in other words what is the substantiation that 
there is a god and that we are to reconnect with that divinity? If there is proof it lies in the 
experience of those who have reconnected  (through the process enjoined by religion 
(myth, ritual, mysticism)) and who have repor ted about that reconnection to those who 
have not yet reconnected. However, disbelie ving in religion (atheism) without engaging 
in the process enjoined by religion does not constitute proof of the invalidity of religion 
or non-existence of the Divine. Also, having faith in religion wit hout engaging in the 
reconnection process does not constitute the au thentic practice of religion.  Faith in the 
existence of a divinity is not religion in and of itself, it is part of the myth aspect or stage 
of religion but alone may only be considered as theism or spirituality until the full course 
of a reconnection process is engaged. To be clear here, in  order to be considered a 
religion, the discipline or tradition needs to  incorporate as its goal the obj ective of 
reconnection of the soul to the high god or goddess, or supreme being or ultimate agency 
causing and sustaining existence; it is deri ved from the experien ce of those who have 
reconnected, that there is an ultimate agency or  being that is responsible for the existence 
of souls and Creation and that there was an original connection between that being and 
the souls of human beings that was disconnect ed and needs to be reconnected so that a 
human being may find peace, contentment and co mpleteness. Those practices that do not 
incorporate this goal may not be included as part of the definition of religion but would 
more aptly be included in the definition of spirituality.


--- PAGE 9 ---
Page 9 of 33 
Religion and Culture and their African 
Manifestations


--- PAGE 10 ---
Page 10 of 33 
 
 
 
Gue Nyame 
Ghananian Adinkira symbol meaning: “God is the Supreme power” 
 
 
Overview of African Religions4\5\6\7\8 
 
Among some scholars of African Religion(s) th ere has been a debate  about the issue of 
whether or not there is one African Religion or if there are many African Religions. This 
may depend on the perspective or criteria that one applies to the question. This issue may 
be similar to the issue of humanity; are there many races of human beings or is there one 
human race? If we look at the culture, the outward manifestations of human societies we 
would tend to think that there are many differe nt “kinds” of human beings. However, if 
we look at the DNA of all human beings we w ould find that they are all related and that 
in fact they all originated from one original line of human beings that came out of Africa 
150,000 to 200,000 years ago to populate the earth. That means that there is only one 
human race. In the same way, if we look at th e folkloric manifestations of the religious 
practices throughout Africa we may tend to feel  that there are many “different” religions 
being practiced. If we look at the “Fundamental Principles” of those re ligions, that is to 
say, the DNA of religion, we can find basic te nets of religion, what makes a kind of 
religion discernible from anothe r, in common. If we engage in this study we find that 
African religions throughout Africa hold the sa me tenets in common, and that this makes 
them manifestations of the same tradition.9  
 
The term “African Religions” as used in our  present context relates to the forms of 
religions that were developed on the con tinent of Africa by its indigenous or native 
peoples from ancient times.  It will refer to those forms of religions which existed prior to 
the introduction of religions from outside of Africa and prior to influences from other 
societies outside of Africa. As of 1999, about half of the people in Africa consider 
themselves as adherents to Islam. A lesser number are adherents to Christianity and 
African Religions. A smaller number ar e adherents to Judaism or Hinduism.
10 So despite 
the work of Muslim and Christian missionari es, a substantial number of Africans still 
practice one of the African Religions. Also there are a substantial number of people of 
African descent who practice one of the African Religions outside of Africa as well. 
                                                           
4 "African Religions: An Interpretation," Microsoft® Encarta® Africana. © 1999 Microsoft Corporation. All rights 
reserved. 
5 African Religion: World Religion by Aloysius M. Lugira 
6 African Mythology by Geoffrey Parrinder 
7 African Religions and Philosophy -- by John S. Mbiti 
8 Civilization or Barbarism by Cheikh Anta Diop 
9 See the Book Comparative Mythology, Cultural and Social Studies and the Cultural Category-Factor 
Correlation Method: A New Approach to Comparative Cultural, Religious and Mythological Studies by Muata 
Ashby 
10"African Religions: An Interpretation," Microsoft® Encarta® Africana. ©&(p) 1999 Microsoft Corporation. All rights 
reserved.


--- PAGE 11 ---
Page 11 of 33 
 
     Though the colonial period in Africa wa s short-lived when compared to the overall 
view of history, it had a profound effect on the culture and also never truly ended in 
many parts of the continent because of the imposition of Neocolonialism (control of 
individual countries by controlling the governme nt that is run by locals.) and the new 
moves in the late 20 th century to impose Globalization (control of the world economy 
by Western governments) on the world community. The following excerpt from 
Compton’s Encyclopedia concisely sums up the colonial history of European nations in 
Africa. 
 
“In what is called the “Scramble for Africa,” European nations partitioned 
Africa at the Berlin West Africa Conference (1884-1885). The Germans 
got southwestern Africa, along with  Tanganyika in East Africa. The 
Portuguese got Mozambique and Angola,  in southern Africa. Belgium 
took the Congo, and France got Senegal, the Cameroons, and several other 
colonies in the western Sudan and Central Africa. The British got the rest, 
including Kenya and Uganda in East Africa, the Gold Coast (now Ghana) 
and the territory that became Nigeria in West Africa. The British already 
controlled Egypt, which they had o ccupied in 1882, as well as English-
speaking Cape Colony and Natal on the southern tip of Africa. The British 
also dominated Southern Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe) and Northern 
Rhodesia (now Zambia) through the British South Africa Company under 
the leadership of Cecil Rhodes. The result was that  almost every part of 
the African continent was a European colony.”
11 
 
     Another method to discern the essentia l elements of African religion is to study its 
most ancient forms, and then to correlate th ese with the aspects that persist into the 
present and compare these with the aspects that developed later. Thus, the study of 
Ancient Egyptian-Nubian (Cushite) religion is  of extreme importance in reconstructing 
African religion and philosophy. As we have already seen, there ar e several areas of 
commonality between Ancient Egyptian-Nubian religion and other African religions. In 
this manner, Ancient Egyptian-Nubian spirituality may be seen as a centerpiece and 
perhaps even a pinnacle of African religious culture and philosophy. 
 
     The developments in Ancient Egypt are central to understandi ng African Religions 
and their history both before and after the ri se of Kamitan civiliza tion. This is because 
there was a close relationship between Neteri an Religion and other African religions, as 
there was a relationship between Ancien t Egypt and other African nations. The 
connection between Ancient Egypt and Nubia ha s been elaborated in previous chapters. 
Also, the fact that the Ancient Egyptians we re “black” Africans and that the original 
Ancient Egyptians originated in the heart of Africa, the land now called Uganda, was also 
explained earlier. What is important to unde rstand now is that the fundamental Ancient 
Egyptian Religious tenets can be found in ot her African religions.  This means that the 
tenets were a common product of African spir ituality. In this cont ext, Ancient Egypt 
exemplified the concepts of African Spirituality in their most highly advanced form. This 
form, (Neterian Religion – Shetaut Neter) also led to the development of pre-Judaic and 
Islamic Arabian religions, Judaism, Christianity, as we will see throughout this book. 
                                                           
11 Colonialism and Colonies," Microsoft® Encarta® Encyclopedia 2000. © 1993-1999 Microsoft Corporation. All rights 
reserved.


--- PAGE 12 ---
Page 12 of 33 
 
     One of the problems in studying African religion is that the c oncepts, traditions and 
rituals of the varied religions were generally not committed to writing. The exception to 
this is the Neterian Religion, where there is extensive writing that has survived. 
Western researchers have tried to advance the idea that North-east Africa and Ancient 
Egyptian culture and religion was part of Mi ddle Eastern (Arabic) culture and religion, 
and that “Sub-Saharan Africa” is the land of “blacks” who do not have a refined notion 
of spirituality. From this, negative stereotyping led to the denigration of African culture 
and its people as backward savages who live in the jungle, ignorantly worshiping pagan 
gods. To those involved in initiating and perp etuation the salve trade, this made the 
enslavement of Africans
12 a more justifiable act during the period after the colonization 
of the New World (1492 A.C.E.-1800 A.C.E.) and then the colonization of Africa itself 
(1750 A.C.E.-1960 A.C.E.). The lack of scriptures or worship in western style churches 
or Mosques was used by Europeans and Arabs as an excuse to claim that they were 
bringing religion to Africans, and thus, accord ing to the mandates of their scriptures 
(especially as will be discussed with respect to the Judeo-Christians and Muslims which 
sanctions the conquering of ot her peoples to “spread the word”), they were able to 
justify their actions to themselves as being Divine in nature. Another problem is that the 
African religious culture was and continue s to be supported by language and shared 
history. The introduction of European language s, and the systematic prevention of the 
African people from speaking their own na tive languages or introducing tribal names 
has led to a situation of inter-tribal conflicts which were not previously present. This is 
due to the introduction of distorted ethnonyms, names given to the groups of villages or 
nations by the Europeans based on their anth ropological studies and the pre-colonial 
African names of societies. This means that people who were at one time actually 
relatives might be caught in two different  geographic areas, but due to colonial 
pressures their common langua ge and common identity is suppressed until forgotten. 
Then the two begin to see one another as st rangers, following the cause of the colonial 
ruler against the colonial ruler of the other territory. Thus, the modern interpretation for 
the word “tribe” as “a group of people who are des cended from common ancestors and 
ruled by a hereditary "chief," who share a single culture (incl uding, in particular, 
language and religion), and live in a well-defined geographical region,
13  is a 
misapplication as concerns many groups in  present day Africa due to all of the 
distortion of African society in the past 200 years. In other words, people living in a 
present day “tribe” may not have a connection with common ancestors from other tribe 
members, or the tribe may have no such legacy because the disruption by colonists 
resulted in the tribal memory being lost or in other cases, the members of the tribe may 
be composed of people who lost their cult ural identity (refugees, orphans, etc.) and 
were brought together for political or economic reasons and forced to speak a language, 
etc. This definition of the word “tribe” may be equated with or thought of 
interchangeably with the term “ethnic group.” 
 
                                                           
12 From the 1520s to the 1860s an estimated 11 to 12 million African men, women, and children were forcibly 
embarked on European vessels for a life of slavery in the Western Hemisphere. Many more Africans were captured or 
purchased in the interior of the continent but a large number died before reaching the coast. About 9 to 10 million 
Africans survived the Atlantic crossing to be purchased by planters and traders in the New World, where they worked 
principally as slave laborers in plantation economies requiring a large workforce. "Transatlantic Slave Trade," 
Microsoft® Encarta® Africana. © 1999 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Author’s note: Other estimates run 
much higher but this one has been presented here to avoid needless arguments over the issue. Nevertheless this number 
pales in comparison to the deaths caused by the forced enslavement and kidnapping of Africans which estimates project 
at 100,000,000 (one hundred million) or more men, women and children. 
13 "Ethnicity and Identity in Africa: An Interpretation" Microsoft® Encarta® Africana. ©1999 Microsoft Corporation. 
All rights reserved.


--- PAGE 13 ---
Page 13 of 33 
     African culture views religion as a li ving aspect of life which is passed on from 
parent to child and from elders and storytellers to the younger generations who grow up 
and continue the tradition by passing on the myths, culture and religious traditions to 
the next generation, and so  on. This is called the Sacred Oral Tradition in African 
religion. The Sacred Oral Tradition  was passed on through me ntorship, rituals, and 
intensive periods of education, including rites of passage.
14 
 
     European travelers and missionaries la ter realized that the practice of religion did 
exist in Africa, but it was not consistent w ith their interpretation of what religion was 
supposed to be. Despite this realization, the invalidation of Af rican spirituality 
continued and the missionary movements of Christianity and Islam continued, not in 
the spirit of sharing views on religion or ha ving a meeting of minds on religious issues, 
but from a perspective of br inging a “superior” religion to people with inferior or no 
religion. This attitude also led to the denigration of African people as well. 
 
     Due to the transatlantic slave trade,  colonization of Africa and the ensuing chaos 
which was perpetrated by European nations on  African nations, with the special intent 
of preventing the continuation of the transmittance and practice of African religions and 
the promotion of Western religions and soci al concepts, the traditions of African 
religions have sometimes been altered, disr upted or completely lost. The lack of 
concrete writings prior to the time of the pre-African holocaust ha s led to a situation 
wherein much reconstruction of Ancient Afri can traditions has b een required. Some 
European scholars began this work, but many have been accused of distorting African 
religion, skewing it in light of Western cultura l values and religious tenets, and in the 
context of European religion being superior by virtue of the fact that Europeans came to 
believe that monotheism is the advanced con cept of religion. This means that some of 
the original wisdom of th e practices, myths and syst ems of gods and goddesses has 
been misunderstood. The particular form of monotheism espoused by the three major 
Western religions (Judaism, Christianity, Is lam) is actually a narrow concept which, 
when examined, is actually a form of inte nsified dogmatic idolat ry. In contrast to 
African Religions, there are several examples of Western religions going to war against 
one another. The same is not the case with  African religions or iginally. Conflicts 
between African groups did exist but not for the same reasons as between the 
Europeans; one such issue is ethnic differences as in the case of Rwanda. However, in 
modern times, Africans have fought each othe r over religion, especially those involved 
with Christianity and Islam. This is b ecause the concept of African religion, while 
incorporating the teaching of  monotheism, actually inco rporates the pantheistic 
understanding as well. Pantheism relates to  the understanding the God or the Divine, 
manifests as Creation and everything in it. So  here we are confronted with the African 
concept of Polytheistic Monotheism , system of religion presenting a Supreme Being 
with many “lesser gods and goddesses” who serve the Supreme and sustain Creation 
and lead human beings to spiritual enlighten ment and worldly prosperity. This form of 
conception of God has also been termed “henotheism”.  These religious principles will 
be discussed more in depth later on.  
 
     In this context the Western con cept of monotheism has been degraded to a 
circumscribed idea that is expressed in a strict form of expression based on a 
“revelation.” This is errone ous in view of the actions  that Western Culture has 
perpetrated on other cultures and among themselves (wars, slavery, economic 
subjugation, etc.). The concept of revela tion in the Western religions (Judaism, 
                                                           
14 Microsoft® Encarta® Africana. ©1999 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.


--- PAGE 14 ---
Page 14 of 33 
Christianity and Islam) holds that some  absolute and perfect  knowledge about the 
Supreme Being has been given. This is in stark contrast to  the philosophy and tenet of 
African Religions (including Ancient Egyptian philosophy), Indian Vedanta 
philosophy, Buddhist philosophy, Chinese Taoism and other mystical traditions which 
holds that which is transcende ntal and unintelligible cannot be related in words, as the 
intellect cannot fathom the true nature of the Supreme Being. Thus, the Western 
religions and some orthodox religions that developed in Asia Minor such as the 
Zoroastrian religion, stand alone  with the narrow concept of the Supreme Being that is 
touted as a high revelation that must be imposed on the rest of the world’s societies. 
 
     As missionaries preached throughout Afri ca, they translated th e European texts into 
the African languages. In the process of doing so, the missiona ries realized that there 
was a term in African spirituality for “Supreme Being.” But even then they attempted to 
characterize this African con cept as a limited idea related to a Creator personality, and 
they viewed the rituals and propitiations to lesser divinities as proof of the inferiority of 
African religious concept. This European vi ew of the African c oncept of the Supreme 
Being was called deus otiotus meaning “a remote god w ho is rarely invoked.” The 
African concept of the Supreme is so lofty that it views a direct approach to the 
Supreme Being, an unintelligible existen ce, as presumptuous and irreverent. As 
expressed above, the African re ligious philosophical view is  that the very naming of 
such a being constitutes the act of conditioning it, and th is is contradictory to its 
essential nature. Further, th e so-called reverence of West ern religions which extol the 
glory of the Supreme Being does not cause the European practitioners of religion to be 
more faithful or peaceful, as history has show n. Rather, what develops  is a form of lip 
service which denigrates the religious pro cess since the words are expressed but the 
reverence, if any, does not translate to virt ue or even tolerance of others. So the 
Western idea that reverencing a Supreme Being directly makes the people or the society 
more pious is unfounded. Within authentic Ancient African systems of Religion, the 
Supreme Being is to be approached not  through intellectualizing (naming and 
classifying), but through ritual which facilitates the entering into transcendental 
consciousness wherein the being can be direc tly experienced without the encumbrances 
of illusory and limited mental concepts. Also, an approach through gods and goddesses 
was devised. 
 
     Further, Ancient African Religion does not therefore ascribe a gender to the 
Supreme Being. Thus it is less susceptible to  male chauvinism (sexism, bigotry) unlike 
the patriarchal western religi ons. So there is more of a balance in African Religion 
between the roles played by men and wome n in the religious practices. Hence, 
philosophy and ritual in African Religion are highly advanced and integral aspects of 
religious practice and therefore, rituals are not primitive displays of superstition.  
 
     Some Western scholars have characterized African societies as resistant to change and 
this view has been accepted by some leadi ng African scholars of religion such as John 
Mbiti. This in part explains the persisten ce of African religion despite the tumultuous 
history of Africa. In some parts of present day Africa, there is an upsurge in the revival of 
traditional African religion. Some Africans living  in and outside of Africa feel that many 
social problems are due to interference fr om European governments, businesses and 
religions and a backlash of negative sentiment has begun to develop in recent years 
against the Western Culture and religion.


--- PAGE 15 ---
Page 15 of 33 
Table: List of African Religions 
 
 
Kushite Religion 
Kamitan (Ancient 
Egyptian) 
Religion 
 
!Kung Religion 
Acholi Religion 
Akamba Religion 
Akhan Religion 
Akikuyu Religion 
Ashanti Religion 
Ateso Religion 
Babemba 
Religion 
Bachagga 
Religion 
Bacongo Religion 
Bafipa Religion 
Baganda Religion 
Bagisu Religion 
Bahaya Religion 
Bahehe Religion 
Baka Religion  
Baluba Religion 
Bamakonda 
Religion
 
 
Bambara Religion 
Bambuti Religion 
Bandembu Religion
Banyakyusa 
Religion 
Banyakyusa 
Religion  
Banyamwezi 
Religion 
Banyankore 
Religion 
Banyarwanda 
Religion 
Banyoro Religion 
Barundi Religion 
Basukuma Religion 
Dinka Religion 
Dogon Religion 
Edo Religion 
Ewe Religion 
Fang Religion 
Fanti Religion 
Fon Religion 
Ga Religion 
Galla Religion 
 
 
Igbo Religion 
Khol Religion 
Langi Religion 
Lovedu Religion 
Lugbara 
Religion 
Maasai Religion 
Mende Religion 
Nuer Religion 
Nupe Religion 
San Religion 
Shilluk Religion 
Shona Religion 
Sotho Religion 
Swazi Religion 
Tiv Religion 
Tswana Religion 
Western Africa 
Xhosa Religion 
Yoruba Religion 
Zulu Religion 
 
Unknown Past 
Religions


--- PAGE 16 ---
Page 16 of 33 
Manifestations of African Religion in Latin America and the Caribbean  
 
 
 
he religions of Latin Amer ica and the Caribbean are strongly rooted in African 
religion as a result of African peoples being brought to the Americas as slaves. 
These religions therefore reflect the slav ery experiences (including but not limited 
to racism, exploitation and mistreatment) of the original Afri can slaves and their 
descendants. They also reflect a mixture of traditions, including re ligious elements from 
the religions of the slave masters which were not in the original traditions brought from 
Africa. Some of the developments in the Americas included elements from Native 
American religions. One example of this is the spirituality of the African slaves who were 
brought to the Island of Puerto Rico in the Caribbean.  
 
     The first Africans actually arrived in  Puerto Rico with Columbus in 1493 A.C.E as 
sailors. The African slave trade in Puerto  Rico was not authorized by the Spanish 
government until 1510 A.C.E. The Taino Nativ e American population were the native 
inhabitants of Puerto Rico and they were  also enslaved by the Spaniards upon their 
arrival to the island. The enslavement and mi streatment of Taínos went on before and 
after slavery was permitted by the Spanish government. It was legally prohibited by a 
royal decree in 1542. However, the Spanish settl ers (slave masters) continued to enslave 
them illegally. Since they were not physically suited for the heavy physical labor and 
violent clashes with European slavers as well  as the rigors of European diseases, their 
numbers were reduced dramatically. The Afri can slaves who were brought to the island 
of Puerto Rico, beginning in 1510 A.C.E., creat ed a new culture as they mixed with the 
Taino Native American Population, creati ng an admixture of religious thought. The 
culture of Puerto Rico was further shaped  by the amalgamation with the Spanish ruling 
class and the later Anglo-Am ericans.  The Anglo-Ameri cans who took control of the 
T


--- PAGE 17 ---
Page 17 of 33 
country imposed a form of racism that led to  the development of a form of caste system. 
The almost extinct Native American population and those of (unmixed) African descent 
were segregated and discriminated against in  favor of the mulatto population.  However, 
even within this population, the darker ski nned members were discriminated against in 
favor of lighter skinned members, who receive d the greater latitude of freedom in the 
general society.  This policy of discrimination based on the shading of skin was instituted 
by the Europeans generally, but intensified when the USA took over Puerto Rico after the 
so called Spanish – American War. 
 
     In present day Puerto Rico, an independence movement has managed to prevent 
statehood.  However, the majority of the population is pro-western. The society maintains 
an aspect of Creole
15 culture wherein the lighter skinned members of the population feel a 
superiority that is supported by preferenti al treatment from the Anglo society of the 
United States. It must be clear that in most , if not all of the gr oups brought over by slave 
masters, slavery destroyed traditional African secret soci eties and priesthoods. 16 Roman 
Catholicism was the only officially recognized religion in Puerto Rico as Puerto Rico was 
a colony of Spain and Roman Catholicism wa s the official religi on of Spain also. 
However, most of the population practiced va ried forms of religion which combined the 
African beliefs with Christian images and tr aditions. This situation was typical in other 
parts of the Caribbean and the Americas. Puerto Rico, like other Caribbean and American 
countries, has produced African scholars and African patriots. 
 
     Perhaps one of the best-known scholars in  the field of African history and culture is 
Arturo Alfonso Schomburg. However, not many  people know that he was born in Puerto 
Rico in 1874. He grew up in Puerto Rico and studied in the Dutch West Indies. When 
confronted by another student who challenge d him by saying that peoples of African 
descent had not done anything significant in history, he countered with the achievements 
of those people of African descent on the is land of Puerto Rico who had made such 
advances in the arts and writing that they  had gained international recognition. This 
further spurred him on to travel the world seeking to document the achievements of 
Africans. He became a mentor to many 20
th century Africentrists and is honored for 
amassing one of the largest and finest colle ctions of books and evidences on the African 
contribution to humanity. By the time of his death in 1938, Arturo Alfonso Schomburg 
was recognized as a great scholar, humanist and African historian. 
 
     The African influence on Puerto Rican cu lture can be seen in such areas as the arts, 
food, music, dance, and language. For example, there is an African beat called La Bomba, 
that is still played especially within the circles of people of African descent and which 
has been recognized as an influence on latin music. The last enslaved Africans who came 
                                                           
15 Creoles, a name adopted by or applied to a number of ethnic groups in the New World who were descended from 
European colonists and/or African slaves. "Creole" can also refer to the language of such groups. Creoles," Microsoft® 
Encarta® Africana. ©&(p) 1999 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. 
16 Religions, African, in Latin America and the Caribbean," Microsoft® Encarta® Africana. ©1999 Microsoft Corporation. 
All rights reserved.


--- PAGE 18 ---
Page 18 of 33 
to the island were rela tively young and came from Nigeria, Ghana, and Zaire. 17 Some 
African words that survive in the Puerto Rican language include: 
 
• bembe – party 
• bembas – lips 
• guarapo – sugarcane juice 
• mongo – limp  
 
The major African-derived religions of Latin American and Caribbean slaves 
include:  
• Shango in Trinidad – Based on Yoruba Religion mixed with Christianity. 
• Rastafarianism in Jamaica – based on Ethiopian Christianity and Judaism. 
• Umbanda in Brazil – Based on Yoruba Religion mixed with Christianity  
• Candomblé in Brazil – 3 Types all based on Yoruba Religion (Supreme Being 
with Orishas) 
• Voodoo in Haiti – From Fon Vodun religion of Benin  
• Santería in Cuba – Combination of Yoruba Religion and Christianity 
The Common Fundamental Principles of African Religion 
 
     For many years, Westerners, specifi cally anthropologists, Christian missionaries and 
Muslims, did not regard African Religion as  “true” religion. Muslims moving into Africa 
called the Africans kaffirs, or “unbelievers,” which relates them as people who are 
atheistic, as opposed to  havi ng their own religion. Christians  adopted the similar terms, 
and henceforth African religion came to be regarded as magic or superstition, fetishism or 
animism. If we look closely at the traditi ons of other African religions besides the 
Ancient Egyptian, we will discover that many, if not all, of the fundamental aspects of the 
highly evolved Kamitan religion that were late r infused into the world religions can also 
be found in the African Relig ions of the past and pres ent. Though there are many 
variations of religious pr actice among African Religions there are some discernible 
common fundamental principles that they all share. A fuller treatment will be presented 
in an upcoming work. This essay will present only two of the most basic defining 
principles; these relate to the basic arrangement of religion that relates to it’s (A)Ideal of 
Spiritual Evolution and it’s (B)Theistic format.  
 
(A)Principle of Stages of Religious Practice and Spiritual Evolution
 
 
(B)Principle of One Supreme and Transcendental God and Many Gods and Goddesses 
 
                                                           
17 "African Religions," Microsoft® Encarta® Encyclopedia 2000. © 1993-1999 Microsoft Corporation. All rights 
reserved.


--- PAGE 19 ---
Page 19 of 33 
Among the essential concepts common to all African religions are the following: 
 
 
BLACK AFRICAN 
RELIGION 
(Sub-Saharan) 
 
ANCIENT EGYPTIAN 
RELIGION 
(Corresponding name given to 
the same teaching in Kamit) 
 
1. There is one God (Supreme Being)
 
2. That God expresses as Lesser 
divinities = gods and goddesses 
3. God and the universe are One =All 
objects in the universe are alive and 
divine 
4. Seek to discover the Menaing of Life
. 
5. No separation between Sacred and 
Secular 
6. Human beings have fallen from 
divinity due to vice 
7. Human beings can raise themselves 
up (discover the Divine) through 
virtue 
8. Social order achieved through Ubuntu 
(African Spiritual Humanism) 
9. Divine monarchy - King and Queen 
(A) administer secular (cultural) 
duties such as protecting the populace 
and administering equal justice for all 
and (B) (non-secular duties) officiate 
at spiritual ceremonies (as heads of 
the national religion) 
10. Men and Women
 can serve as priests 
and priestesses with equal rights and 
privilages. 
11. Highest Goal of Life
 = Mortal 
humans discover god and become 
godlike 
 
1. Neter 
2. Neteru 
 
3. Neberdjer 
 
 
4. Shetaut Neter 
5. Neter – Neterit, Heka – Hekat 
 
6. Isfet 
 
7. Maakheru 
 
 
8. Maat 
 
9. Peraah (Pharaoh)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
10. Hm and Hmt 
 
 
11. Akhu


--- PAGE 20 ---
Page 20 of 33 
Principle of Stages of Religious Practice 
and Spiritual Evolution


--- PAGE 21 ---
Page 21 of 33 
 The Stages of African Religion 
 
 
he complete program of religion has thre e steps which are necessary for the goal 
of religion, to discover and experience  G o d ,  t o  b e  r e a lized. Any spiritual 
movement that includes these steps can be called “religion” regardless of the name 
that it may be given by the culture that practices them. These steps include Myth, Ritual 
and Mysticism or Metaphysics. The table above shows how th ese three steps or stages 
manifest in African Religion (2nd column) and also how that same program is enjoined in 
the practice of Egyptian Yoga (3 rd column). Egyptian Yoga (Sema Tawi) 18  may be 
thought of as the advanced disciplines to be practiced in order to promote the highest goal 
of the religious movement. 
 
 
The Stages of African Religion 
 
 
 
Program of Religion 
(Universal Religion) 
3-Stages 
 
 
African Religion 
 
 
Sema (Smai) Tawi 
(Egyptian Yoga) 
Based on the teachings of 
the Temple of Aset 
(Aswan, Egypt) 
 
 
Myth 
 
Storytelling 
(myths – proverbs) 
 
 
Listening 
(to spiritual scriptures, 
teachings) 
 
 
Ritual 
 
Ritual 
(ceremony – Virtuous 
living) 
 
 
Reflection  
(on & practice of the 
teachings) 
 
Mysticism/Metaphysics 
 
Ecstasy 
(Transcendental experience) 
 
 
Meditation 
(on the teachings) 
 
 
     In African Religion, storytelling ach ieves the purpose of transmitting myths which 
contain the basic concepts of human identity as  part of a culture, a nd offers insight into 
the nature of the universe. Myths also cont ain a special language of self-knowledge and 
also proverbs that provide moral education for an ethical society. Rituals are formal 
(ceremony) and informal (virtuous living) pr actices which allow a human being to come 
                                                           
18 See the books Egyptian Yoga Vol. 1 for more on the disciplines of Egyptian Yoga and Mysteries of Isis for more on the 
teachings of the Temple of Aset, by Muata Ashby 
T


--- PAGE 22 ---
Page 22 of 33 
into harmony within themselves, the environment and the Spirit. This movement leads to 
an ecstatic experience which transcends tim e and space and allows a human being to 
discover and experience the Divine. 
 
 
The African Definition for the Word “Religion” 
 
     Most African religions do not have a world that is correspondent to the western term 
religion. However, there are terms to describe the various activities, rituals, and 
traditions of the religious process. The African culture that developed in northeast 
Africa (Ancient Egyptian) did have a name for the practices and concepts of religion. In 
the Ancient Egyptian texts, a term appears which is used to describe the religious 
process as well as the disciplines to attain entry into knowledge of the higher aspects of 
spirituality, i.e. religion: Shetaut Neter. 
 
 
Shetaut Neter 
(Secrets about the Divine Self) 
 
     The term above is derived from 
 Sheta (Mystery), 
 Sheta (Hidden) and 
 Neter (The Divinity). Thus we can now s ee why the Ancient Egyptian religion has 
come to be referred to as the “Egyptian Mysteries.” Actually, this term is more closely 
approximated by the Chinese term “Tao.” The term Tao in Taoism relates to the “Way of 
Nature.” The Ancient Egyptian term relates to the quality of divinity which is “hidden.” 
Thus, in Kamitan spirituality it means “the process of uncovering or discovering what is 
hidden or unknown about the Spirit - (Divine Self-Goddess-God)


--- PAGE 23 ---
Page 23 of 33 
Principle of One Supreme and 
Transcendental God and Many Gods 
and Goddesses


--- PAGE 24 ---
Page 24 of 33 
The Concept of The Supreme Being and the Gods and Goddesses in African Religion 
 
heism, is the idea that there is a God that exists and that that God is engaged in the 
affairs of Creation. Monotheism is a form of theism that asserts the existence of 
only one God; polytheism, another form of theism, asserts that there are many 
gods; henotheism concurs with polytheism in that there are many gods, however, 
henotheism places more importance of and reverence towards one of them. 
The term Henotheism  comes from the Greek εἷς θεός heis theos "one god". This term 
was coined by Max Müller. Henotheism means devotion to a single "God" while 
accepting the existence of other gods.  Müller affirmed that henotheism signifies 
"monotheism in principle and polytheism in fact." Müller used this concept as the 
foundation of his criticisms of the Western religious and theological concepts of 
exceptionalism which had developed as a west ern cultural dogma that monotheism was 
better defined and superior  to other forms of concepts of God.  
Other terms for Henotheism include: inclusive monotheism and monarchial polytheism. 
These terms have been used to differentiate between some manifestations of henotheism. 
The terms monolatrism and kathenotheism have also been used. Monolatrism means 
essentially that the worshiper worships onl y one god.  Kathenotheism means essentially, 
"one god at a time." 
In African Traditional religions (indigenous ), including Ancient E gyptian religion, there 
was/is practice of henotheism in most cultures.  In most forms of Af rican henotheism, the 
supreme divinity is revered but  not worshipped directly. For example, in India there is 
also practice of henotheism, yet, Suprem e Divinities such as  Brahman are openly 
reverenced and paid homage even though th e worshiper may use Krishna or Rama, for 
example, for daily spiritual worship. In Afri can henotheism, such as in the case of 
Ancient Egyptian religion, the High Deity, Nebe rdjer, is acknowledge d by the priests as 
the transcendental Supreme Divinity but the masses may select any of the lesser divinities 
or may even select from local or cosmic di vinities to be seen as the High God or High 
Goddess, for communal and/or personal spiritua l practices. So this form of henotheism 
where the Supreme Divinity is acknowledged bu t not talked about or referenced openly 
or frequently may be termed Shetatheism. The term “sheta” is derived from the Ancient 
Egyptian/African term “Shetaut” meaning “h idden”. What is hidden is unfathomable, 
unapproachable and that is why the lesser di vinities serve the pur pose of providing an 
approachable means to discover the hidden Supreme Divinity.  
 
 
Pa Neter 
 
     In the Kamit (Ancient Egypt) religion, Pa-Neter means “The Supreme Being” and 
neteru, 
 , means “the gods and goddesses or cosm ic forces in Creation.” Also, the 
word “neteru” refers to creation itself. So, neter-u emanates from Neter. Creation is 
T


--- PAGE 25 ---
Page 25 of 33 
nothing but Supreme Being who has assumed various forms or neteru: trees, cake, 
bread, human beings, metal, air, fire, water, animals, planets, space, electricity, etc. The 
neteru are cosmic forces emanating from  the Supreme Being. This is a profound 
teaching which should be reflected upon cons tantly so that the mind may become 
enlightened to its deeper meaning and ther eby discover the Divinity in nature. The 
Divine Self is not only in Creation but is the very esse nce of every human being as 
well. Therefore, the substratum of every human being is in reality God as well. The task 
of authentic spiritual practice such as Yoga is to discover this essential nature within 
one’s own heart. This can occur if one reflects upon this teaching and realizes its 
meaning by discovering its reality in the deepest recesses of one’s own experience. 
When this occurs, the person who has attained th is level of self-discovery is referred to 
as having become enlightened. They have di scovered their true, divine nature. They 
have discovered their oneness with the Divine Self. 
 
     African religions recognize powers that emanate from the Supreme Being that 
circulate in the universe like a kind of life force . For example, the Dogon worship 
Amma, the Supreme Being, whose vital force,  operates throughout th e universe, and is 
called Nyama. The Igbo of southeastern Nigeria call the Supreme Being Chiukwu or 
Chineke, and the life force that ope rates in the universe is known as Chi
19. Another 
example is to be found in Ancient Egyptian re ligion with the concept of Neberdjer, the 
Supreme Being, and Sekhem as the life for ce which operates throughout the universe. 
In this manner, the life force itself is to be understood as an intelligent cosmic energy 
which pervades all of Creation,  sustaining it at all times a nd thereby also unifying it as 
well. 
 
     In African religion the Supreme Being is viewed as a transcendental essence which 
cannot be defined and therefore cannot be a pproached directly. On e important reason 
given as to why the lesser spirit powers are invoked while the Supreme Being is seldom 
invoked or the recipient of of ferings is that the Supreme Being, as the ultimate and all-
pervasive power in the universe, already ow ns all and can therefore, receive nothing. 
For this reason representations of the Supreme Being do not occur in African religions, 
only the manifesting aspects are given form. These are used to promote the religious 
movement of the individual by allowing the individual to appro ach and understand a 
concrete aspect of the transcendental Spirit.  This understanding of course relates to the 
higher, mystical aspect of religion. Thus, in African religion we see a consistent pattern 
of structure in the way in which the Spirit  is presented across the panorama of African 
nations. This structure is simple, but ex tremely profound in conceptualization: The 
transcendental Supreme Being manifests as lesser or associated powers that emanate 
from the ultimate source (the same Supreme Being). There are also human beings that, 
through virtue, become higher powers, i.e.  gods and goddesses. Thus, the higher 
concept behind the practice of ancestor wo rship in African religion is not of 
worshipping the souls of the departed relativ es, but of propitiating the saints (deified 
forbears, i.e. canonized) and sa ges of the past who have elevated themselves and who 
have become part of the cosmic forces of  the Supreme Being. This pattern holds true 
for African Religions including Ancient E gyptian religion. Again, this is the same 
course taken by the Western religions, alt hough they do not admit nor profess to view 
the angels and saints in this way, in prac tice, many of the followers of those religions 
worship the angels and saints in the same fashion as within African Religion.  
 
                                                           
19 Which is incidentally also the name for the life force in Chinese and Japanese spirituality.


--- PAGE 26 ---
Page 26 of 33 
     In most African religions, includi ng the Ancient Egyptian, masks, headdress, 
costumes, the impersonation of lesser divin ities are used as means to attract and 
propitiate the lesser spirits. Statues are also made of the lesser spirits as symbols (and 
not as idols in the Western sense of the concept). These are also used to attract and 
propitiate the lesser spirits.  Again, these re presentations are not made of the Supreme 
Being.   
 
     Since the African Religious concept holds that God and the Universe are one, it 
follows thst there is no conflict between wh at is secular or sacr ed and the current, 
ongoing conflict in the West over Creation or Evolution as the cause behind the 
universe is inappropriate. 
 
The Consistent Pattern of Structure in African Religion: 
 
Supreme Being 
Ú 
Gods and Goddesses 
Ï 
Deified Ancestors 
Ï 
Mortal Human Beings 
 
     Human beings may attain the status of  higher being through a life of virtue and or 
righteous leadership. This concept is accentuated in the religions of the peoples of East, 
Central, and Southern Africa, as well as th e ancient Northeast (Nubia-Egypt) Africa. It 
is acknowledged within the philosophy that many of the lesser spirits in the religions of 
those areas once lived as human beings, often as kings. This is especially true of the 
Buganda of Uganda and the Shona in Zimbabwe.
20  Also, Ancient Egypt is to be 
included in this category, since there was a high teaching related to the Sheps and the 
Akhus. Shep means venerated ancestor and Akhu means enlightened ancestor, someone 
who has attained spiritual enlightenment. Al so, the Pharaonic system of Ancient Egypt 
had as one of its main tenets that the kings and queens became divinities upon their 
death. So Ancient Egyptian religion and the religions of other African peoples appear to 
follow close parallels in many fundamental aspects of religious philosophy as well as 
the general program of religious movement. 
 
                                                           
20Microsoft® Encarta® Africana. ©1999 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.


--- PAGE 27 ---
Page 27 of 33 
Table 1: Examples of African Religions with the System of Supreme Being and 
Lesser Divinities21 
 
African 
Religious System 
Supreme  
Being 
Lesser 
Spirits 
(Gods and 
Goddesses
 
Kamit (Ancient Egypt) 9 9 
Nubia (Kush-Ethiopia) 9 9 
Bakele 9 9 
Bambara 9 9 
Bantu 9 9 
Buganda 9 9 
Dahomey 9 9 
Dinka 9 9 
Dogon 9 9 
Dokos 9 9 
Edjou 9 9 
Fon 9 9 
Galla 9 9 
Gugsa 9 9 
Igbo 9 9 
Jola 9 9 
Makoosa 9 9 
Masai 9 9 
Nuer 9 9 
Shekani 9 9 
Yoruba 9 9 
   
 
The “High God” and The Gods and Goddesses of Ancient Egypt 
 
     There were several "High God" syst ems in Ancient Egyptian religion as in other 
African religions. This is the next lowest pos ition in the hierarchy of divinity after the 
Supreme Being. The term “High God (or Go ddess)” means that the highest God or 
Goddess within that particular system of theo logy is considered to be the original deity 
from which all others emanated as cosmic forces. Thus, in the Asarian religion of Ancient 
Egypt, Asar is known as Pa Neter or The God (High God) and Creation is composed of 
the cosmic forces, neters or gods and goddesses, which originates from Asar. It is 
important to understand that the High G ods and Goddesses as well as the Egyptian 
Trinities originated from the same trans cendental Supreme Being which was without 
name or form, but was referred to as Neter Neteru (Neter of Neters - Supreme Being 
above all gods and goddesses) and Neb-er-tcher (Neberdjer – All-encompassing 
Divinity).  
 
                                                           
21 This is a partial list only since the list is quite extensive.


--- PAGE 28 ---
Page 28 of 33 
     In this manner, the initiate (in virtuall y all African religions) is to understand that all 
of the gods and goddesses are in reality symbol s, with names and forms, which represent 
the Divine in the varied manifest forms of nature. This produces a two aspected format of 
religion in which there is a personal aspect and a transpersonal aspect of God. The 
personal aspect is fixed in ti me and space with a name and form. This form is readily 
understood by the masses of human beings with ordinary spiritual awareness and is used 
in myths and stories. The second aspect, the transpersonal side, points our interest 
towards that which lies beyond the symbolic form. This is the unmanifest form of the 
Divine as it is expressed in the mystical teachings of religious mythology. Thus, the High 
God is a personal symbol or representation, with a name and form, of the nameless, 
formless, unmanifest and transcendental  Supreme Being. The High God or Goddess 
usually appears alone and gi ves rise to male and female gods and goddesses and human 
beings. One important reason given as to why th e lesser spirit powers are invoked while 
the Supreme Being is seldom invoked or the recipient of offerings is that the Supreme 
Being, as the ultimate and all-pervasive power  in the universe, alr eady owns all and can 
therefore, receive nothing. 
 
Single Supreme, Transcendental Being   
 (unmanifest realm beyond time and space - names and forms) 
Ð 
High God or Goddess 
Ð 
Lesser Gods and Goddesses 
 
The Concept of God and Creation According to Ancient Egyptian Religion and 
Mystical Philosophy 
 
 
     The term  “Trinity”  was misunderstood by the Ort hodox Catholic Christians and, 
because of this misunderstanding, some Gnostic groups even ridiculed them. However, 
upon closer examination it will be discovered that the Ancient Egyptian Trinity, which 
was later adopted by the Christians and Hindus, is nothing less than a development on the 
same system of polytheistic monotheism that characterizes African religion. The three in 
one metaphor was ancient by the time it was adopt ed by Catholicism. It was a term used 
to convey the idea of different aspects of the one reality. This sa me idea occurs in 
Egyptian as well as in Indian mythology. Howeve r, for deeper insights  into the mystical 
meaning of the Trinity, we must look to  Ancient Egypt. In Egyptian mythology, the 
Trinity was represented as three metaphysical neters  or gods. They represent the 
manifestation of the unseen principles that s upport the universe and the visible aspects of 
God.  The main Egyptian Trinity is compos ed of Amun, Ra and Pt ah. Amun means that 
which is hidden and unintelligible, the underlyi ng reality which sustai ns all things. Ra 
represents the subtle matter of  creation as well as the mind. Ptah represents the visible 
aspect of Divinity, the phenomenal unive rse (gross physical matter). The Ancient


--- PAGE 29 ---
Page 29 of 33 
Egyptian “Trinity” is also known as a manifestation of  Nebertcher (Neberdjer), the “all 
encompassing” Divinity. Thus, the term Nebe rtcher is equivalent to the Vedantic 
Brahman, the Buddhist Dharmakaya and the Ta oist Tao. The Ancient Egyptian text reads 
as follows: 
 
 “Nebertcher: Everything is Amun-Ra-Ptah, three in one.”  
 
     The following passage from the  Hymns to Amun  (papyrus at Leyden) sums up the 
Ancient Egyptian understanding of the Trin ity concept in creation, and that which 
transcends it. 
 
He whose name is hidden is  AMUN. RA belongeth to him as his face, and 
his body is PTAH. 
 
     Thus, within the mysticism of the Ancient Egyptian Trinity, the teaching of the triad 
of human consciousness (seer-seen-sight) is also found. Amun, th e hidden aspect, is 
called the “eternal witness.” This witness is one of the most important realizations in 
mystical philosophy, because it points to the ex istence of a transcendental awareness that 
lies beyond the conscious level of the mind. This  mystical concept of  the “witness” is 
also to be found in Indian ph ilosophy under the Yoga teaching of Sakshin and the 
Buddhist teaching of Mindfulness. Sakshin is the “fourth” state of consciousness, beyond 
the waking, dream and dreamless sleep states. It  is the goal of all mystics to achieve 
awareness with this state (Enlightenment). 
 
     The visible “gods” and “goddesses” wi th a name, form and other attributes are 
considered to be emanations of the one God, Nebertcher, meaning that which is without 
name, form or attributes (abs olute). In the same way the Indian Trinity (Brahma, Shiva, 
and Vishnu) arises out of Brahman, the Absolute . They are responsible for the direction 
(management) of creation at every moment.  In Indian mythology, each male aspect of 
the Trinity of Brahma - Shiva - Vishnu had his accompanying female aspect or 
manifesting energy: Saraswati - Kali - Lakshm i, respectively. Similarly, in the Egyptian 
system of gods and goddesses we have: 
 
Male   
 
Amun 
Ra   
Ptah 
 
Female 
 
Amenit 
Rai 
Sekhmet 
 
 
Changes in the Way Lesser Beings (Spirits) are Viewed in African 
Religion Over Time 
 
     European and African historia ns have discovered many changes in the 
understanding and worship of lesser bei ngs (gods and goddesses and deified human 
beings) in African Religion, over time. Some  changes have been correlated to the 
emergence of agriculture, metal and even the slave trade. For example, the emergence 
of the earth goddess Ala religious sect am ong the Igbo people correlates to the 
increasing importance of agriculture. Am ong the Congo people of Central Africa and 
Jola people of Senegal, certa in new religious sects related to lesser beings emerged in


--- PAGE 30 ---
Page 30 of 33 
relation to the slave trade. They developed out  of a need to explai n the adversity that 
had befallen them, foreign conquest, enslavement, and the challenges of colonialism.22  
 
     Therefore, when studying specific Af rican religions, the hist ory of the peoples who 
developed the religion must be taken into account. Local variations should be evaluated 
as to their meaning for discerning the nature  of African religion only in the context of 
general principles which are common to all the religions and exhi bit the qualities that 
denote them as being ancient, preceding the hi storical influences from outside factors. 
The major outside factors influencing the development of African Religion include 
Judaism, Christianity, Islam, Arab slave trad e, European slave trade, colonialism, and 
neocolonialism. So this means that when studying African culture and religion, caution 
must be exercised so as not to misinterpr et the higher original aspects of African 
religion and culture with those that were e ngendered by disruptions , and then later on 
became assimilated into the culture. A supe rficial study would lead to the erroneous 
conclusion that all African Religion and its derivatives in the Diaspora are intact, 
correct or authentic forms of the practice of African Religion.  Thus, careful studies, 
taking into account the disruptive factors above, must be undertaken. 
 
     It is also important to note that the practices of African religion, which constantly seek 
to bring a balance between the spirit and the material, seeing them as essentially the 
same, is still misunderstood by most West erners. Many Africans who believe in the 
pantheistic view of African Religions have also accepted the Western religions, but this is 
not seen as a conflict since they inherently believe in one God. However, this belief of the 
Western traditions denies the di vinity that is to be discove red in the realm of time and 
space, the realm of human events, due to the sharp demarcation between heaven and 
earth. In this philosophy there is a separa tion between God and humanity. So within the 
framework of orthodox Christianity, even if th ey see Jesus as an intermediary, a lesser 
spirit as the gods and goddesses of African religion, they do not see him as being able to 
fulfill all their needs in all situations. Thus, there is still a need for the variety of gods and 
goddesses in African religion. So while there is a commit ment to God by many African 
converts to the Western religions, there remain s a need to seek the assistance of minor 
deities to resolve concerns of a worldly natu re. So there are many followers of religions 
like Islam, Christianity and Judaism who also continue to consult diviners and traditional 
healers, attend traditional rituals and participate in other aspects of African religion.  
 
 
Manifestations of African Religious Expression and Transmission to 
the Next Generation 
 
     African religious thought expresses through oral traditio ns and the recitation of myth, 
and also through discussions between elders and the curr ent generation. Rituals are a 
powerful means of transference of religious culture from ge neration to generation. They 
form an important part of African religion. Ri tuals are designed to attract and propitiate 
the spirit powers. Libations of millet beer, palm wine or water, and sometimes also 
foodstuffs are usually offered as part of a r itual. The libation is believed to augment the 
power of the spoken word. Less prevalent is th e practice of animal sacrifice, which is 
believed to release the Life Force of the anim al to augment the Life Force of the person 
promoting the ritual.  
                                                           
22Microsoft® Encarta® Africana. ©1999 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.


--- PAGE 31 ---
Page 31 of 33 
 
     The concept of the divine word or Hekau is an extremely important part of Ancient 
Egyptian religion and is instruct ive in the study of all Africa n religion. Some of the few 
differences between Ancient Egyptian religi on and other African religions were the 
extensive development of the philosophy related to the “written word” in Ancient 
Egyptian religion and the expansive social infrastructure that allowed the development of 
advanced monumental architecture.  
 
     As explained earlier, the word religion is translated as Shetaut Neter in the Ancient 
African language of Kamit. These Shetaut (mysteries- rituals, wisdom, philosophy) about 
the Neter (Supreme Being) are related in the 
Shetit or writings related to the 
hidden teaching. Those writi ngs are referred to as 
  Medu Neter or “Divine 
Speech,” the writings of the god Djehuti (Anc ient Egyptian god of the Hekau or divine 
word), and also refers to a ny hieroglyphic texts or inscrip tions generally. The term Medu 
Neter makes use of a special hieroglyph,
 , which means “ medu” or “staff - walking 
stick-words.” This means that speech is the support for the Divine, 
 . Thus, just as the 
staff supports an elderly pers on, the hieroglyphic writing (the  word) is a prop (staff) 
which sustains the Divine in the realm of time and space. That is, th e Divine writings 
contain the wisdom that enlightens us about the Divine, 
 Shetaut Neter. 
 
     If Medu Neter is mastered, then the spiritual aspirant becomes 
 Maakheru or true of thought, word  and deed, that is, purified in 
body, mind and soul. The symbol Medu is static while the symbol of Kheru is dynamic. 
     This term (Maakheru or Maa kheru) uses the glyph 
  kheru which is a rudder – oar 
(rowing), symbol of voice, meaning that purification occurs when the righteous 
movement of the word occurs, that is, when  it is used (rowing-movement) to promote 
virtue, order, peace, harmony and truth. So Medu Neter is the potential word and Maa 
kheru is the perfected word. 
  
     The hieroglyphic texts (Medu Neter), whic h are the spiritual scri ptures in general, 
become useful in the process of relig ion (Maakheru) when they are used as 
hekau - the Ancient Egyptian “Words of Power” when the word is 
 Hesi, chanted and 
  Shmai- sung and thereby one performs 
Dua or worship of the Divine.  The divine word allows the speaker to 
control the gods and goddesses, i.e. the cosmic fo rces. This concept is really based on the 
idea that human beings are in  reality higher order beings  (neteru-gods and goddesses), 
and this attainment becomes possible if they  learn about the nature  of the universe and 
elevate themselves through virtue and wisdom.


--- PAGE 32 ---
Page 32 of 33 
INDEX 
 
Absolute ............................29 
Africa....3, 4, 5, 6, 10, 11, 12, 
13, 14, 15, 16, 18, 22, 26, 
29 
African Religion6, 10, 11, 13, 
14, 15, 16, 18, 21, 24, 25, 
26, 27, 29, 30 
African religions...4, 5, 6, 11, 
13, 18, 22, 25, 26, 27, 28, 
30, 31 
Akhus ................................26 
Americas......................16, 17 
Amma ................................25 
Amun...........................28, 29 
Amun-Ra-Ptah...................29 
Ancestors...........................26 
Ancient Egypt.4, 5, 7, 11, 12, 
14, 15, 18, 22, 24, 25, 26, 
27, 28, 29, 31 
Arabs .............................4, 12 
Asar ...................................27 
Aset....................................21 
Aset (Isis) ..........................21 
Asia................................4, 14 
Asia XE "Asia"  Minor........4 
Asia Minor.........................14 
Awareness .........................29 
Barbarism ..........................10 
Being ..13, 14, 24, 25, 26, 27, 
28, 31 
Benin .................................18 
Black................................3, 4 
Brahma ..............................29 
Brahman ......................24, 29 
Brazil .................................18 
Buddhist ..................7, 14, 29 
Caribbean ..............16, 17, 18 
Catholic .............................28 
Chi .....................................25 
Chiukwu (or Chineke) .......25 
Christianity10, 11, 13, 14, 18, 
30 
Civilization ........................10 
Class, ruling class ..............16 
colonialism ....................5, 30 
Colonialism .......................11 
Congo ..........................11, 29 
Consciousness, human.......29 
cosmic force ....24, 25, 27, 31 
Creation ..7, 8, 13, 24, 25, 26, 
27, 28 
Cuba ..................................18 
Culture.....................9, 13, 14 
Cushite...............................11 
Dharmakaya.......................29 
Diaspora.........................5, 30 
Diop, Cheikh Anta.............10 
Djehuti...............................31 
Dogon ....................15, 25, 27 
economic subjugation........13 
Ecstasy...............................21 
Egyptian Mysteries............22 
Egyptian religion ....4, 22, 24, 
25, 26, 27, 31 
Egyptian Yoga...................21 
Egyptian Yoga see also 
Kamitan Yoga................21 
Enlightenment....................29 
eternal witness ...................29 
Ethiopia .............................27 
Ethnicity ............................12 
Evolution, theory of...........26 
Faith.....................................8 
Female ...............................29 
France ................................11 
Galla culture ................15, 27 
Ghana...........................11, 18 
Globalization .....................11 
Gnostic...............................28 
God ...6, 7, 10, 13, 19, 21, 22, 
24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30 
Goddess ...........22, 24, 27, 28 
Goddesses........24, 26, 27, 28 
Gods.................24, 26, 27, 28 
gods and goddesses.7, 13, 14, 
19, 24, 25, 27, 28, 29, 30, 
31 
Gold...................................11 
Gue Nyame........................10 
Haiti...................................18 
Hekau.................................31 
Henotheism....................5, 24 
Hidden ...............................22 
High God ...............24, 27, 28 
Hinduism ...........................10 
Hindus ...............................28 
Ice Age ................................4 
Igbo..................15, 25, 27, 29 
India...................................24 
Isfet....................................19 
Isis .....................................21 
Isis, See also Aset ..............21 
Islam ............4, 10, 13, 14, 30 
Jamaica ..............................18 
Jesus.................................. 30 
Judaism......10, 11, 13, 18, 30 
Judeo-Christian................. 12 
Kali ................................... 29 
Kamit .....................24, 27, 31 
Kamit (Egypt).....4, 5, 19, 24, 
27, 31 
Kamitan ...........11, 15, 18, 22 
Kamitan spirituality .......... 22 
Kenya................................ 11 
King .................................. 19 
Krishna ............................. 24 
Kush...........................4, 5, 27 
Lakshmi ............................ 29 
Latin...................6, 16, 17, 18 
Latin XE "Latin"  America
...........................16, 17, 18 
Life ..............................19, 30 
Life Force ......................... 30 
Listening........................... 21 
Maakheru.....................19, 31 
Maat.................................. 19 
Male.................................. 29 
Meditation......................... 21 
Mediterranean..................... 4 
Medu Neter....................... 31 
Metaphysical Neters ......... 28 
Metaphysics...................6, 21 
Middle East....................... 12 
mindfulness....................... 29 
Mindfulness ...................... 29 
Monotheism.................13, 24 
Mozambique ..................... 11 
Muhammad......................... 4 
Music ................................ 17 
Muslims .......................12, 18 
Mysteries .....................21, 22 
mystical philosophy.......... 29 
Mysticism ................7, 21, 29 
Mythology .........6, 10, 28, 29 
Native American............7, 16 
Nature ............................... 22 
Neberdjer ...19, 24, 25, 27, 29 
Nebertcher ........................ 29 
neo-colonial ........................ 5 
neo-colonialism .................. 5 
Neocolonialism................. 11 
Neter 7, 11, 19, 22, 24, 27, 31 
Neterian .......................11, 12 
Neters................................ 27 
Neteru ..........................19, 27 
Nile River ........................... 4


--- PAGE 33 ---
Page 33 of 33 
Nubia .....................11, 26, 27 
Nubian ...............................11 
Nyama ...............................25 
Oral Tradition....................13 
Orishas...............................18 
Orthodox......................14, 30 
Orthodox religions.............14 
Pa Neter .......................24, 27 
Pantheism ..........................13 
Pharaoh..............................19 
phenomenal universe.........28 
Philosophy...................10, 28 
polytheism .........................24 
pre-Judaic ..........................11 
priests and priestesses........19 
Ptah..............................28, 29 
PTAH ................................29 
Puerto Rico..................16, 17 
Queen ................................19 
Ra ................................28, 29 
Rama..................................24 
Rastafarianism...................18 
Reflection ..........................21 
Religion ....5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 
14, 15, 16, 18, 21, 22, 24, 
25, 26, 28, 29, 30 
Rhodesia ............................11 
Ritual .................................21 
Rituals......................6, 21, 30 
Roman ...............................17 
Roman Catholic.................17 
Sahara..............................3, 4 
Sakshin ..............................29 
Saraswati ...........................29 
Saraswati - Kali - Lakshmi 29 
Scramble for Africa .......4, 11 
See also Ra-Hrakti.......28, 29 
seer-seen-sight ...................29 
Sekhem ..............................25 
Sekhmet .............................29 
Self (see Ba, soul, Spirit, 
Universal, Ba, Neter, 
Heru)....................7, 22, 25 
Self 
(seeBasoulSpiritUniversal 
BaNeterHorus).........22, 25 
Sema ..................................21 
Sema Tawi.........................21 
Senegal ........................11, 29 
Shedy ...................................7 
Sheps .................................26 
Shetaut Neter7, 11, 19, 22, 31 
Shetaut Neter See also 
Egyptian Religion.....7, 11, 
19, 22, 31 
Shiva..................................29 
Slave Trade........................12 
slavery .........5, 12, 13, 16, 17 
Smai...................................21 
Spain..................................17 
Spaniards ...........................16 
Spirit ............................22, 25 
Spirituality .....................7, 11 
Storytelling ........................21 
sub-Saharan Africa ......3, 4, 6 
Sudan.................................11 
Supreme Being ...6, 7, 13, 14, 
18, 19, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 
31 
Supreme Divinity...........7, 24 
Taino..................................16 
Tao...............................22, 29 
Taoism.........................14, 22 
Tawi...................................21 
Temple.............................. 21 
Temple of Aset ................. 21 
The Absolute .................... 29 
The God............................ 27 
The Gods .......................... 27 
The way .............................. 6 
Theology............................. 6 
Time.................................. 29 
time and space ....7, 8, 22, 28, 
30, 31 
Tradition ........................... 13 
Triad ................................. 29 
Trinity..........................28, 29 
Ubuntu .............................. 19 
Uganda.....................4, 11, 26 
USA, West........................ 17 
Vedanta............................. 14 
Vedantic. See also Vedanta29 
Vishnu............................... 29 
Voodoo ............................. 18 
wars .................................. 13 
West Africa....................3, 11 
West Indies ....................... 17 
Western Culture...........13, 14 
western religions............... 14 
Western religions..13, 14, 25, 
30 
Western, West....3, 11, 17, 26 
Yoga ......................21, 25, 29 
Yoruba ...................15, 18, 27 
Zaire.................................. 18 
Zambia.............................. 11 
Zimbabwe....................11, 26 
Zoroastrian religion .......... 14 
Zoroastrian, Zoroastrianism
...................................... 14 
Zulu .................................. 15

