=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: williamszinetotal.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 22
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:31:50.005914
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
I WILL NOT 
CRAWL
excerpts from Robert F . Williams on Black 
struggle and armed self-defense in Monroe, NC
“Somebody in the crowd fired a pistol and the people again started to 
scream hysterically, ‘Kill the niggers! Kill the niggers! Pour gasoline on the 
niggers!’ The mob started to throw stones on top of my car. So I opened 
the door of the car and I put one foot on the ground and stood up in the 
door holding an Italian carbine.  
 All this time three policeman had been standing about fifty feet 
away from us while we kept waiting in the car for them to come and rescue 
us. Then when they saw that we were armed and the mob couldn’t take us, 
two of the policemen started running. One ran straight to me, grabbed me 
on the shoulder, and said, ‘Surrender your weapon! Surrender your 
weapon!’ I struck him in the face and knocked him back away from the car 
and put my carbine in his face, and told him that we didn’t intend to be 
lynched. The other policeman who had run around the side of the car 
started to draw his revolver out of the holster. He was hoping to shoot me 
in the back. They didn’t know that we had more than one gun. One of the 
students (who was seventeen years old) put a .45 in the policeman’s face 
and told him that if he pulled out his pistol he would kill him. The policeman 
started putting his gun back into the holster and backing away from the car, 
and he fell into the ditch.
 There was a very old man, an old white man out in the crowd, and 
he started screaming and crying like a baby, and he kept crying, and he 
said, ‘God damn, God damn, what is this God damn country coming to 
that the niggers have got guns, the niggers are armed and the police can’t 
even arrest them!’ He kept crying and somebody led him away through the 
crowd.”
 -from Negroes with Guns, documenting a 1961 NAACP 
  campaign to integrate a public swimming pool. 
www.NCpiececorps.wordpress.com | NCpiececorps@gmail.com


--- PAGE 2 ---
Gospel, not so much by the fighting sects as by the Quakers, and not so 
much by Quaker men as by Quaker women?
 This event advertises me that there is such a fact as death; the pos -
sibility of a man’s dying. It seems as if no man had ever died in America 
before; for in order to die you must first have lived.
It is in the nature of the American Negro, the same as all other men, to fight and try 
to destroy those things that block his path to a greater happiness in life.
The Future Belongs to Today’s Oppressed
 Whenever I speak on the English-language radio station in Havana (which 
broadcasts for an audience in the United States) I hope in some way to penetrate 
the mental barriers and introduce new disturbing elements into the consciousness 
of white America. I hope to make them aware of the monstrous evil that they are 
party to by, oppressing the Negro. Somehow, I must manage to clearly reflect the 
image of evil that is inherent in a racist society so that white America will be able 
to honestly and fully see themselves as they really are. To see themselves with the 
same clarity as foreigners see them and to recognize that they are not champions of 
democracy. To understand that today they do not really even believe in democracy. 
To understand that the world is changing regardless of whether they think they like 
it or not.
 For I know that if they had a glimpse of their own reality the shock would 
be of great therapeutic value. There would be many decent Americans who would 
then understand that this society must mend its ways if it is to survive; that there 
is no place in the world now for a racist nation. As an individual, I’m not inclined 
toward “politics.” The only thing I care about is justice and liberation. I don’t be -
long to any political party. But I think that as long as the present politics prevails 
the Negro is not going to be integrated into American society. There will have to be 
great political changes before that can come about.
 Those Americans who most deny the logic of the future are the ones who 
have driven me into exile. Those people have been cruel. Yet cruel as it may be, this 
exile was not the end those people had planned for me. But it is not in the hands 
of today’s oppressors to determine my end. Their role in history denies to them 
an understanding of this, just as their role will not allow them to understand that 
every true nationalist leader in Africa has been imprisoned or exiled, and that the 
future leaders of Latin American and Asian national liberation today are experienc-
ing imprisonment, exile, or worse.
 The future belongs to today’s oppressed and I shall be witness to that 
future in the liberation of the Afro-American.
The following is a brief biographical sketch of an incredible man named 
Robert F . Williams, along with several chapters excerpted from his famous 
1962 book Negroes with Guns. Though less well known than more urban 
groups like the Black Panthers, the words and actions of Monroe, NC’s mil-
itant NAACP chapter were tremendously influential on later organizations 
that advocated self-determination, autonomy, equality, and self-defense. 
 This publication was made possible by public documents of the Na -
tional Humanities Center and the Afro-American Studies Department of 
the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Though Robert F . Williams was not 
an anarchist perse, we hope that this publication can nevertheless further 
dialogue(s) around the themes of southern history, race, self-defense, and 
insurrection. 
-in love and rage,
the North Carolina Piece Corps 
40


--- PAGE 3 ---
groes are not pacifists just let them slap one. Pick any Negro on any street comer in 
the U.S.A. and they’ll find out how much he believes in turning the other cheek.  
 All those who dare to attack are going to learn the hard way that the 
Afro-American is not a pacifist; that he cannot forever be counted on not to defend 
himself. Those who attack him brutally and ruthlessly can no longer expect to at -
tack him with unity.
 The Afro-American cannot forget that his enslavement in this country
did not pass because of pacifist moral force or noble appeals to the Christian
conscience of the slave-holders.
 Henry David Thoreau is idealized as an apostle of non-violence, the 
writer who influenced Gandhi, and through Gandhi, Martin Luther King, Jr. But 
Thoreau was not dogmatic; his eyes were open and he saw clearly. I keep with me 
a copy of Thoreau’s Plea For Captain John Brown. There are truths that are just as 
evident in 1962 as they were in 1859 when he wrote:
... It was his [John Brown’s] peculiar doctrine that a man has a perfect 
right to interfere by force with the slaveholder, in order to rescue the 
slave. I agree with him. They who are continually shocked by slavery 
have some right to be shocked by the violent death of the slaveholder, 
but such will be more shocked by his life than by his death. I shall not 
be forward to think him mistaken in his method who quickest succeeds 
to liberate the slave.
 I speak for the slave when I say, that I prefer the philanthropy of 
Captain Brown to that philanthropy which neither shoots me nor lib -
erates me.... I do not wish to kill nor to be killed, but I can foresee 
circumstances in which both these things would be by me unavoidable. 
We preserve the so-called peace of our community by deeds of petty 
violence every day. Look at the policeman’s billy and handcuffs! Look at 
the jail!... We are hoping only to live safely on the outskirts of this pro-
visional army. So we defend ourselves and our henroosts, and maintain 
slavery. I know that the mass of my countrymen think that the only 
righteous use that can be made of Sharpe’s rifles and revolvers is to fight 
duels with them, when we are insulted by other nations, or to hunt 
Indians, or shoot fugitive slaves with them or the like. I think that for 
once the Sharpe’s rifles and the revolvers were employed in a righteous 
cause. The tools were in the hands of one who could use them.
 The same indignation that is said to have cleared the temple once 
will clear it again. The question is not about the weapon, but the spirit 
in which you use it. No man has appeared in America, as yet, who loved 
his fellowman so well, and treated him so tenderly. He [John Brown] 
lived for him. He took up his life and he laid it down for him. 
 What sort of violence is that which is encouraged, not by soldiers, 
but by peaceable citizens, not so much by laymen as by ministers of the 
I WILL NOT
CRAWL
Excerpts from Robert F . Williams on Black 
struggle and armed self-defense in Monroe, NC
www.NCpiececorps.wordpress.com  |  NCpiececorps@gmail.com
39


--- PAGE 4 ---
by Timothy B. Tyson
Associate Professor of Afro-American Studies
University of Wisconsin–Madison
Robert Williams, born in Monroe, North Carolina, became one of the most
influential African American radicals of his time, primarily for his advocacy of what 
he called “armed self-reliance” during the late 1950s and the 1960s. He engaged in a 
widely published written debate with Martin Luther King Jr. in 1960 and, though his 
leadership abilities were no match for King’s, he wielded an enduring influence. His
life in the freedom struggles revealed the deep influence of black nationalism and
armed self-defense. His influence might have been even greater had he not been
forced to flee the United States in 1961 with his wife and two small children, a
machine gun slung over one shoulder, foiling a Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
dragnet. In Cuba and the People’s Republic of China, Williams shared podiums with
Fidel Castro, Ho Chi Minh, and Mao Tse-tung. “Radio Free Dixie,” his regular
program on Radio Havana from 1962 to 1965, blasted “rump-licking Uncle Toms” and
“Ku Klux Klan savages” from Seattle to New York City. His 1962 book, Negroes with
Guns, a decisive influence on the Black Panthers and a generation of young African
American radicals, became a classic document of the Black Power movement. Just
before his death on October 15, 1996, Williams completed a draft of his autobiog-
raphy, While God Lay Sleeping. In its pages, in his life, we find a distillation of the 
bitter history that shaped not only one of the South’s most dynamic race rebels but 
thousands of other black insurgents whose militant resistance helped end the racial 
caste system in the United States.
 Robert Williams was born in 1925 to Emma C. and John L. Williams. 
His father was a railroad boiler washer in Monroe, North Carolina, a town of six 
thousand in the North Carolina piedmont. His grandfather, Sikes Williams, born 
a slave in Union County, had attended Biddle Institute in nearby Charlotte after 
Emancipation and became a Republican Party activist during the late nineteenth 
century. Sikes Williams also published a small newspaper called “The People’s 
Voice” and denounced the white supremacy campaign, which took the vote from 
black citizens at the turn of the twentieth century.
 Robert’s grandmother, Ellen Williams, also born a slave, was a daily pres-
ence in his childhood: Williams remembered her as “my greatest friend.” He re -
called that “she read everything” and that she “specialized in history.” She would 
point to the old printing press in the shed and tell the young boy stories of the cru-
sading editor’s political exploits. Before she died, Ellen Williams gave young Robert 
a gift that symbolized much that slavery and the struggle for liberty had taught her: 
the ancient rifle that his grandfather had wielded against white terrorists.
 During World War II, Williams moved to Detroit, where he worked at 
the Ford Motor Company, joined a militant labor union, and battled white mobs 
On Robert F . Williams tion. Discrimination and race hatred are undesirable, and I’m just as much against 
racial discrimination, in all forms, every place in the world, as I am against it in the 
United States.
 What do we mean by “nationalism”? When you consider the present 
white American society it can be classified as nothing but a nationalistic society 
based on race. Yet as soon as an Afro-American speaks out for his people, and 
is conscious and proud of his people’s historical roots and culture, he becomes a 
“nationalist.” I don’t mind these labels. I don’t care what they call me. I believe in 
justice for all people. And because the Afro-American is the most exploited, the 
most oppressed in our society, I believe in working foremost for his liberation.
Non-Violence and Self-Defense
 The tactics of non-violence will continue and should continue. We too 
believed in non-violent tactics in Monroe. We’ve used these tactics; we’ve used 
all tactics. But we also believe that any struggle for liberation should be a flexible 
struggle. We shouldn’t take the attitude that one method alone is the way to libera-
tion. This is to become dogmatic. This is to fall into the same sort of dogmatism 
practiced by some of the religious fanatics. We can’t afford to develop this type of 
attitude.
 We must use non-violence as a means as long as this is feasible, but the 
day will come when conditions become so pronounced that non-violence will be 
suicidal in itself. The day is surely coming when we will see more violence on the 
same American scene. The day is surely coming when some of the same Negroes 
who have denounced our using weapons for self-defense will be arming themselves. 
There are those who pretend to be horrified by the idea that a black veteran who 
shouldered arms for the United States would willingly take up weapons to defend 
his wife, his children, his home, and his life. These same people will one day be 
the loud advocates of self-defense. When violent racism and fascism strike at their 
families and their homes, not in a token way but in an all-out bloody campaign,  
then they will be the first to advocate self-defense. They will justify their position 
as a question of survival. When it is no longer some distant Negro who’s no more 
than a statistic, no more than an article in a news paper; when it is no longer their 
neighbors, but it means them and it becomes a matter of personal salvation, then 
will their attitude change. 
 As a tactic, we use and approve non-violent resistance. But we also believe 
that a man cannot have human dignity if he allows himself to be abused; to be 
kicked and beaten to the ground, to allow his wife and children to be attacked, re-
fusing to defend them and himself on the basis that he’s so pious, so self-righteous, 
that it would demean his personality if he fought back.
  We know that the average Afro-American is not a pacifist. He’s not a 
pacifist and he has never been a pacifist and he’s not made of the type of material 
that would make a good pacifist. Those who doubt that the great majority of Ne -
1 38


--- PAGE 5 ---
in the Detroit race riot of 1943. Drafted in 1944, Williams endured the ironies of 
marching for freedom in a segregated army. Though the racial discrimination in 
the army angered Williams, military training gave him and a generation of African 
American veterans “some feeling of security and self-assurance,” he recalled. “The 
Army indoctrination instilled in us what a virtue it was to fight for democracy and 
that we were fighting for democracy and upholding the Constitution. But most of 
all they taught us to use arms.” Like thousands of other African American veterans, 
Williams came home unwilling to accept the South’s racial caste system.
 Another returning African American veteran, a friend of Williams’s named 
Bennie Montgomery, killed his white landlord in a dispute over wages in 1946. The Ku 
Klux Klan (KKK) wanted to lynch the black sharecropper, but instead state authorities 
whisked Montgomery out of town, tried and convicted him of murder, and ten months
later executed him in the gas chamber at Central Prison in Raleigh. Robbed of their
lynching, the local klavern of “the invisible empire” let it be known that Bennie
Montgomery’s body belonged to the Klan. “They was gonna come and take Bennie’s
body out and drag it up and down the streets,” J. W. McDow, another African
American veteran, recalled. “I rather die and go to hell before I see that happen.” A
group of former soldiers met at Booker T. Perry’s barbershop and made a battle plan.
When the Klan motorcade pulled up in front of Harris Funeral Home, forty black men
leveled their rifles, taking aim at the line of cars. Not a shot was fired; the Klansmen
simply weighed their chances and drove away. Former U.S. Army Private First
Class Robert F . Williams cradled a carbine that night. So did three of the men who
would become key lieutenants in the “black militia” that Williams organized ten years
later. “That was one of the first incidents,” Williams recalled, “that really started us to
understanding that we had to resist, and that resistance could be effective if we
resisted in groups, and if we resisted with guns.”
 Williams soon left the South for almost a decade, working briefly at Cadillac
Motor Company in Detroit before using his G.I. Bill benefits to write poetry and study
psychology at three different historically black colleges: West Virginia State College,
Johnson C. Smith College, and North Carolina Central College for Negroes.
“Someday,” he vowed in a 1949 article for the Detroit edition of the Daily Worker, “I
would return seasoned from the fight in the north and more efficient in the fight for the
liberation of my people.” In 1952, Williams wrote an essay for Paul Robeson’s
newspaper, Freedom, in which he predicted that African American college students
would soon become “the most militant agitators for democracy in America today.
They have nothing to lose and all to gain.” In 1953, Williams ran out of money for
college and reenlisted in the armed forces, this time in the United States Marine
Corps.
 “Wherever he has gone,” an FBI observer noted during this period, “Williams
has constantly complained, both in the Army and at previous places of employment,
that he has been discriminated against.” The Marine Corps was no different.
Objecting bitterly to racial discrimination, Williams clashed with his officers, spent
much of his sixteen months in the Marine Corps in the brig, and received an
to the standard of Jim Crow life in a Jim Crow society. It is on this basis that they 
have struck out against the insanity of racial prejudice. We know that the Southern 
bigot, the Southern racist is mentally ill; that he is sick. The fact that Jim Crow 
discrimination and racial segregation may very well be based on economic exploita-
tion is beside the point.
 We are oppressed and no matter what the original cause or purpose of 
this oppression, the mind and personality of the racist doing the oppression have 
been warped for so long that he is a mental case. Even if the economic situation 
is changed it will take quite a while, and it will require quite a shock, to cure this 
mental disease. I’ve read that one of the best treatments for some forms of mental 
illness is the shock treatment. And the shock treatment must come primarily from 
the Afro-American people themselves in conjunction with their white allies; in 
conjunction with the white youth.
 This movement that I led was not a political organization. It had no po -
litical affiliations whatsoever. It was a movement of people who resented oppres -
sion. But I would say one thing about our movement. What happened in North 
Carolina, had better become a lesson to the oppressors and the racists of America. 
Because it is symbolic of a new attitude, symbolic of a new era. It means that the 
Negro people are becoming restless. It means that there will be many more racial 
explosions in the days to come. Monroe was just the beginning. I dare predict that 
Monroe will become the symbol of the new Afro-American; a symbol of the Afro-
American determined to rid himself of the stigma of race prejudice and the pain 
and torture of race hate and oppression at any cost.
Black Nationalism; Another Label
 The label Black Nationalist is as meaningless as the Communist label. 
The Afro-American resents being set aside and oppressed, resents not being al -
lowed to enter the mainstream of American society. These people who form their 
own groups, because they have been rejected, and start trying to create favorable 
societies of their own are called “Black Nationalists.” This is a misleading title. 
Because the first thing you must remember is that I am an Afro-American and I’ve 
been denied the right to enter the mainstream of society in the United States. As an 
Afro-American I am rejected and discriminated against. We are the most excluded, 
the most discriminated-against group in the United States; the most discriminated-
against class. So it is only normal that I direct most of my energy toward the libera-
tion of my people, who are the most oppressed class.
 As for being a “Black Nationalist,” this is a word that’s hard to define. 
No, I’m not a “Black Nationalist” to the point that I would exclude whites or that 
I would discriminate against whites or that I would be prejudiced toward whites. 
I would prefer to think of myself as an Inter-Nationalist. That is, I’m interested in 
the problems of all mankind. I’m interested in the problems of Africa, of Asia, and 
of Latin America. I believe that we all have the same struggle; a struggle for libera-
237


--- PAGE 6 ---
undesirable discharge in 1955. His one bright moment as a marine came on May 17,
1954, when he heard that the U.S. Supreme Court had struck down school
segregation. “At last I felt that I was a part of America and that I belonged,” he wrote.
“I was sure that this was the beginning of a new era of American democracy.”
Upon his return to Monroe in 1955, Williams joined both the local branch of the
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) and a mostly
white Unitarian fellowship. In a Sunday sermon delivered to his fellow Unitarians in
1956, Williams hailed the Montgomery bus boycott and celebrated what he called
“the patriots of passive revolution.” His bitter collision with the Marine Corps had not
dampened his commitment to equal rights for all under the U.S. Constitution and to
those elements in the American political tradition that he believed undergirded black
liberation. Invoking “the spirit of Concord, Lexington and Valley Forge,” Williams
declared from the pulpit that, as he put it, “the liberty bell peals once more and the
Stars and Stripes shall wave forever.”
 The atmosphere at the Monroe NAACP was less exuberant. In the wake of the
Brown decision and the triumph at Montgomery, KKK rallies near Monroe began to
draw crowds as large as fifteen thousand. Dynamite attacks on black activists in the
area were common and lesser acts of terror routine. “The echo of shots and
dynamite blasts,” the editors of The Southern Patriot wrote in 1957, “has been almost
continuous throughout the South.” The Monroe NAACP dwindled to six members
who then contemplated disbanding. When the newest member objected to
dissolution, the departing membership chose him to lead the chapter. “They elected
me president,” Williams recalled, “and then they all left.”
 Findinghimselfvirtually a one-man NAACP chapter, Williams turned 
first to the African American veterans with whom he had stood against the Klan 
that night back in 1946. Another veteran, Albert E. Perry, M.D., became vice presi-
dent. Finding it “necessary to visit homes and appeal directly to individuals,” as 
Williams informed the national office, he painstakingly recruited from the beauty 
parlors, pool halls, and street corners, building a cadre of roughly two hundred 
members by 1959. The Monroe branch of the NAACP became “the only one of its 
kind in existence,” Julian Mayfield wrote in Commentary in 1961. “Its members 
and supporters, who are mostly workers and displaced farmers, constitute a well-
armed and disciplined fighting unit.”
 The branch became “unique in the whole NAACP because of a working 
class composition and a leadership that was not middle class,” Williams wrote. “Most 
important, we had a strong representation of black veterans who didn’t scare easily.” 
In response to the drownings of several local African American children whom
segregation had forced to swim in isolated farm ponds, the Monroe NAACP launched
a campaign to desegregate the local tax-supported swimming pool in 1957. Not
surprisingly, the KKK blamed the affluent Dr. Perry for the resurgent black activism,
and a large, heavily armed Klan motorcade attacked Perry’s house one night that
summer. African American veterans greeted the night riders with sandbag
fortifications and a hail of disciplined gunfire. The Monroe Board of Aldermen
Afro-American newspaper, which began publication in 1827. The truth of these 
words has not dimmed in the century and a half since they first appeared in Free -
dom’s Journal. They are more appropriate than ever. 
 There are white people who are willing to give us aid without strings 
attached. They are willing to let us direct our own struggle; they are genuinely 
interested in the liberation of the Negroes. I wouldn’t have been able to remain in 
the South as long as I did if it had not been for the support that I got from some 
whit people in the North. And I might never have succeeded in escaping the legal-
lynching manhunt fomented by the FBI nor have reached Cuban sanctuary but 
for the help of whites. They will be willing to continue helping us for the sake of 
justice, for the sake of human decency.
“Every Freedom Movement in the U.S.A. is Labeled
‘Communist’”
 I’m not a member and I’ve never been a member of the Communist Party. 
But most decent-minded Americans should realize by now that every movement 
for freedom that is initiated in the United States; every movement for human dig-
nity, for decency; every movement that seeks fairness and social justice; every move-
ment for human rights, is branded as “Communistic.” Whenever a white person 
participates in a movement for Black liberation, the movement is automatically 
branded as “under the domination of Moscow.” I can’t expect to be an exception.
 This Communist-thing is becoming an old standard. An old standard
accusation now. Anyone who uncompromisingly opposes the racists, anyone
who scorns the religious fanatics and the super-duper American conservatives
is considered a Communist.
 This sort of thing gives the Communists a lot of credit, because certainly 
many people in my movement in the South don’t know what a Communist is. 
Most of our people have never even heard of Marx. When you say Marx some of 
the people would think that maybe you were talking about a fountain pen or a New 
York City cab driver. Or the movie comedians.
 But people aspire to be free. People want to be liberated when they are 
oppressed. No matter where the leadership comes from. The enslavement and sup-
pression of Negroes in the American South were going on before Karl Marx was 
born, and Negroes have been rebelling against their oppression before Marxism 
came into existence. As far back as the 16th century, and the beginning of the 17th 
century, Negroes were even rebelling on the slave ships. The history of American 
Negro slavery was marked by very many conspiracies and revolts on the part of 
Negroes.
 Certainly the Marxists have participated in the human rights struggle of 
Negroes, but Negroes need not be told by any philosophy or by any political party 
that racial oppression is wrong. Racial oppression itself inspires the Negro to re -
bellion. And it is on this ground that the people of Monroe refused to conform 
3 36


--- PAGE 7 ---
immediately passed an ordinance banning KKK motorcades, a measure they had
refused to consider prior to the gun battle.
 An even more remarkable local drama dragged Robert Williams onto the stage
of international politics on October 28, 1958. T wo African American boys, “Fuzzy”
Simpson and Hanover Thompson, ages eight and ten, met some white children in a
vacant lot. A kissing game ensued in which the ten-year-old Thompson and an eightyear-
old white girl named Sissy Sutton kissed one another. The worldwide
controversy that stemmed from the “kissing case” underlined the power of sexual
questions in racial politics and demonstrated both the promise and the problems of
cold war politics for the African American freedom struggle.
 After the kissing incident, Sissy Sutton’s mother reported that “I was furious. I
would have killed Hanover myself if I had the chance.” Sissy’s father took a shotgun
and went looking for the two boys. Neighbors reported that a white mob had roared
up to the Thompson home and threatened not only to kill the boys but also to lynch
their mothers. Later that afternoon, police officers spotted Hanover Thompson and
Fuzzy Simpson pulling a red wagon loaded with soft drink bottles. “Both cops jumped
out with their guns drawn,” Thompson recalled. “They snatched us up and
handcuffed us and threw us in the car. When we got to the jail, they drug us out of
the car and started beating us.” The local juvenile court judge reported to Governor
Luther H. Hodges that the police had detained the boys “for their own good, due to
local feeling in the case.”
 Authorities held the two boys for six days without permitting them to see
parents, friends, or attorneys. Passing gunmen fired dozens of shots into the
Thompson home. Klan terrorists torched crosses on the lawn. Hanover’s sister
found his dog shot dead in the yard. For many white citizens, the case seemed to
resonate with the sexual fears that accompanied their vision of where school
desegregation would lead. “If [black children] get into our rural schools and ride the
buses with our white children,” one local woman wrote, “the Monroe ‘kissing’ incident
is only a start of what we will have.” On November 4, Judge J. Hampton Price
convened what he termed “separate but equal” hearings for the white parents and the
black boys and sentenced the pair to Morrison T raining School For Negroes. If they
behaved well, Judge Price told the black boys, it might be that they could be
released before they were twenty-one.
 Robert Williams saw the “kissing case” as more than a local expression of the
irrational sexual lynchpin of white supremacy; the bizarre clarity of the case and the
strange politics of the cold war suggested a larger strategy. Like Martin Luther King
Jr. and the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) would do in
Birmingham four years later, Williams and his friends in Monroe set out to use
international politics of the cold war as a fulcrum to push the U.S. government to
intervene. Determined to make the “kissing case” a global metaphor for the American
racial dilemma, they fired off press releases, pestered reporters, hounded the wire
services, and put in motion what Time magazine called “a rolling snowball” of
worldwide publicity.
better to bleed for a just cause than to bleed just for the thrill of the sight of blood. 
Rebellion ferments in modern youth. It is better that it expend itself against its true 
enemies than against teen-age schoolmates who can’t even explain the reasons for 
their dangerous skirmishes.
 The Montgomery bus boycott was perhaps the most successful example
of completely pacifist action. But we must remember that in Montgomery, where 
Negroes are riding in the front of buses, there are also Negroes who are starving. 
The Montgomery bus boycott was a victory—but it was limited. It did not raise 
the Negro standard of living; it did not mean better education for Negro children, 
it did not mean economic advances.
 Just what was the issue at hand for the white racists? What sacrifice? Re -
member that in Montgomery most of the white Americans have automobiles and 
are not dependent on the buses. It’s just like our own experience in Monroe when 
we integrated the library. I just called the chairman of the board in my county. I 
told him that I represented the NAACP , that we wanted to integrate the library, 
and that our own library had burned down. And he said, “Well, I don’t see any 
reason why you can’t use the same library that our people use. It won’t make any 
difference. And after all I don’t read anyway.” Now, this is the attitude of a lot 
of white Southerners about the Montgomery bus boycott. The white people who 
control the city didn’t ride the buses anyway; they had their own private cars, so it 
didn’t make any difference to them.
 But when Afro-Americans get into the struggle for the right to live as hu-
man beings and the right to earn the same amount of money, then they’ll meet the 
greatest amount of resistance, and out of it will come police-condoned or -inspired 
violence. When that happens, the racist must be made to realize that in attacking 
us he risks his own life. After all, his life is a white life, and he considers the white 
life to be superior; so why should he risk a superior life to take an inferior one?
 Now I believe, and a lot of other Negroes do too, that we must create a 
black militancy of our own. We must direct our own struggle, achieve our own 
destiny. We must realize that many Afro-Americans have become skeptical and 
extremely suspicious of the so-called white liberals who have dominated “Negro” 
freedom movements. They just feel that no white person can understand what 
it’s like to be a suppressed Negro. The traditional white liberal leadership in civil 
rights organizations, and even white radicals, generally cannot understand what 
our struggle is and how we feel about it. They have always made our struggle sec -
ondary and after all these years we really never got any place.
 They have a patient sense for good public relations. But we’re not interest-
ed in a good press. We’re interested in becoming free. We want to be liberated. To 
me, oppression is harmful. It is painful. I would wake up in the morning as a Negro 
who was oppressed. At lunchtime, I would eat as a Negro who was oppressed. At 
night, I would go to bed as a Negro who was oppressed. And if I could have been 
free in thirty seconds, it would not have been too soon.
 “Too long have others spoken for us,” began the first editorial in the first 
435


--- PAGE 8 ---
This publicity campaign quickly attracted the support of the Socialist 
Workers Party (SWP), a T rotskyite group attempting to break with the American left’s
tendency to subordinate race to class. Efforts for socialism and black liberation must
meet as equal partners, C. L. R. James and Claude DeBruce had persuaded their
SWP comrades. DeBruce, an African American member, saw the need for an
independent black political leadership, preferably with ties to the NAACP , that could
“project a program in the interest of the mass of Negroes.” Thus when Robert
Williams emerged from the black South in 1958, the SWP stood poised to assist him
on his own terms. Beginning in 1958, The Militant, the SWP’s newspaper, carried
dozens of articles about Williams and Monroe—twenty-five on the “kissing case”
alone—coverage that overshadowed their reports on the Cuban revolution, the
anticolonial uprising in the Belgian Congo, and all the other developments in the
African American freedom struggle combined. “They knew I wasn’t going to join any
party,” he recalled, “because I had made that plain. I wasn’t interested in them.” The
reverse, however, was not true. Robert Williams “has some audacious plans which I
think are feasible,” SWP organizer George Weissman wrote. “Indeed, the more I see
of him the more I think he has the possibility of becoming a real Negro leader.”
With logistical assistance from the SWP , Williams addressed audiences at labor
halls, liberal churches, and college auditoriums across the country. Soon the “kissing
case” emblazoned front pages around the globe. John Shure, head of the United
States Information Agency at the Hague, reported that he himself had received over
twelve thousand letters “even though the response does not appear to have been
organized.” While the White House and the State Department expressed alarm at the
damage to U.S. foreign relations, Williams had a ready answer. “It is asinine for
colored people to even think of sparing the U.S. State Department embarrassment
abroad,” he replied. “If the U.S. government is so concerned about its image abroad,
then let it create a society that will stand up under world scrutiny.” Three and a half
months after Hanover and Sissy had kissed each other, Governor Hodges
announced, under enormous political pressure, that the boys would be released.
 “The kissing case,” activist lawyer Conrad Lynn observed years later, “was the
case that got [Williams] in national and international attention.” The case furnished
Williams not only with a network of seasoned activists in the American left but also
with a growing number of supporters among black nationalists in Harlem. Audley
“Queen Mother” Moore, an important figure in both communist and black nationalist
circles in Harlem from the 1920s to the 1970s, organized support for Williams. He
became a regular visitor to Louis Michaux’s National Memorial African Bookstore on
Seventh Avenue off 125th Street, where Michaux welcomed Williams to the podium
the store provided for the legendary Harlem street speakers of the day. The most
important of Williams’s contacts among the Harlem nationalists was Malcolm X,
minister at the Nation of Islam’s Temple Number 7. “Every time I used to go to New
York he would invite me to speak,” Williams recalled. Malcolm would tell his
congregation “that ‘our brother is here from North Carolina, and he is the only fighting
man that we have got, and we have got to help him so he can stay down there,’”
because he defends himself, his family, his home, and his dignity. He does not in-
troduce violence into a racist social system—the violence is already there, and has 
always been there. It is precisely this unchallenged violence that allows a racist so -
cial system to perpetuate itself. When people say that they are opposed to Negroes
“resorting to violence” what they really mean is that they are opposed to Negroes 
defending themselves and challenging the exclusive monopoly of violence practiced 
by white racists. We have shown in Monroe that with violence working both ways 
constituted law will be more inclined to keep the peace.
 When Afro-Americans resist and struggle for their rights they also possess
a power greater than that generated by their will and their hands. With the world 
situation as it is today, the most racist and fascist United States government con -
ceivable could not succeed in exterminating 20,000,000 people. We know there 
is a great power struggle going on in the world today, and the colored peoples 
control the true balance of power. We also know, from the statistics of the Detroit 
race riots, that production in this country would fall in forty-eight hours. People 
everywhere in the world would be ready to support our struggle.
 Nor should we forget that these same deceiving pacifist-preaching well-
to-do southern blacks profit from the struggle, living lives of luxury while most 
Afro-Americans continue to suffer. Are they any better than the Negro Quisling 
in neighboring Charleston, North Carolina—a black man who rode around in a 
new pink Cadillac with anti-NAACP and anti-integration literature, a huge roll of 
money, and an expense account, all the blessings of the White Citizens’ Council? It 
is an ironic sign that black Judases are becoming more expensive as the white racist 
becomes desperate—though it is a small consolation to those of us who suffer from 
his betrayals.
 In Monroe, where we fought the Klan, we were being penalized. There 
are children there growing up without any education, children without shoes, chil-
dren without food. Old people without medical attention. For the Monroe Negro, 
there is no work; there is no welfare. From all the money raised in the North by 
the official black leadership, no one would send a penny to Monroe, because white 
liberals who gave this money considered us to be outlaws and thugs. They preferred 
to let us suffer rather than to identify themselves with our position. They sent truck 
convoys into other places in the South, but penalized us because we took a militant
stand.
 But our children who are growing up without shoes are also growing up 
with a sense of direction they cannot obtain in the Jim Crow schools. There once 
was a threat, in Monroe, of Negro teen-age gang war. It abated as the teen-agers re-
solved their difficulties by coming to understand the problem. It is only natural to 
expect the black youth to be infected with a desire to do something. Frustrated by 
less active adults, this desire may be projected in the wrong direction. The vigor of 
the youth can be channeled into constructive militant actions. It is simply a matter 
of common sense to have these young Negroes constructively fight racial injustice 
rather than fight among themselves. Danger is not a respecter of color lines; it is 
5 34


--- PAGE 9 ---
Williams recounted. Williams found ready support among Harlem intellectuals,
including Julian Mayfield, John Henrik Clarke, John O. Killens, and other literary and
political figures. “They all saw something in Monroe that did not actually exist—an
immediately revolutionary situation,” Harold Cruse observed. Julian Mayfield later
wrote an unpublished autobiography in which he disclosed that “a famous black
writer made contact with gangsters in New Jersey and bought me two sub-machine
guns which I took to Monroe.” Williams was not the best known black leader in the
United States, but he may have been the best armed.
 The “kissing case” recruited new allies for Williams, but it launched him on a
collision course with the NAACP hierarchy. Since the Scottsboro trials of the 1930s,
the NAACP had steadfastly shunned so-called “sex cases” and political alliances
that might leave the organization open to red-baiting. Should the NAACP “ever get
identified with communism,” Kelly Alexander, head of the North Carolina Conference
of Branches, told a reporter, “the Ku Klux Klan and the White Councils will pick up
the charge that we are ‘reds’ and use it as a club to beat us to death.” Differences
over strategy became bitter: Alexander complained to the national office that Williams
“has completely turned his back on the one organization that is responsible for him
being in the spotlight today,” while Williams griped that Alexander “sounds more like a
Tom than ever.” Roy Wilkins, executive secretary of the national organization, began
to refer to Williams in private as “Lancelot of Monroe.”
 Just as the “kissing case” headlines faded in the spring of 1959, two news
stories from other parts of the South gripped black America. One was the lynching of
Mack Charles Parker, accused of raping a white woman in Mississippi. When
Mississippi NAACP field secretary Medgar Evers heard that Parker had been
dragged from his cell and murdered by a mob, he told his wife, “I’d like to get a gun
and start shooting.” The other was the terrifying ordeal of four young black college
students at Florida A&M. Their double date after a college dance was interrupted by
four white men with guns and knives. The drunken assailants, who had vowed, as
one of them testified in court later, “to go out and get some nigger pussy,” forced the
two eighteen-year-old black men to kneel at gunpoint while they undressed the two
women and decided aloud which one they would kidnap and then gang-rape. In the
wake of these highly publicized outrages, Roy Wilkins conceded in a letter marked
“NOT FOR PUBLICATION” that “I know the thought of violence has been much in
the minds of Negroes.” By early May, Wilkins admitted that the NAACP found it
“harder and harder to keep feelings from boiling over in some of our branches.”
 Right on the heels of the Parker lynching and the terrors in Tallahassee, two
pressing local matters brought Robert Williams and a crowd of black women to the
Union County courthouse. B. F . Shaw, a white railroad engineer, was charged with
attacking an African American maid at the Hotel Monroe. Slated for trial the same
day, Lewis Medlin, a white mechanic, was accused of having beaten and sexually
assaulted Mary Ruth Reid, a pregnant African American woman, in the presence of
her five children. According to Williams, Reid’s brothers and several of the African
American women of the Monroe NAACP had urged that the new machine guns be
traitors.” In Atlanta, a university professor, energetic about the new spirit on the 
part of the Negroes, was very hopeful that new militant leadership would replace 
the old Uncle Toms, whose days, he was confident, were numbered. 
 There are exceptions among us. The Uncle Toms, the Judases, and the 
Quislings of the black “elite” would deny this rising consciousness. They do every-
thing possible to make white Americans think that it is not true, while apologizing 
to us for the very people who oppress us. Some of these “responsible” Negroes are 
afraid that militant action damages “amiable race relations.” They complain that 
race relations may deteriorate to a point that many Negroes may lose jobs. What 
they mean is that they may lose their jobs. For the black workers, who are the first 
to be fired, and last, if ever, to be hired, the situation is so bad it can’t deteriorate. 
 We realize that there must be a struggle within our own ranks to take the 
leadership away from the black Quislings who betray us. Then the white liberals 
who are dumping hundreds of thousands of dollars into our struggle in the South 
to convert us to pacifism will have to accept our understanding of the situation or 
drop their liberal pretensions. 
 Why do the white liberals ask us to be non-violent? We are not the ag -
gressors; we have been victimized for over 300 years! Yet nobody spends money 
to go into the South and ask the racists to be martyrs or pacifists. But they always 
come to the downtrodden Negroes, who are already oppressed and too submissive 
as a group, and they ask them not to fight back. There seems to be a pattern of 
some sort of strange coincidence of interest when whites preach a special doctrine 
to Negroes. Like the choice of theology when the plantation-owners saw to the 
Christianization of the slaves. Instead of the doctrines which produced the rugged 
aggressively independent and justice-seeking spirit that we associate with Colonial 
America as the New England Conscience, the slaves were indoctrinated in the most 
submissive “trust-your-master” pie-in-the-sky after-you-die form of Christianity.
 It is because our militancy is growing that they spend hundreds of thou -
sands of dollars to convert us into pacifists. Because our militancy is growing they 
come to us out of fear. 
 Of course, the respectable Negro leadership are the most outspoken ex -
ponents of non-violence. But if these people, especially the ministers, are such pure 
pacifists, why is it that so few, if any, criticize the war preparations of this country? 
Why is it that so few speak out against the Bomb? Isn’t that the sort of preaching 
one expects and hears from sincere pacifists? The responsible Negro leadership is 
pacifist in so far as its one interest is that we do not fight the white racists; that we 
do not “provoke” or enrage them. They constantly tell us that if we resort to violent 
self-defense we will be exterminated. They are not stopping violence—they are only 
stopping defensive violence against white racists out of a fear of extermination.
 This fear of extermination is a myth which we’ve exposed in Monroe. We 
did this because we came to have an active understanding of the racist system and 
we grasped the relationship between violence and racism. The existence of violence 
is at the very heart of a racist system. The Afro-American militant is a “militant” 
633


--- PAGE 10 ---
tried out on Medlin before his trial. “I told them that this matter would be handled
through the law and the NAACP would help,” Williams recalled, “that we would be as
bad as the white people if we resorted to violence.”
 The proceedings against the two white men compelled Williams to recon-
sider his assessment. The judge dropped the charges against Shaw in spite of the fact 
that he failed to appear for court. During the brief trial of Medlin, his attorney argued 
that he had been “drunk and having a little fun” at the time of the assault. Further, 
Medlin was married, his lawyer told the jury, “to a lovely white woman...the pure 
flower of life...do you think he would have left this pure flower for that?” He gestured 
toward Reid, who began to cry uncontrollably. Medlin was acquitted in minutes.
Robert Williams recalled that “the [black] women in the courtroom made such an
outcry, the judge had to send Medlin out the rear door.” The women then turned on
Williams and bitterly shamed him for failing to see to their protection.
 At this burning moment of an -
ger and humiliation, Williams turned to wire service
reporters and declared that it was time to “meet violence with violence.” African
American citizens unable to enlist the support of the courts must defend themselves.
“Since the federal government will not stop lynching, and since the so-called courts
lynch our people legally,” he declared, “if it’s necessary to stop lynching with
lynching, then we must resort to that method.” The next day Williams disavowed the
reference to lynching. “I do not mean that Negroes should go out and attempt to get
revenge for mistreatments or injustice,” he said, “but it is clear that there is no
Fourteenth or Fifteenth Amendment nor court protection of Negroes’ rights here, and
Negroes have to defend themselves on the spot when they are attacked by whites.”
Banner headlines flagged these words as symbols of “a new militancy among
young Negroes of the South.” Enemies of the NAACP blamed this “bloodthirsty
remark” squarely on the national office. That very morning, when he read the words
“meet violence with violence” in a United Press International dispatch, Roy Wilkins
telephoned Robert Williams to inform him that he had been removed from his post as
president of the Monroe NAACP .
 The fiftieth anniversary convention of the NAACP that summer of 1959 
became a highly public show trial whose central issue was whether or not the na -
tional organization would ratify Wilkins’s suspension of Robert Williams. The 
national office printed up a pamphlet, “The Single Issue in the Robert Williams 
Case,” and distributed it to all delegates. As part of the coordinated effort to crush 
Williams, Thurgood Marshall visited the New York offices of the FBI on June 4, 
1959, and urged agents to investigate Williams “in connection with [Marshall’s] ef-
forts to combat communist attempts to infiltrate the NAACP .” Wilkins twisted ev-
ery available arm. Daisy Bates, the pistol-packing heroine of Little Rock, agreed to 
denounce Williams for advocating self-defense—after the national office consented 
to buy $600 a month in “advertising” from her newspaper. “The national office,” 
Louis Lomax wrote, “subjected the Williams forces to a heavy bombardment from 
the NAACP’s big guns.” Forty speakers, including Bates, King, Jackie Robinson, 
tions of the premises that make up the racist mentality. Look at the phenomena 
this way and they are the logical inventions of a thoroughly diseased mind. The 
racist is a man crazed by hysteria at the idea of coming into equal human contact 
with Negroes. And this mass mental illness called racism is very much a part of the 
“American Way of Life.” When Afro-American liberation is finally achieved in the 
U.S.A., one of the many new developments in such a society will be some sort of 
institution that will correct those Americans whose minds are thoroughly warped 
by racism. Somehow a way will be found so that these insane people will be made 
whole, will be made well again.
“We Must Create A Black Militancy...”
 This is the time for the Afro-American to act. Our sense of national con-
sciousness and militancy is growing. I speak of the masses of people, the masses of 
Afro-Americans that I know and have visited; in Jacksonville, Florida; in Atlanta, 
in Savannah, and in Macon, Georgia; in Columbia, in Charleston, and in Green -
ville, South Carolina. The oppressed and exploited black men that I’ve met on the 
streets of Harlem, on the streets of Detroit, and in Chicago. And I speak of the 
people in Monroe where five years ago, when I started talking about self-defense, I 
would walk through the streets and many of my black neighbors would walk away 
to avoid me. Today, despite the FBI manhunt and my exile, despite the frame-up 
arrests and the shootings since, despite the intimidation campaign like the one to 
drive Mrs. Johnson of The Crusader staff from Monroe, despite all of this, black 
Monroe continues its struggle.
 As editor of The Crusader, I went south in the fall of 1960, deep in Jim 
Crowland, to observe the freedom struggle. I was confronted with this new won -
derful spirit rising throughout Dixie—this determination to break the chains of 
bondage and the spirit of valor of a people who just a few years ago were submis -
sive peons in civilization’s no-man’s-land. Daily, I saw the old myth about Afro-
Americans being incapable of unity and action exploded.
 In Savannah an NAACP leader had contributed $30,000 to the local 
branch. The branch has a full-time worker and a suite of office space. Pickets and 
sit-iners have been beaten, and jobs have been lost, but the struggle goes on. The 
leader is not afraid of violence to himself because the people are with him. In that 
city an Afro-American union leader said that it had come to pass that the masses 
of Afro-Americans can see that “We must defend ourselves against violence with 
violence.” That many of them now say that the American white racist needs a good 
“whipping” to bring him down to earth and to break his white supremacy mania.
 I learned in Atlanta that Mr. Elijah Muhammad had made quite an im -
pression and that many Afro-Americans are learning, to the consternation and em-
barrassment of the black respectable leadership, that he has more to offer than weak 
prayers of deliverance. A prominent minister in South Carolina said, “Our biggest 
stumbling block is the Uncle Tom minister—the people must stop paying these 
7 32


--- PAGE 11 ---
and dozens of distinguished lawyers, rose one after the other to denounce Williams. 
But when the burly ex-marine from Monroe finally strode down the aisle to speak, 
he was neither intimidated nor penitent.
 “There is no Fourteenth Amendment in this social jungle called Dixie,” 
Williams declared. “There is no equal protection under the law.” He had been an-
gry, they all knew, trials had beset him, but never had he intended to advocate acts 
of war. Surely no one believed that. But if the black men of Poplarville, Mississippi, 
had banded together to guard the jail the night that Mack Parker was lynched, he 
said, that would not have hurt the cause of justice. If the young black men who es-
corted the coed who was raped in Tallahassee had been able to defend her, Williams 
reminded them, such action would have been legal and justified “even if it meant 
that they themselves or the white rapists were killed.” “Please,” he beseeched the
assembly, “I ask you not to come crawling to these whites on your hands and knees
and make me a sacrificial lamb.”
 And there the pleading stopped. “We as men should stand up as men and
protect our women and children,” Williams declared. “I am a man and I will walk
upright as a man should. I WILL NOT CRAWL.” In a controversy that the Carolina
Times called “the biggest civil rights story of the year,” the NAACP convention voted
to uphold the suspension of Robert Williams. The day after Daisy Bates had urged
the assembly to censure Williams for his vow to defend his home and family, she
wired the attorney general of the United States to complain about dynamite attacks
on her home in Little Rock. “We have been compelled to employ private guards,” she
said. Williams wrote to Bates soon afterward, “I am sorry to hear that the white
racists have decided to step up their campaign against you. It is obvious that if you
are to remain in Little Rock you will have to resort to the method I was suspended for
advocating.”
 Against this backdrop of white lawlessness and political stalemate in 1959 
and early 1960, Robert Williams moved to strengthen the local movement in Mon-
roe and to reach out to a national audience. Though Williams underlined the fact that 
“both sides in the freedom movement are bi-racial,” his emerging philosophy reinvig-
orated many elements of the black nationalist tradition whose forceful reemergence 
in the mid-1960s would become known as “Black Power.” His militant message was 
neither racially separatist nor rigidly ideological. Williams stressed black economic
advancement, black pride, black culture, independent black political action, and what
he referred to as “armed self-reliance.” He connected the southern freedom struggle
with the anticolonialism of the emerging third world, especially African nations. In the
late 1950s, when other integrationists focused on lunch counters and voter
registration, Williams insisted on addressing persistent black poverty: “We must
consider that in Montgomery, where Negroes are riding in the front of buses,” he
said, “there are also Negroes who are starving.” His approach was practical,
eclectic, and improvisational. There must be “flexibility in the freedom struggle,” he
argued, and tactics must emerge from the confrontation itself. At the core of his
appeal, however, stood his calls for absolute racial equality under a fully enforced
saying that they were tied up, then she turned around and said that they were re -
leased by me unharmed and left an hour and a half later. 
 Meanwhile, she was claiming various reasons for being in the colored 
community in the first place. In one paper she said they were taking a short cut. 
For another paper she said that they were lost, that they didn’t know where they 
were going. But no highway runs through our community. This was a dead-end 
street almost a mile from the highway that the Stegalls would use to get back to 
Marshville. Any person who knew the county could not possibly get lost there. The 
Stegall woman also told one reporter that the house I lived in, the house that I was 
born in, had been sold to my father by her father and that she had once lived there 
herself. In all these stories it was always Mrs. Stegall doing the talking and Mrs. 
Stegall’s picture that you saw. They never had Mr. Stegall, who was a known Klans-
man, saying anything. 
 I also read a report where Mrs. Stegall was quoted by the Charlotte Ob -
server as saying “that Williams only pretended that he was trying to help us.” Well, 
how would she know? One of the best proofs that I was helping them is the fact 
that they were unharmed and still alive. And they know this. 
Chapter 7
Self Defense: An American Tradition
The stranglehold of oppression cannot be loosened by a plea to the oppressor’s con-
science. Social change in something as fundamental as racist oppression involves 
violence. You cannot have progress here without violence and upheaval, because it’s 
struggle for survival for one and a struggle for liberation for the other. Always the 
powers in command are ruthless and unmerciful in defending their position and 
their privileges. This is not an abstract rule to be meditated upon by Americans. 
This is a truth that was revealed at the birth of America, and has continued to be 
revealed many times in our history. The principle of self-defense is an American 
tradition that began at Lexington and Concord.
Minds Warped By Racism
 We have come to comprehend the nature of racism. It is a mass psychosis.
When I’ve described racial conditions in the United States to audiences of foreign 
newsmen, Cubans and other Latin Americans, they have been shocked to learn 
of the depths of American race hatred. When I have cited as illustrations such 
extreme situations as the segregation of telephone party-lines in Union County, or 
the segregated pet-animal cemetery in Washington, D.C., where an Afro-American 
cannot bury his dog, they find such things comic as well as pathetic.
 Such extreme examples of the racist mentality only appear comic when 
looked upon as isolated phenomena. In truth they are perfectly logical applica -
831


--- PAGE 12 ---
U.S. Constitution, backed by an unyielding resistance to white supremacy.
In pursuit of this uncompromising vision of interracial democracy, Williams
became an editor and publisher like his grandfather before him. T wo weeks after the
1959 NAACP convention, FBI agents reported to J. Edgar Hoover that black children
were “selling a newsletter known as The Crusader on the streets of Monroe.” Its title
honored the late Cyril V. Briggs, Harlem organizer of the left-wing African Black
Brotherhood in the early twentieth century. The Crusader’s self-proclaimed mission
was “ADVANCING THE CAUSE OF RACE PRIDE AND FREEDOM.” Sample
mailings yielded several thousand subscribers across the country. Williams’s
newsletter fed a lively and important debate within the freedom movement about the
meaning of nonviolence.
 “The great debate in the integration movement in recent months,” Anne 
Braden of the Southern Conference Educational Fund wrote in late 1959, “has been 
the question of violence vs. nonviolence as instruments of change.” Harry Boyte, soon
to be Martin Luther King Jr.’s first white aide, observed that “the idea of striking 
back...meets a steady response among the downtrodden, grass roots of the south -
ern Negro population.” For several years, Boyte argued, Robert Williams “has suc-
ceeded in reaching these grass roots,” exercising “great influence in Union County 
and beyond because of his militant position and refusal to submit to intimidation.” 
Williams “poses a real threat to more peaceful and non-violent methods of solving 
our problems.” The FBI, too, remained uneasy about Williams’s expanding range of 
contacts. Hoover’s files, agents reported, “reflect numerous instances where groups 
in various sections of the country have proclaimed and demonstrated their sym -
pathies with Williams and have sent him money.” Not merely the FBI but also the 
most influential advocates of nonviolence felt compelled to deal with Williams’s 
growing reputation. In a series of public debates in New York City, Williams faced 
A. J. Muste, Bayard Rustin, David Dellinger, and others. “Nonviolence is a power-
ful weapon in the struggle against social evil,” Williams conceded. “It represents 
the ultimate step in revolution against intolerable oppression, a type of struggle 
wherein man may make war without debasing himself.” The problem, according 
to Williams, was that the success of nonviolence depended somewhat upon the 
adversary; rattlesnakes, he noted, were immune to moral appeals, as were white 
terrorists in the South. “When Hitler’s tyranny threatened the world,” he argued, 
“we did not hear much about how immoral it is to meet violence with violence.” 
Williams “drew a large audience to his debate with the pacifists,” George Weissman 
of the SWP wrote to Carl Braden in Louisville, “and handled himself quite well.” 
 In a widely reprinted debate first published in Liberation magazine, Wil-
liams faced Martin Luther King Jr. Again careful to endorse King’s methods wher-
ever they proved feasible, Williams advocated “armed self-reliance,” explaining 
that among well-armed white vigilantes, “there is open defiance to law and order 
throughout the South today.” Where law has broken down, he said, it was neces -
sary and right to defend home and family. “Nonviolence is a very potent weapon 
when the opponent is civilized, but nonviolence is no repellent for a sadist,” Wil -
because of the lack of law. We didn’t learn about the indictment until we were in 
New York and heard it flashed on radio and television. When we left North Caro-
lina we headed directly for New York. In the beginning I thought that we would 
stay there; that we would stop over in Harlem and from there we would immedi -
ately start a campaign to tell the world about the ruthless racist oppression that was 
taking place in Monroe. It was for this reason that I had left North Carolina. Only 
from outside the state could I organize a publicity campaign that would bring help 
to the Negroes and Freedom Riders so hopelessly outnumbered in Monroe. I had 
left North Carolina only after the chief of police had called me and told me that 
the state troopers were coming and that in thirty minutes I would be hanging in 
the court house square. I remembered the words of Hugh B. Cannon when I had 
appealed to him for protection under law for the missing Freedom Rider. The Gov-
ernor’s aide told me that he didn’t give a damn about anyone, that we had asked for 
violence and now we were going to get it. He wanted to know then “why I wasn’t 
dead yet!” I didn’t think then that anything legal was involved. 
 The first I knew of the indictment was in New York when I heard over the 
radio that there was an all-points alarm out for me and that I had been indicted for 
kidnapping the Stegalls by the Union County Grand Jury. 
 The FBI claims that it entered the case because I was an indicted fugi -
tive from justice in interstate flight to avoid prosecution. But technically the FBI 
is wrong, because I left Monroe early that night about 9 o’clock. When the grand 
jury indicted me sometime late the next day, I was already in New York. I certainly 
didn’t cross the North Carolina state line as an indicted fugitive. 
 But this technical error in the Federal charge that was made against me so 
that I might be “legally” hounded throughout the whole United States is not at all 
surprising when one thinks of the complete falsity of the state kidnapping charge. 
It is very important to note what happened immediately after I left Monroe. I 
was indicted on the testimony of two policemen (there is no court record that the 
Stegalls ever appeared before the grand jury). Then, with the warrant issued, my 
house was raided by about a hundred officials of the state, the Federal government, 
and the local police armed with machine guns, rifles, riot-guns and tear gas. They 
didn’t know that I had already left. They couldn’t believe that I had got away. 
 When I read about the grand jury indictment in the New York papers, it 
was accompanied by interviews of reporters with Mrs. Stegall. I don’t know what 
Mrs. Stegall finally told the grand jury, if she ever did appear before them. But I do 
know she couldn’t keep her story straight for the reporters and she never told the 
same version twice. 
 I read stories in The New York Post and The New York Times the follow-
ing day reporting that when they had questioned Mrs. Stegall she said-that I had 
chided the crowd for kidnapping her and her husband. Yet she turned around in 
the next paragraph and said that I was responsible because I was the ringleader of 
these people. Next I read that she claimed that they had been tied up in my house 
and held at gunpoint and that when I left the house they were still there. But after 
9 30


--- PAGE 13 ---
liams noted. “Nowhere in the annals of history does the record show a people 
delivered from bondage by patience alone.”
 King conceded that white violence and white intransigence had brought the
movement to “a stage of profound crisis.” African Americans were frustrated, he
said, and the “current calls for violence” reflected “a confused, anger-motivated drive
to strike back violently.” The Supreme Court’s 1954 mandate and even the triumph at
Montgomery had yielded small tokens, elaborate evasions, and widespread terror.
Only three responses presented themselves. One could practice “pure nonviolence,”
King said, but this path “could not readily attract large masses, for it requires
extraordinary discipline and courage.” A position that encompassed legitimate self-
defense was more practical. King pointed out that “all societies, from the most
primitive to the most cultured and civilized, accept [self-defense] as moral and legal.
The principle of self-defense, even involving weapons and bloodshed, has never
been condemned, even by Gandhi.” Here was where King the politician sensed his
constituency. “When the Negro uses force in self-defense,” he continued, “he does
not forfeit support—he may even win it, by the courage and self-respect it reflects.”
This widely accepted position was, of course, precisely Williams’s view—which was
King’s problem.
 The third and most unacceptable position, King argued, was “the advocacy of
violence as a tool of advancement, organized as in warfare, deliberately and
consciously.” Here, then, was the pale beyond which King sought to cast his
adversary. “Mr. Robert Williams would have us believe that there is no collective or
practical alternative,” King insisted. “He argues that we must be cringing and
submissive or take up arms.” Essentially, King had invented his own Robert
Williams, a kind of black Geronimo plotting military strikes against the white man, and
then responded to that Robert Williams. Lacking theological training and combative in
his manner, Williams made himself vulnerable to this caricature. But the philosophical
position from which King centered his own argument—preferring nonviolence, but
endorsing “the principle of self-defense, even involving weapons and bloodshed”—
was precisely the place where Williams had taken his stand. After the debate
appeared in Liberation and began to resonate throughout the movement, W. E. B. Du
Bois weighed in with a commentary, also entitled “Crusader Without Violence,” in
which he discouraged applause for King’s critique of Williams. In Montgomery, he
wrote, King had “stood firm without surrender,” but Du Bois considered it “a very
grave question as to whether or not the slavery and degradation of Negroes in
America has not been unnecessarily prolonged by the submission to evil.”
 More than the persuasive skills of their elders, the bold actions of African
American college students set these philosophical debates aside and gave the battal-
ions of nonviolence their brief but compelling historical moment. On February 1,
1960, four students from North Carolina Agricultural and Technical College 
walked into Woolworth’s in Greensboro, sat down at a segregated lunch counter, 
and asked to be served. Within two months, the sit-ins had spread to fifty-four 
communities across nine states of the old Confederacy, infusing the freedom move-
coming from out of the county, they were coming from other towns or calling 
long-distance on the telephone offering to join in the defense group that was being 
formed. But all the people who had been regularly affiliated with me and in the 
guard were in the back of my house because that was where we were assembling 
and checking out our weapons and ammunition for the night. The street crowd 
consisted of Negroes who had become angry and involved. They didn’t belong to 
any organization, to any one group. They were just armed private citizens who were 
fed up with oppression. 
 I went to the telephone and my wife gave the Stegalls a seat. When I came 
back the woman kept repeating, “If you’ll take us out of here we’ll be all right.” 
And I told her again that I didn’t have time to take her out. I told her that if I had 
been caught in her community under similar conditions I would already be dead. 
I said, “You see, we are not half as cruel as your people.” And she admitted that I 
was right. She told me that she was a church-going Christian and that she wanted 
to help us and she wished there was something she could do. And I told her that 
her husband could help us. And he said he didn’t know what he could do since he 
wasn’t well known around Monroe, that they lived in Marshville. She kept saying, 
“You’re Robert Williams!” and I told her, “Yes.” She said, “Well, I never met you 
before, but I heard a lot of talk about you.” And I said, “It was all bad.” And she 
said, “Yes, I must admit that it was all bad, but you’re not the type of fellow they 
say you are. You seem to be a good fellow. You’re much better than I thought.” 
 The telephone rang again. It was the chief of police, A. A. Mauney. He 
said, “Robert, you’ve caused a lot of race trouble in this town, but state troopers are 
coming. In thirty minutes you’ll be hanging in the courthouse square.” 
 He hung up. Someone else called and said there was a news flash on tele-
vision that troops were being sent to surround the town. Another woman called 
and said that she saw troops moving in and that the highway patrol was parking 
its cars behind the jailhouse. This was confirmed by a radio flash. Then one of our 
fellows called me to the door. I went out into the street and looked around. Both 
ends were being blocked off by police cars. I realized they were trying to trap me 
into waiting until the state troopers got there. I told Mabel, my wife, that we had to 
leave. I said she didn’t have time to take anything, just to get the children. I called 
Julian Mayfield who had left just after the Stegalls followed me in, and told him 
about the state troopers moving in around my area, advising him to leave Monroe 
immediately so that if something happened to me, someone would be free to tell 
the world the story. Then we left. 
In Flight But Not a Fugitive 
 Most people think that we left because we were fleeing an indictment. 
But the possibility of an indictment hadn’t even occurred to me at that time. Re -
member, I left Monroe knowing I had saved the lives of the Stegalls. We were flee-
ing because of the attitude of the state, because of the attitude of the chief of police, 
1029


--- PAGE 14 ---
ment with fresh troops and new tactics.
 Soon after the sit-ins began, Robert Williams followed a dozen black 
youths into Gamble’s Drug Store in downtown Monroe and was the only person ar-
rested. Marched down the street in handcuffs, a shotgun-toting guard on either side 
of him, Williams spoofed himself as “the dangerous stool-sitter bandit” and vowed 
that he had “never felt prouder in my life.” Young insurgents in Monroe mounted an
aggressive campaign of sit-ins that displayed its own unique style. “The Negroes
remained in each store only a short time,” the Charlotte Observer reported, “usually
until management closed the counters.” Under court orders to abide by the law or
face imprisonment, Williams defied the judge and marched with his young troops.
“We’re using hit-and-run tactics,” Williams told reporters. “They never know when
we’re coming or when we’re going to leave. That way we hope to wear them down,”
he said, managing to sound like a platoon leader even while participating in a passive
resistance campaign. “They were always doing something,” the manager of Jones
Drug Store recalled. “It’s a wonder somebody didn’t kill him.” It was no mystery to
Williams; the main difference between the sit-ins in Monroe and elsewhere was that
“not a single demonstrator was even spat upon during our sit-ins,” Williams 
claimed.
 The uneasy peace in Monroe would soon be broken, in large measure by
followers of King. In 1961, Reverend Paul Brooks of SCLC and James Forman, soon
to become president of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC),
came to Monroe in the company of seventeen Freedom Riders fresh out of jail in
Jackson, Mississippi. The young insurgents arrived in Monroe to launch a nonviolent
campaign in Robert Williams’s backyard, though Forman later denied any intention to
undermine Williams. One of the Freedom Riders announced that he had come to
Monroe because he considered “Mr. Robert F . Williams to be the most dangerous
person in America.” Another proclaimed: “If the fight for civil rights is to remain
nonviolent, we must be successful in Monroe. What happens here will determine the
course taken in many other communities throughout the South.”
 Williams welcomed the Freedom Riders warmly but had a similar under-
standing of the stakes. “I saw it first as a challenge,” he recalled, “but I also saw it 
as an opportunity to show that what King and them were preaching was bullshit.” 
T wo weeks of picketing at the Union County Courthouse grew progressively more
perilous for the Freedom Riders. Crowds of hostile white onlookers grew larger and
larger. Finally, on Sunday afternoon, August 28, a mob of several thousand furious
white people attacked the approximately thirty demonstrators, badly injuring many 
of them. Local police arrested the bleeding protestors. In his classic memoir, The 
Making of Black Revolutionaries, Forman later called this riot his “moment of death”
and “a nightmare I shall never forget.” To the consternation of SCLC, the nonviolent
crusade swiftly deteriorated into mob violence. Throughout the community, white
vigilantes attacked black citizens and even fired fifteen shots into the home of former
mayor J. Ray Shute, a white moderate who had befriended Williams.
 At the height of this violent chaos, a white married couple entered the black
en in town. Some of their children were missing and some children were in jail. 
As soon as the Stegalls’ car entered our street it was recognized and stopped at 
gunpoint less than a block away from my house. I was in the house at the time 
receiving telephone calls from all over town: calls from parents crying about their 
children who had participated in this demonstration; calls from Negroes reporting 
that they were beaten and asking what should be done, what action to take; calls 
from Negroes volunteering to fight, Negroes offering to join in armed groups so 
they defend the community. When I wasn’t on the phone I was out in the back of 
my house setting up a defense line before nightfall. 
 When the Stegalls were stopped, they were taken out of their car and 
brought into my yard. Someone called me out of the house and I came out and saw 
all these people milling around the Stegalls. I realized how angry these people were 
and I saw the circle closing in around the Stegalls. I knew that if just one person 
lost control of himself the Stegalls would be killed. I started driving the crowd away 
from them, forcing the crowd out of reach. 
 Then Mrs. Stegall said, “We’ve been kidnapped!” She kept repeating this. 
I said, “Lady, you’re not kidnapped. You can leave when you get ready but you got 
to go through this crowd and people are angry.” She stood up and looked at the 
crowd and she said, “You should take us out of here. You could take us out. If you 
took us out of here they wouldn’t bother us.” I said, “Lady, I didn’t bring you here 
and I’m not going to take you away. You knew that all these people would be here; 
you know how rioting has been going on in the town and you should have known 
better than to come into a place like this where the people are angry and upset 
like this. We are too busy now trying to defend our homes. I’m trying to set up a 
defense line and I don’t have time to bother with you. That’s your problem.” 
 While we were standing there talking, an airplane flew over us. The air -
plane probably was either from the Klan or the Sheriff’s Department. They use 
plenty of light planes and we were constantly getting calls threatening to bomb 
us from the air since my house was too well guarded to get us from the ground. 
So when this plane swooped over the house about fifteen men armed with high-
powered .30-caliber rifles opened fire. Mrs. Stegall had been very indignant and 
arrogant, but as soon as she saw this she realized how serious the situation was, that 
these people were angry and really meant business. She started shaking all over and 
almost became hysterical. Then a car with white men drove by, firing, and about 
twenty fellows fired back and you could see flames where the bullets struck the car. 
Mrs. Stegall could see this. 
 I started into the house and the crowd began screaming that the Stegalls 
should be killed. When I started walking up the front steps Mrs. Stegall was right 
up against me,walking right up against my body and her husband was right up 
against her. They followed me on into the house while all these people were still 
screaming that they should be killed. One man was begging for somebody to give 
him a gun and let him, please, let him kill them. 
 Some of the people in this crowd I had never seen before. Negroes were 
11 28


--- PAGE 15 ---
community for reasons that are unclear and drove straight into an angry black mob
milling near Williams’s house. “There was hundreds of niggers there,” the white
woman stated, “and they were armed, they were ready for war.” Black residents,
under the impression that the demonstrators downtown were being beaten and
perhaps slaughtered, threatened to kill the white couple. Williams, though busy
preparing to defend his home, rescued the two whites from the mob and led them into
his house, where they remained for about two hours. White authorities later charged
Williams and several other people with kidnapping, although the white couple met two
police officers on their way home and did not report their alleged abduction. The
woman later conceded that “at the time, I wasn’t even thinking about being
kidnapped.... [T]he papers, the publicity and all that stuff was what brought in that
kidnapping mess.” During a long night of racial terror, Williams slung a machine gun
over his shoulder and walked several miles with his wife and two small sons to
where Julian Mayfield waited with a car. The Williams family fled first to New York
City, then to Canada, then on to Cuba to escape the hordes of FBI agents who
combed the countryside in search of them. One of the agents assigned to search
locally for Williams reported his frustrations to FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover:
“Subject has become something of a ‘John Brown’ to Negroes around Monroe and
they will do anything for him.”
 The FBI dragnet never snared Williams, but it did not take Hoover long to 
hear from him. Every Friday night from 11:00 to midnight on Radio Havana, Wil-
liams hosted “Radio Free Dixie,” a program that could be heard from 1961 to 1964 
as far away as New York and Los Angeles. From Cuba, Williams continued to edit 
The Crusader for a circulation that eventually grew to forty thousand. In 1962, his 
book Negroes With Guns, published from Cuba, became the single most important 
intellectual influence on Huey P . Newton, soon to found the Black Panther Party 
in Oakland. Copies of The Crusader traveled down the Mississippi back roads with
SNCC organizers: “this leaflet is being distributed by SNCC and COFO [Council of
Federated Organizations] workers among U.S. Negroes,” the Mississippi State
Sovereignty Commission complained in the spring of 1964. Later that year, when
SNCC began to veer away from nonviolence, members cited Williams approvingly in
the fierce internal debates.
 As black activists began to reject even the tactical pretense of nonviolence, the
influence of Robert Williams continued to spread. “Armed self-defense is a fact of life
in black communities—north and south—despite the pronouncements of the
‘leadership,’” a North Carolina activist wrote to Williams. Long before Stokely
Carmichael and Willie Ricks led the chants of “Black Power” that riveted national
media attention in the summer of 1966, most elements of that ambiguous slogan
already were in place. “Your doctrine of self-defense set the stage for the
acceptance of the Deacons For Defense and Justice,” Lawrence Henry told Williams
in the spring of 1966. “As quiet as it is being kept, the Black man is swinging away
from King and adopting your tit-for-tat philosophy.”
 Williams’s influence was not limited to the South. “As I am certain you realize,”
them. 
 The white mob was already armed. The police disarmed some of the men 
attempting to rescue the Freedom Riders and turned these additional weapons over 
to the mob. Firing broke out at the picket line when the police and the mob tried 
to prevent the English exchange student from getting into one of the rescue cars 
driven by three armed Negroes. The police held Negroes while white racists beat 
them up. At first the victims were all Freedom Riders and the local non-violent 
students, but soon Negroes were attacked indiscriminately as the mob fanned out 
all over town. They were massing for an attack against our community. 
We Aim for Self-Defense 
 So many Freedom Riders and Negroes were arrested that many prisoners 
with legitimate charges against them were released from jail to make room. Many 
of these people who came out of jail reported to me that students were bleeding 
to death there without any medical attention. I called the chief of police and told 
him that I had reports that the students were not getting medical attention and that 
their lives were in danger. I told him I would give him just thirty minutes to get 
medical attention for them and that if they didn’t receive medical aid within thirty 
minutes, we would march on the jail. About fifteen minutes later James Forman 
called from the hospital to let me know that they were receiving medical care. Just 
after that, Julian Mayfield returned and reported that members of the white mob, 
which now included some uniformed police, were near the railroad tracks and fir-
ing down at Negroes who had fled town. At the approach of darkness, white people 
started driving through our community, shouting and screaming. Some fired out 
of their cars and threw objects at people on the streets. Many of the colored people 
started arming, exchanging guns, borrowing ammunition and forming guards for 
the night to defend the community from the mob massing in town. On the block 
where I live there were about 300 people milling around the street. 
 About 6 o’clock in the evening a white couple, Mr. And Mrs. Bruce 
Stegall, came riding through our neighborhood. They were recognized as people 
who had driven through town the day before with a banner on their car announc-
ing an “Open Season On Coons.” It meant that this was killing time. 
 People have asked why a racist would take his wife into a riot-torn com -
munity like ours on that Sunday. But this is nothing new to those who know the 
nature of Klan raiding. Many Southern racists consider white women a form of 
insulation because of the old tradition that a Negro is supposed to be intimidated 
by a white woman and will not dare to offend her. White women are taken along 
on Klan raids so that if anything develops into a fight it will appear that the Negro 
attacked a woman and the Klansman will of course be her protector. Mrs. Stegall 
was brought along as insulation by her husband. They were trying to see what de -
fenses we were preparing for that night. 
 The Negroes out on the street were raging. Some of them had been beat-
1227


--- PAGE 16 ---
Richard Gibson, editor of Now! magazine in New York, wrote to Williams in 1965,
“Malcolm’s removal from the scene makes you the senior spokesman for Afro-
American militants.” Life magazine reported in 1966 that Williams’s “picture is
prominently displayed in extremist haunts in the big city ghettos.” Clayborne Carson
names Williams as one of two central influences—the other being Malcolm X—on the
1966 formation of the Black Panther Party For Self-Defense in Oakland, “the most
widely known black militant political organization of the late 1960s.” The Central
Intelligence Agency (CIA) exaggerated considerably in 1969 when it reported that
Williams “has long been the ideological leader of the Black Panther Party.” It is closer
to say that the Panthers were “a logical development” from the philosophy of
Williams, as Reginald Major asserted in his 1971 book, A Panther Is a Black Cat .
According to Williams, he “talked to Bobby Seale and Mrs. [Kathleen] Cleaver by
telephone when I was in Africa” in 1968 and the leadership “asked me to become
Foreign Minister of the Panthers.” At that moment, Williams had already been named
president-in-exile of two of the most influential revolutionary nationalist groups: the
Revolutionary Action Movement, which the CIA believed to be “the most dangerous
of all the Black Power organizations,” and the Detroit-based Republic of New Africa.
“Despite his overseas activities,” the CIA reported in 1969, “Williams has managed to
becoming an outstanding figure, possibly the outstanding figure, in the black
extremist movement in the United States.”
 Even though he became friends with Che Guevara and Fidel Castro himself,
Williams grew uneasy in Cuba: he yearned to return home. As the Soviet strings on
the Cuban revolution shortened, Williams resisted pressure to make his own politics
conform to the Soviet line. “I am under constant attack by the [Communist Party of
the United States],” Williams wrote to a friend in the mid-1960s. “They are trying to
cut off my facilities here in Cuba. One would think I am Hitler and Wall Street
combined.” An FBI informant as early as 1962 stated that Williams “has stubbed his
toes” with Cuban Communists through his “criticism of [the] Communist Party for
barring Negroes from leadership” and that he “may not be able to regain his footing.”
The Stalinists were “getting worse than the crackers in Monroe,” Williams com -
plained in 1964. “Things are about to the stage when I had to leave Monroe in a
hurry.” Williams persuaded Castro to let him travel to North Vietnam in 1964, 
where he met Ho Chi Minh and wrote antiwar propaganda aimed at African Ameri-
can soldiers. In 1965, the Williams family relocated to Beijing, where Williams was
“lionized and feted by top Peking leaders,” according to CIA intelligence reports. The
Williams family dined with Mao Tse-tung and moved in the highest circles of the
Chinese government for three years. Like the Black Power movement itself, as
Williams got farther away from his roots in the South he sometimes drifted into
apocalyptic nonsense. His 1967 essay, “The Potential of a Minority Revolution,” for
example, depicted a scenario in which black saboteurs and guerrilla enclaves could
bring down the U.S. government. Though Williams had been one of the best
organizers in the black freedom movement, his isolation from any local constituency
made him vulnerable to the same frustrations and delusions that plagued the rest of
who’s lost in the woods.” He said, “I don’t give a damn who he is. You asked for 
violence and now you’re getting it, see; you’re getting just what you deserved.” So I 
told him, “Do you know one thing . . . you are the biggest fool in the whole world!” 
[Ellipsis in original] He became infuriated and started raging on the telephone 
and told me to shut up. I told him that he may be the Governor’s assistant but he 
couldn’t tell me to shut up. He said, “If you don’t stop talking to me like that I’ll 
hang up.” And he finally hung up. No protection came. 
 Each time the Freedom Riders would get ready to go on the picket line 
they would call the FBI in Charlotte and ask for protection. The FBI would say, 
“We’re on our way.” But they would never be there when anything happened. On 
Saturday when the Freedom Riders were picketing in town and the taxicabs that 
had been transporting them to the line had started out to pick them up, the local 
white racists gathered together and blocked the road. This meant the Freedom 
Riders had to walk back to the colored community which was almost a mile away. 
The mob followed the Freedom Riders along the streets, throwing stones at them 
and threatening to kill them. When they came into the colored community, the 
colored people who were not participating in the picket line became very upset that 
our community had been invaded by a mob chasing Freedom Riders. Many of the 
colored people started stoning cars and beating back the white racists. 
Chapter 5
Self Defense Prevents a Pogrom: 
Racists Engineer a Kidnapping Frameup
 Sunday morning the chief of police and his men drove through the coun-
ty urging whites to come to town to fight the Freedom Riders. In addition, people 
were coming in from other counties and from South Carolina. An organization 
called the Minute Men had brought people in. 
 By afternoon thousands of white racists had gathered in town, concen -
trating at the courthouse square. At 4 o’clock James Forman, one of the picket 
captains, called my home requesting four taxicabs within the hour. He said that the 
racists were threatening to assault the line and complained of police indifference. 
Forman was to end up in jail with a split head one hour later. 
 At 4:30 the Negro cab company called to report that they couldn’t get 
through to the picketers because every entrance into town was blocked off. Min -
utes later a couple of cars driven by our people came racing into the neighborhood. 
They had just made it in from town to report that the mob had started to attack the 
picket line, shots had been fired and the town was in the grip of a full-scale riot. 
 When the self-defense guard, which up to now had stayed away from the 
courthouse square, heard that the lives of the Freedom Riders and local non-violent 
youth were in danger, they jumped into their cars and rode into town, breaking 
through the mob’s blockade to rescue the picketers. Julian Mayfield went with 
13 26


--- PAGE 17 ---
the movement in the last half of the 1960s.
 In the late 1960s, when the Nixon administration moved toward opening
diplomatic relations with China, Williams bartered his almost exclusive knowledge of
the Chinese government for safe passage home and a Ford Foundation–sponsored
post at the Center for Chinese Studies at the University of Michigan. Not that the
entire federal apparatus was happy to welcome him home: the Internal Security
Division of the Department of Justice observed that “Williams could be the person to
fill the role of national leader of the black extremists. We should offset attempts by
him to assume such a position.” Williams, however, wrote to a friend that “a lot of
people are going to be surprised after my arrival not to find me fighting for leadership
the way many others are doing.” Returning to family ties and local activism, Williams
spent the last twenty-seven years of his life in the small, trout-fishing village of
Baldwin in western Michigan and died on October 15, 1996.
 A week after his death, Rosa Parks climbed slowly into a church pulpit in
Monroe, North Carolina. Beneath her lay the body of Robert F . Williams, clad in a
gray suit given to him by Mao Tse-tung and draped with a black, red, and green Pan-
African flag. Parks told the congregation that she and those who marched with Martin
Luther King Jr. in Alabama had always admired Williams “for his courage and his
commitment to freedom. The work that he did should go down in history and never be
forgotten.” Her presence in that pulpit, nearly inexplicable when viewed through the
traditional narrative of “the civil rights movement,” demonstrates in almost poetic
fashion that historians should reexamine the relationship between “civil rights” and
“Black Power.” Our vision of the postwar African American freedom movement prior
to 1965 as one characterized solely and inevitably by nonviolent “civil rights” protest
obscures the full complexity of racial politics. It idealizes black history, downplays
the oppression of jim crow society, and even understates the achievements of
African American resistance. Worse still, our cinematic “civil rights movement” blurs
the racial dilemmas that follow us into the twenty-first century.
 The life of Robert Williams underlines many aspects of the ongoing black
freedom struggle—the decisive racial significance of World War II, the impact of the
cold war on the black freedom struggle, the centrality of questions of sexuality and
gender in racial politics, and the historical presence of a revolutionary Caribbean. But
foremost it testifies to the extent to which, throughout World War II and the postwar
years, there existed among African Americans a current of militancy—a current that
included the willingness to defend home and community by force. This facet of
African American life lived in tension and in tandem with the compelling moral
example of nonviolent direct action. No doubt those who began to chant “Black
Power” in the mid-1960s felt that slogan with an urgency specific to their immediate
circumstances. But then, as now, many aspects of its meaning endure as legacies 
from earlier African American struggles. Above the desk where Williams completed
his memoirs just before his death, there still hangs an ancient rifle—a gift, he said,
from his grandmother.
  • • • • • •
across the line and stopped at a restaurant. There they were recognized and attacked 
by white racists. In the scramble one of the Freedom Riders could escape only by 
running into the woods; the others had to flee in the car, leaving him behind. We 
notified the Monroe city police, our county police, the Charlotte police, and the 
Mecklenburg County police that a Freedom Rider was in the woods, missing, and 
the racists were trying to catch him. We were afraid he would be lynched. We asked 
them to intercede. The Monroe police refused. The Union County police refused. 
Rev. Brooks called the Governor’s office. Governor Terry Sanford was out, they 
said. But Rev. Brooks got an opportunity to speak to the Governor’s chief aide, 
Hugh B. Cannon, and complained to him about the lack of police protection 
for the Freedom Riders. The Governor’s aide kept talking about Robert Williams. 
Rev. Brooks said he was not calling about Robert Williams; he was calling about a 
missing Freedom Rider. He said that they were pacifists, non-violent people, and 
wanted police protection. The Governor’s aide, Hugh B. Cannon, replied, ‘If you’re 
a real pacifist you had better get the hell out of Monroe, man, because there’s going 
to be plenty of violence there.” 
 Rev. Brooks kept trying to appeal to him for police protection but finally 
gave up. He said, “Since you’re talking about Robert Williams so much, he’s right 
here. Do you want to talk to him?” The Governor’s aide said, Yes. 
 Cannon and I had talked about two weeks before when I had asked for 
state police protection. Instead the Governor had sent an Uncle Tom representa -
tive named Dr. Larkins, who is supposed to be the Governor’s troubleshooter. He 
came and held a secret meeting with me to find out what it would take to quiet 
things down. I gave him the ten-point program and it shocked him. He said that it 
was too much, that the demands were too high, but he would take it up with the 
Governor anyway. And he said that, well, he understood I had been undergoing 
economic pressure and that this was wrong and that maybe I could get a job, that 
maybe the state could help me if we just didn’t start any trouble around here. 
 When I called back the Governor’s office and told Hugh B. Cannon 
about this bribe attempt, he replied, “You mean to tell me that you’re not dead 
yet?” And I told him, “No, I’m not dead, not yet, but when I die a lot of people 
may die with me.” So he said, “Well, you may not be dead, but you’re going to get 
killed.” I kept telling him that we wanted protection, trying to avoid bloodshed. He 
said, “If you’re trying to avoid bloodshed you shouldn’t be agitating.” 
The Governor and the FBI 
 So this Friday night, when Rev. Paul Brooks finished talking to Hugh B. 
Cannon and he said he wanted to talk to me, I got on the phone and told him what 
had happened. He said, “Well, you’re getting just what you deserve down there. 
You’ve been asking for violence, now you’re getting it.” I told him that I wasn’t ap-
pealing to him for myself. I was appealing to him for a pacifist. And I told him, 
“Besides, I’m not appealing to you for a Negro; this happens to be a white boy 
1425


--- PAGE 18 ---
Chapter 3
The Struggle for Militancy in the NAACP
 
 Until my statement hit the national newspapers the national office of the 
NAACP had paid little attention to us. We had received little help from them in 
our struggles and our hour of need. Now they lost no time. The very next morn -
ing I received a long distance telephone call from the national office wanting to 
know if I had been quoted correctly. I told them that I had. They said the NAACP 
was not an organization of violence. I explained that I knew that it was not an 
organization of violence. They said that I had made violent statements. I replied 
that I made these statements as Robert Williams, not as the National Association 
for the Advancement of Colored People. They said that because I was an official 
of the organization anything that I said would be considered NAACP policy, that 
,we were too close together. I asked them why if we were so close together they 
hadn’t come to my rescue all this time when I had been the unemployed victim of 
the Klan’s economic pressure and when I had had all of my insurance canceled as a 
poor insurance risk. I asked them why they didn’t then consider our closeness. 
Suspension, Distortion and Re-election 
 In the next few hours Roy Wilkins of the NAACP suspended me from of-
fice. I didn’t learn about it from the national office. I first heard of it when Southern 
radio stations announced and kept repeating every thirty minutes that the NAACP 
had suspended me for advocating violence because this was not a means for the so-
lution of the race problem and that the NAACP was against Negroes using violence 
as a means of self-defense.  
 Our Union County NAACP was one of the few interracial branches in 
the South. We had some white pacifist members, and when I was suspended they 
sent a telegram to the national office stating that they were white Southerners and 
that they were pacifists, but they protested my suspension on the ground that they 
understood the problems in the community and that the national office did not. 
This telegram was never made public by the NAACP . And not a single paper ever 
printed the fact that ours was an interracial branch and that even Southern white 
pacifists supported my position. 
 Nevertheless, this all developed into a national debate. We found out 
that there was no provision in the NAACP constitution to justify or authorize this 
hypocritical action by Roy Wilkins. I demanded some sort of hearing. Wilkins 
turned the matter over to the NAACP’s paternalistic Committee on Branches, and 
in New York City on June 3, 1959, they conducted what turned out to be a trial 
where I fought the suspension. The committee ruled that I was to be suspended for 
isted in the United States especially in such a “progressive” Southern state as North 
Carolina was supposed to be. So we encouraged these visits. Julian Mayfield, the 
young Afro-American novelist and an old friend of Monroe, was there. A young 
exchange student, Constance Lever of Durham, England, was a guest at our house 
along with Mrs. Mae Mallory, who had been active in the movement for true inte-
gration in her own city, New York. 
 When the Monroe Non-Violent Action Committee set up its picket line 
on the first day, the Freedom Riders seemed convinced they were making real prog-
ress. One Freedom Rider even returned from the line overjoyed. He said, “You 
know, a policeman smiled at me in town today while I was on the line.” I laughed 
and told him not to pay that any attention because the policeman was probably 
smiling at the thought of how best to kill him. Constance, the English exchange 
student, had joined the picket line. She said, “Oh, I don’t think these people are so 
bad. I just think you don’t know how to approach them. I noticed that they looked 
at me in a friendly way in town today. I tried to explain to her that these people 
were trying to win her and the others over in the hope that they would leave Mon-
roe. The day that these people realized that they couldn’t win the Freedom Riders 
over, they would show their true nature. A few days later, Constance Lever was 
arrested by the Monroe police and charged with “incitement to riot.” 
The Racists Act by Violence 
 It was on the third day that the townspeople started insulting the pickets 
and their politeness turned to viciousness. A policeman knocked one picket to the 
ground and threatened to break his camera. Another was arrested and all the time 
the white crowd heckled. When one of the white Freedom Riders smiled back at 
the hecklers, two of Monroe’s “pure white flowers” spit in his face. Tensions contin-
ued to mount. 
 On the fourth day a white Freedom Rider was attacked on the street in 
town and beaten by three whites. The police broke this up and promised to arrest 
the white people who had attacked this Freedom Rider. So the Freedom Riders 
kept on thinking there was a possibility that the law would be on their side be -
cause they had publicly proclaimed themselves to be non-violent. I told them it 
was all right for them to be pacifists but they shouldn’t proclaim this to the world 
because they were just inviting full-scale violent attack. In the past we hadn’t had 
any victims of the type of violence they were beginning to experience because we 
had shown a willingness to fight. We had had picket lines and sit-ins and nobody 
had successfully attacked our lines. But they said they were struggling from a moral 
point of view. 
“Ain’t You Dead Yet?” 
 That night the Freedom Riders went for a ride into Mecklenburg County 
Negroes With Guns: excerpts
15 24


--- PAGE 19 ---
six months’ time, after which I would automatically be reinstated. 
 I didn’t think of doing anything more about the suspension; there was a 
more important matter at hand. As a result of the trial I was more convinced than 
ever that one of our greatest and most immediate needs was better communication 
within the race. The real Afro-American struggle was merely a disjointed network 
of pockets of resistance and the shameful thing about it was that Negroes were rely-
ing upon the white man’s inaccurate reports as their sources of information about 
these isolated struggles. I went home and concentrated all of my efforts into devel-
oping a newsletter that would in accurate and no uncertain terms inform both Ne-
groes and whites of Afro-American liberation struggles taking place in the United 
States and about the particular struggle we were constantly fighting in Monroe. The 
first Issue of The Crusader came off the mimeograph machine June 26, 1959. 
 Then at the last minute I decided to appeal the committee’s decision to 
the NAACP’s 50th National Convention which was meeting in New York that 
July. The national office found it necessary to issue a special convention pamphlet 
attacking me. This pamphlet tried to confuse my demand that Negroes meet vio -
lence with violence as a means of self-defense with the advocacy of lynch law. In its 
own way the national office contributed to the erroneous impression played up by 
the racist press that I was agitating for race war and the indiscriminate slaughter of 
white people. 
 My suspension was upheld by the convention delegates, many of whom 
either felt or were pressured into seeing the vote as a question of publicly sup -
porting or disavowing the NAACP national leadership. But on the real issue at 
hand, delegate sentiment forced the national leadership to support the concept of 
self-defense. The preamble to the resolutions passed by that convention read, “. . . 
we do not deny but reaffirm the right of an individual and collective self-defense 
against unlawful assaults.” 
 While I was suspended, the people in my branch voted to make my wife 
president to serve in my place. And at the end of the six months, instead of going 
back into office automatically, I held an election because I didn’t want the NAACP 
national office to think that they were doing me any special favor. We had the elec-
tion and I was re-elected unanimously. 
 The national office of the NAACP was determined to keep within the 
good graces of a lot of the influential Northern whites who were disturbed by our 
militancy. They maintained an indifferent attitude to our branch. We had a char -
ter and that was all. We were unable to secure assistance from them in any of our 
school integration cases and our sit-in cases. 
 In 1960 we started a sit-in campaign. We became the thirteenth town in 
North Carolina to start sit-in demonstrations. Though the NAACP wasn’t taking 
notice, our sit-ins proved that self-defense and non-violence could be successfully 
combined. There was less violence in the Monroe sit-ins than in any other sit-ins 
in the South. In other communities there were Negroes who had their skulls frac -
tured, but not a single demonstrator was even spat upon during our sit-ins. We 
crowded with colored youths just out of school. They have no means of gainful 
employment or wholesome recreation. 
 For reasons such as these we believe that the basic ill is an economic ill, 
our being denied the right to have a decent standard of living. 
The Freedom Riders Come to Monroe 
 We had planned to put picket lines around the county courthouse to 
draw attention to our program and to apply pressure for its achievement. At this 
time seventeen Freedom Riders came to our support, perhaps the first time that 
they engaged in a struggle over such fundamental demands as our program pre -
sented. Hitherto, as I’ve said, the goals were peripheral and while important, ame-
nable to small compromises. For example, we had won integration in the public 
library. On these peripheral matters, leaders of the Sit-In Movements can meet 
with city and state officials and win concessions. I believe this is an important part 
of the overall Negro struggle. But when these concessions are used for propaganda 
by negro “leaders” as examples of the marvelous progress the Afro-American is 
supposedly making, thereby shifting attention from the basic evils, such victories 
cease to be even peripheral and become self-defeating. When we tackle basic evils, 
however, the racists won’t give an inch. This, I think, is why the Freedom Riders 
who came to Monroe met with such naked violence and brutality. That and the 
pledge of non-violence. 
 The Freedom Riders reflected an attitude of certain Negro leaders who 
said that I had mishandled the situation and that they would show us how to get 
victory without violence. With them came the Reverend Paul Brooks, sent by the 
Reverend Martin Luther King, Jr., to act as a “trouble-shooter” for the Freedom 
Riders, should the need arise, and to work with the community, helping it to de -
velop non-violence techniques and tactics. I disagreed with their position but was 
more than willing to cooperate. The community rented a house for them which 
was christened “Freedom House” in their honor. They were joined by some of our 
militant youth who had participated in the picket lines around the swimming pool 
the previous month. Together they formed the Monroe Non-Violent Action Com-
mittee. 
 Although I myself would not take the non-violent oath, I asked the peo -
ple of the community to support them and their non-violent campaign. Monroe 
students took the non-violent oath, promising to adhere to the non-violent disci -
pline, which, along with other principles, prohibited self-defense. I also stated that 
if they could show me any gains won from the racists by non-violent methods, I 
too would become a pacifist. 
 At the same time, several observers were in Monroe to see for themselves 
what so-called democracy was like in Union County. We knew that people living 
in other sections of the country and other countries of the world would find it hard 
to believe that such vicious racist conditions, such brutality and ruthlessness, ex -
1623


--- PAGE 20 ---
had less violence because we had shown the willingness and readiness to fight and 
defend ourselves. We didn’t appear on the streets of Monroe as beggars depending 
upon the charity and generosity of white supremacists. We appeared as people with 
strength, and it was to the mutual advantage of all parties concerned that peaceful 
relations be maintained. 
 While the demonstrations were taking place I was arrested and finally sen-
tenced to serve thirty days on the chain gang. The NAACP was supposed to handle 
my case. They handled it up to the State Supreme Court, but then they dropped 
my case from appeal without telling me and with only a few days left in which to 
file an appeal. I discovered this through the newspapers because my case had been 
consolidated with that of seven students from Chapel Hill, N.C. The newspapers 
listed the names of the defendants whose NAACP lawyers had filed appeals and I 
was the only one in the group whose name did not appear.  I appealed to the 
Emergency Civil Liberties Committee. They took my case up and filed an appeal 
to the U.S. Supreme Court. 
“A Letter from De Boss” 
 All this did not mean that the NAACP national office was short on ad -
vice. While they did not feel responsible enough to take the appeal to higher courts, 
they did feel responsible enough to send me a letter upon my return from Cuba in 
the summer of 1960. I subsequently made two trips to Cuba. 
 My experiences in Monroe and with the NAACP which had resulted 
in launching The Crusader were also sharpening my awareness of the struggles of 
Negroes in every part of the world, how they were treated, their victories and their 
defeats. It was clear from the first days that Afro-Cubans were part of the Cuban 
revolution on a basis of complete equality and my trips confirmed this fact. A 
Negro, for example, was head of the Cuban armed forces and no one could hide 
that fact from us here in America. To me this revolution was a real thing, not one 
of those phony South American palace revolutions. There was a real drive to bring 
social justice to all the Cubans, including the black ones. Beginning late in 1959 
I had begun to run factual articles about Cuba in The Crusader, pointing up the 
racial equality that existed there. The articles seem to have stirred up the national 
office for they sent me a letter which included statements such as these: 
 “. . . I wonder, however, whether you are fully aware of the dangers and 
disadvantages of the course of action you seem to favor. I have followed closely 
the events in Cuba in recent months and in particular, Dr. Castro’s visit to the 
United Nations this fall. Regardless of the merits of the Cuban cause I was greatly 
disturbed by the frequent show of insincerity which, I believe, should give you 
food for thought before you find yourself used as just another pawn in the present 
unfortunate feud between Cuba and our country. 
 “. . . It is a callous interference in a native American problem and should 
be recognized as such by anyone in a responsible position of leadership in the 
Aldermen to use its influence to endeavor to: 
1. Induce factories in this county to hire without discrimination. 
2. Induce the local employment agency to grant non-whites the same 
privileges given to whites. 
3. Instruct the Welfare Agency that non-whites are entitled to the same 
privileges, courtesies and consideration given to whites. 
4. Construct a swimming pool in the Winchester Avenue area of Mon-
roe. 
5. Remove all signs in the city of Monroe designating one area for col-
ored and another for whites. 
6. Instruct the Superintendent of Schools that he must prepare to de -
segregate the city school no later than 1962. 
7. Provide adequate transportation for all school children. 
8. Formally request the State Medical Board to permit Dr. Albert E. 
Perry, Jr., to practice medicine in Monroe and Union County. 
9. Employ Negroes in skilled or supervisory capacities in the City Gov-
ernment. 
10. ACT IMMEDIATELY on all of these proposals and inform the 
committee and the public of your actions. 
(signed) 
Robert F . Williams 
Albert E. Perry, Jr., M.D. 
John W. McDow 
 Our demands for equal employment rights were the most important of 
the ten points. Many plants were moving in from the North--runaway industry 
from the North moving to avoid labor unions, seeking low-priced workers in the 
South. They received considerable tax-supported concessions from the local In -
dustrial Development Commission and they didn’t hire any Negroes. In fact, lo -
cal bigoted officials had done everything in their power to prevent Negroes from 
obtaining employment. They had even gone so far as to stipulate that the new 
industries could not hire Afro-Americans if they expected the special concessions 
made possible through the taxation of us all. This amounted to taxation without 
representation and it was one of our biggest complaints. 
 As a result of this racist policy, out of approximately 3,000 Afro-Ameri -
cans in Monroe, there are 1,000 unemployed--persons unable to obtain jobs even 
as janitors, maids and porters. And maids and porters, when employed, earn at 
most $15 for a six-day week. One of the few kinds of work available, cotton pick -
ing, pays all of $2.50 for 100 pounds of picked cotton; at breakneck speed it takes 
a long day, much more than eight hours, to pick 150 pounds. Virtually every Negro 
high school and college graduate in Monroe has to leave to find employment. This 
is not true of the white graduates. Negroes are even laid off in the summer so white 
college youth can work at home. Meanwhile, each summer our street corners are 
17 22


--- PAGE 21 ---
American Negro movement. 
 “. . . the present Cuban attempts to endear themselves to American Ne -
groes are obviously caused by ulterior motives. (Let me just ask you how the Ameri-
can Negro tourist would feel in Cuba at the constant chant of ‘Cuba si, Yanqui 
no!’) 
 “. . . Are you willing to forsake the important support of that section of 
the people who are equally opposed to suppression of Negro rights in our country? 
 “. . . Does not the unfortunate example of the great American Negro 
singer Paul Robeson1 show you the dangers and mistakes of the road which you 
seem to be choosing? What has Paul Robeson with all his greatness done for the 
American Negro in his present struggle for equality: The answer, regrettable as it is, 
must be: Nothing.” 
 These excerpts were reprinted in The Crusader and replied to in this way: 
 “Only a fool or a mercenary hypocrite could muster the gall to call a 
nation and its great leader insincere in dealing with the captive blacks of North 
America when in the course of their daily lives they display the greatest measure of 
racial equality and social justice in the world today. It is certainly a first magnitude 
truism that social justice starts at home and spreads abroad. In past months I have 
twice been to Cuba and there is nothing insincere about my being made to feel that 
I was a member of the human race for the first time in my life. If this is America’s 
idea of insincerity, then heaven help this nation to become insincere like Fidel Cas-
tro and Free Cuba in granting persons of African descent entrance into the human 
race. 
 “As for my being ‘used as a pawn in the struggle of Cuba’ against imperi-
alist and racist North America, I prefer to be on the side of right than on the side 
of Jim Crow and oppression. I prefer to be used as an instrument to convey the 
truth of a people who respect the rights of man, rather than to be used as an Uncle 
Tom whitewasher of black oppression and injustice and an apologist for America’s 
hypocrisy. Cuba’s aversion for America’s inhumanity to man is not an interference 
in a ‘native American problem.’ It is common knowledge that the master race of the 
‘free world’ is out to export North American manufactured racism. Racism in the 
U.S.A. is as much a world problem as was Nazism. If the U.S.A. is to be the only 
nation exempt from the Human Rights Charter of the United Nations, then that 
august body is a party to the great transgressions against America’s captive people. 
I, for one, refuse to remain silent and cooperate with the very force that is seeking 
after my destruction. 
 “The racists in America are the most brutal people on earth. It is fool -
hardy for an oppressed Afro-American to take the attitude that we should keep 
this life-death struggle a family affair. We are the oppressed, it is only natural for us 
to air our grievances at home and abroad. This race fight in the U.S.A. is no more 
a fight to be fought just by Americans than is the fight for black liberation to be 
conducted by colored only. Any struggle for freedom in the world today affects the 
stability of the whole society of man. Why would you make our struggle an excep-
their refusal were: “because of the break in diplomatic relations between the United 
States and Cuba, the government of the United States cannot extend normal pro-
tective services to its citizens visiting Cuba.” 
 This false pretense of being interested in protecting me was a farce of 
the first magnitude and classic hypocrisy. Numerous threats and four attempts of 
murder had been made on my life in the preceding three weeks and the would-be 
assassins, aided and abetted by local officials, were offered immunity from law by 
the deliberate silence of Federal officials to whom I had continuously appealed for 
“normal protective services.” The Federal government couldn’t possibly have been 
interested in protection for me and my family, for they passed up many opportuni-
ties to protect us here at home. 
 This all happened a month before I was forced to leave Monroe. 
Chapter 4
Non-Violence Emboldens 
the Racists: A Week of Terror 
 In our branch of the NAACP there was a general feeling that we were in 
a deep and bitter struggle against racists and that we needed to involve as many 
Negroes as possible and to make the struggle as meaningful as possible. We felt 
that the single issue of the swimming pool was too narrow for our needs, that what 
we needed was a broad program with special attention to jobs, welfare, and other 
economic needs. 
 I think this was an important step forward. The struggles of the Freedom 
Riders and the Sit-in Movements have concentrated on a single goal: the right to 
eat at a lunch counter, the right to sit anywhere on a bus. These are important rights 
because their denial is a direct personal assault on a Negro’s dignity. It is important 
for the racists to maintain these peripheral forms of segregation. They establish an 
atmosphere that supports a system. By debasing and demoralizing the black man in 
small personal matters, the system eats away the sense of dignity and pride which 
are necessary to challenge a racist system. But the fundamental core of racism is 
more than atmosphere--it can be measured in dollars and cents and unemploy -
ment percentages. We therefore decided to present a program that ranged from the 
swimming pool to jobs. 
The Monroe Program
 
On Aug. 15, 1961, on behalf of our Chapter I presented to the Monroe Board of 
Aldermen a ten point program that read as follows: 
We, the undersigned citizens of Monroe, petition the City Board of 
1821


--- PAGE 22 ---
tion? 
 “I am not afraid of alienating white friends of our liberation movement. If 
they really believe in freedom they will not resent deviation from the old worn path 
that has led us in fruitless circles. If they are insincere they are no more than T rojan 
horses infiltrating our ranks to strike us a treacherous, nefarious blow on behalf 
of those and that which they pretend to detest. For if they resent our becoming 
truly liberated, they will detest us for not following their misguidance and skillful 
subterfuge designed to prevent our arrival to the promised land. They speak much 
of tolerance, but they display unlimited intolerance toward those Afro-Americans 
who refuse to become their puppets and yes-man Uncle Toms. 
 “It is strange that I am asked how a ‘Negro’ American tourist would feel 
in Cuba hearing the constant chant of ‘Cuba Si, Yanqui No!’ No one has bothered 
to ask how it feels to constantly face ‘White Only’ signs. These signs mean ‘White 
yes, Colored no!’ No one has asked me how it feels to be marched under guard with 
felons along a public street to jail for sitting on a ‘white only’ stool. On hearing. 
‘Cuba Si, Yanqui No!’ and having lived all of my life under American oppression, I 
was emotionally moved to join the liberation chorus. I knew it didn’t apply to me 
because the white Christians of the ‘free world’ have excluded me from everything 
‘yanqui.’ 
 “You make a cardinal mistake when you fail to give the great Paul Robe-
son credit for making a great contribution to the American ‘Negro’ struggle. Paul 
Robeson is living proof that the Afro-American need not look upon the United 
States as ‘Nigger heaven’ and the last stop for us on this earth. Paul is living proof 
that other civilized societies honor and respect black people for the things that 
‘Free America’ curses, oppresses and starves for. Paul has proven that all black men 
are not for sale for thirty pieces of silver. He has lit a candle that many of the new 
generation will follow. 
 “Yes, wherever there is oppression in the world today, it is the concern 
of the entire race. My cause is the same as the Asians against the imperialist. It is 
the same as the African against the white savage. It is the same as Cuba against the 
white supremacist imperialist. When I become a part of the mainstream of Ameri-
can life, based on universal justice, then and then only can I see a possible mutual 
cause for unity against outside interference.” 
 I don’t want to leave the impression that I am against the NAACP; on 
the contrary I think it’s an important weapon in the freedom struggle and I want 
to strengthen it. I don’t think they should be worrying about Cuba when there is 
plenty to worry about in our country. They know, as I know, the extent to which 
the state governments and the Federal government ignored our appeals for help 
and protection. 
Hypocrisy and Run-around 
 After we closed the pool, as I’ve already described, the racists in Monroe 
went wild. On that same day, after we had gone home, a mob dragged a colored 
man from his car and took him out into the woods where they beat him, stood 
him up against a tree and threatened to shoot him. I had called the Associated Press 
and the UPI and reported that this man had been kidnapped and I also called the 
Justice Department. Apparently just when this man’s attackers were getting ready 
to shoot him, the chief of police came out and rescued him. How did the chief of 
police know where to find him in the woods? Later on this Negro was unable to 
indict anyone who had attacked him even though he recognized some of the mem-
bers of the would-be lynch mob. The FBI refused to demand any indictments for 
kidnapping. 
 The racists would come through the colored community at night and fire 
guns and we had an exchange of gunfire on a number of occasions. One night an 
armed attack was led on my house by a sergeant of the State National Guard. He 
was recognized, but no action was taken against him. And the chief of police de -
nied that an attack had taken place. We kept appealing to the Federal government. 
It was necessary to keep a guard of about twenty volunteers going every night ⎯ 
men who volunteered to sleep at my house and to walk guard. This was the only 
way that we could ward off attacks by the racists. The telephone would ring around 
the clock, sometimes every fifteen minutes, with threatening calls. 
 Then through my newsletter, The Crusader, I started appealing to readers 
everywhere to protest to the U.S. government, to the U.S. Justice Department; to 
protest the fact that the 14th Amendment did not exist in Monroe and that the city 
officials, the local bureau of the FBI in Charlotte, and the Governor of the state of 
North Carolina were in a conspiracy to deny Monroe Negroes their Constitutional 
rights. 
 One of the readers of The Crusader wrote to Congressman Kowalski of 
Connecticut, who in turn wrote a letter to the Attorney General, Robert Kennedy. 
He said that he had been appalled to learn about the lawlessness in Monroe, and 
how this was damaging to our country at a time when the United States was claim-
ing to be a champion of democracy in the world. The Congressman asked for an 
investigation. But despite all those letters and telegrams to the U.S. Justice Depart-
ment, no investigation was made. The only investigation they made was to ask our 
chief of police if these things were true. The chief of police assured them that they 
were not. 
 Finally I went to the Charlotte bureau of the FBI and filed a long report 
calling for a Federal indict-ment of the chief of police for denying citizens their 
rights guaranteed by the 14th Amendment. This report was filed, but I never heard 
from the FBI. Later a newspaperman told me that he had heard from the Justice 
Department and that they claimed they could find no evidence of any violation of 
the 14th Amendment in Monroe. They never did bother to answer me. 
 Yet it was at this time that I received a letter from the United States De -
partment of State. In this letter they denied my family and me the right to travel to 
Cuba, where we had been invited for the 26th of July celebration. The grounds for 
19 20

