=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: wonderful ethiopians 1926 book.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 124
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:31:37.765866
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Wonderful Ethiopians
OF THE
Ancient Cushite Empire
BY DRUSILLA DUNJEE HOUSTON.
BOOK I.
NATIONS OF THE CUSHITE EMPIRE.
MARVELOUS FACTS FROM AUTHENTIC RECORDS.
THE UNIVERSAL PUBLISHING COMPANY
OKLAHOMA CITY, OKLA., U. S. A.
1926.
Scanned at sacred-texts.com, October, 2004. John Bruno Hare, redactor. This text is in the public domain in the United States because it was 
not renewed at the US Copyright Office in a timely fashion as required by law at the time. These files may be used for any 
non-commercial purpose, provided this notice of attribution is left intact in all copies and subject to the sacred texts Terms 
of Service at http://www.sacred-texts.com/tos.htm.
p. verso
COPYRIGHT 1926.
BY DRUSILLA DUNJEE HOUSTON.
TABLE OF CONTENTS.


--- PAGE 2 ---
(I have supplied page numbers in the Table of Contents, which were lacking in the original. In the original 
Chapter VII preceded VI in the above list, which I have corrected. Note that the title of Chapter I in the body of 
the book is "The Empire's Age and Scope".--JBH)
IVORY STATUETTE OF A KING OF THE FIRST DYNASTY (From Petrie's ''Abydos,'' Part II.)
SYNOPSIS OF CONTENTS.
PREFACE--ORIGIN OF CIVILIZATION.
  1. Summary of the astounding contents of Books I and II.
  2. The Growing Need of Light Upon Race Origins.
Chapter:


--- PAGE 3 ---
I. ANCIENT CUSHITE EMPIRE OF ETHIOPIANS.
  1. The Distance of the Empire in Hoary Ages.
  2. Its Spread Over Europe, Asia, Africa and America.
  3. Its Kings the Mysterious Gods of Ancient Mythology.
II. OLD ETHIOPIA ITS PEOPLE.
  1. Egypt was Civilized from Ethiopia.
  2. Ethiopia Described in the Literature of India.
  3. The Bible Linked Egypt and Ethiopia as One Land.
  4. Nubians are Superior to the Egyptians of Today.
  5. Nubians the Race of the Egyptian Monuments.
III. ANCIENT ETHIOPIA, THE LAND.
  1. Ethiopia a Land Richer and Broader than Egypt.
  2. Cushite Wealth Sprang from World-wide Trade.
  3. The Gold Mines and Emeralds of Ethiopia.
  4. The Infinite Number of Monuments and Temples.
IV. THE AMAZING CIVILIZATION OF ETHIOPIA.
  1. Ethiopians Passed Directly to the Use of Iron.
  2. Ethiopians Tamed the Animals and Plants.
  3. The Primitive Worship of the Ethiopians was Pure.
  4. There was a Rich Literature In Olden Days.
  5. Ethiopia Desolated by Arabs and Turkish Conquests.
  6. Recent Excavations In Ethiopia by Harvard University.
  7. Nubians Dress Today Like the Types on the Monuments.
V. PRE-HISTORIC EGYPT THE LAND OF WONDERS.
  1. Lower Egypt was Once a Part of the Sea.
  2. The Primitive Egyptians were entirely Uncivilized.
  3. The Early Population of Thebes was Nubian.
  4. The Physical Features of Upper and Lower Egypt.
  5. Race Traits of the Egyptian Fellah.
  6. The "Hundred Gated Thebes" an Ethiopian City.
  7. The Egyptian God Amen-Ra was Cush of the Scriptures.
p. ii
VI. EGYPT AND HER GOLDEN AGE.
  1. The Earliest Epoch was of the "Old Race."
  2. Greece and Rome but Passed on the Arts of Egypt.
  3. The Gods of Egypt and Her Religion.
  4. Egyptian Arts, Amusements and Domestic Life.
  5. Egyptians as Engineers and Master Builders.


--- PAGE 4 ---
VII. EGYPT AND HER MIGHTY PHARAOHS.
  1. The Earliest Dynasties and Kings.
  2. The Age of Pyramid Building.
  3. The "Old Dynasty" Rulers Full Featured Ethiopians.
  4. Great Pharaohs of the Middle Kingdom, Ethiopians.
  5. The Mulatto Aahmes Frees Egypt from the Hyksos.
  6. The Ethiopian Thotmes Ill, the Greatest Pharaoh.
  7. Egypt's Splendor Revealed In Tut-Ankh-Amen's Tomb.
  8. Egypt Ruled from Ethiopia.
  9. The Decline of the Power of the Pharaohs.
VIII. ARABIA AND HER ANCIENT RACES.
  1. Ancient Arabia Part of the Cushite Empire.
  2. Divisions of Arabia, Deserta, Felix and Petrae.
  3. Arabia Settled by Two Distinct Races
  4. The Cushite-Arabians were Civilized Agriculturists.
  5. The Semitic-Arabians were a Wild, Nomadic Race.
  6. The Cushite-Arabian was the Oldest and Purest Blood.
  7. The Rise of Mohammed and the Koreysh.
IX. THE MARVELOUS ARABIAN CIVILIZATION.
  1. The Marvelous Panorama of Bible Scenes in Arabia.
  2. Alexander Called Arabia the Richest Nation in the World.
  3. The Wonderful Ruins Left by the Adites (Cushites).
  4. The Terracing of the Ancient Race.
  5. "Sinbad the Sailor" Pictured Ancient Cushite Voyages.
  6. The Conquest of the Saracens.
  7. Semitic-Arabians Spread the Precious Cushite Culture.
X. THE RICH ARABIAN LITERATURE.
1. Great Arabian Fair Like the Greek Olympiads.
  2. Here Masters of Poetry and Rhetoric Contested.
  3. The Early Mohammedans were Very Ignorant.
  4. Arabic a Union of Semitic and Cushite Tongues.
  5. The "Arabian Nights Entertainments" Pictured Cushite Life.
  6. The Crowded Arabian Universities.
  7. "Antar the Lion," the Renowned Ethiopian Poet.
  8. Arabian Skill In Manufacture.
  9. Her Gifts In Science and Art to Backward Europe.
p. iii
XI. THE STRANGE RACES OF ANCIENT CHALDEA.
  1. The "Old Race" of Egypt Settled Chaldea.
  2. Colonists Led by Nimrod, Son of Cush.


--- PAGE 5 ---
3. Two Race Types on the Monuments.
  4. The Story of Primitive Times by Berosus.
  5. The Earliest Cities and Their Gods.
  6. Sargon I, a Cushite Arabian.
  7. Origin of the Cassite Conquerors.
  8. Early Assyria but a Province of Babylonia.
  9. Race Traits and Culture of the Assyrians.
XII. BABYLONIA, THE LAND OF MARVELS.
  1. The Mesopotamian Plain and Its Rivers.
  2. The Land Early Filled with Little City-Republics.
  3. Temples Reared by the Race of India and Egypt
  4. The Wonders of Babylon and Its Immense Size.
  5. The Magnificence. of Its Temples.
XIII. THE CIVILIZATION OF BABYLONIA.
  1. Their Recorded Knowledge of Creation.
  2. The Babylonians were Planet Worshippers.
  3. Their Early Mastery of Science.
  4. The Costly Manufacturers of Babylon.
  5. Her Highly Developed System of Laws.
  6. Her Advanced Skill in Agriculture.
  7. Building, Engineering and Drainage.
  8. The Overthrow of Babylon by Cyrus.
  9. Recent Excavations in Babylonia.
XIV. ANCIENT INDIA, THE LAND OF MYSTERY.
  1. Colonies from the "Old Race" Settled India.
  2. The Climate and Wonderful Plant Life,
  3. Aryan Invaders Inferior to the "Old Race."
  4. Hindu Literature Represents a Southern Culture.
  S. The Brahminical Caste of India.
  6. How They Altered the Ancient Literature.
  7. Dravidians the Representatives of the Cushites.
XV. THE CIVILIZATION OF INDIA.
  1. Early System that of City-Republics.
  2. The Singular Communal Life of the Hindu.
  3. The Peculiar Individuality of the Hindu Women.
  4. The Wonderful Ruins Cut Out of Solid Rock.
  5. India Subjected to Foreign Conquest.
  6. The Vast Treasures Pound by the Mongols.
  7. Origin of the Caste System.
p. iv


--- PAGE 6 ---
XVI. HINDU RELIGION AND LITERATURE.
  1. The Most Deeply Religious People in the World.
  2. Buddhism Banished from India by the Brahmins.
  3. Buddha Still Rules the Ideals of One-third of Mankind.
  4. Brahminism's Cruelty in Driving Out Buddhism.
  6. The Origin of the Brahmins.
  6. The Great Epics of India Sprang from the Cushite Element.
  7. The Race of the Rig-Veda.
  8. The Philosophy of India Unapproached by Other Races.
  9. Great Similarity of Sanskrit, Greek and Latin.
XVII. ANCIENT MEDIA AND PERSIA WERE CUSHITE.
  1. Ancient Persia Inhabited by a Wolly-haired Race.
  2. The Climate and Products of Media.
  3. The Old Religion of the Zend-Avesta.
  4. The Strange, Conflicting Testimony About Zoroaster.
  5. The Scythians Overrun Media.
  6. Early Life of Cyrus the Great.
  7. Persian Art, a New Growth Upon an Old Culture.
  8. Persia Saved Civilization and Destroyed It.
  9. Later Flowerings of the Old Culture.
PREFACE.
THE ORIGIN OF CIVILIZATION.
The minds of men today are stirred with eager questionings about the origin of civilization 
and about the part the different races of mankind played in its development from primitive. 
ages. The remains that archaeologists are uncovering in Egypt, old Babylonia, and South 
America, reveal that there were significant factors in the first development of the arts and 
sciences that history has failed to make clear. Scientists are busy today studying the types of 
those old civilizations and comparing them with those of the present. Our modern systems do 
not function for the masses to give them development and happiness as did some of the 
ancient cultures. Books upon the early life of man are very hard to secure. Few have been 
written that are authentic, because it requires technical skill to assemble and condense such 
matter. Exhaustive research work is necessary to secure this kind of information, with only a 
line here and there in modern books to help the reader to reach definite conclusions. Only the 
trained mind holds the multitude of details and possesses the ability to impartially weigh and 
classify the facts, that prove the influence of the races upon the civilization of today.
The quest for the innumerable and startling facts of the succeeding volumes arose, much as
p. 2
did the motive of Schliemann to seek the buried ruins of Troy, from the oft repeated 
expression found by the author in research work, that "what the ancients said about the 
Ethiopians was fabulous." Curiosity was aroused to go back over the story of the ancients to


--- PAGE 7 ---
agree or draw new conclusions. The finds were so astonishing that the vow was made to 
spend upon this study many years if necessary. Like the "Quest of the Holy Grail" the aim 
became sacred, for the trail led backward into the heart of all that the world holds most 
precious and to the primal roots from which all culture sprang. At first the reading of an 
afternoon in the average public library would hardly reveal a line to the credit of the 
Ethiopian. Sometimes a ten volume set of modern books might yield only a few paragraphs; 
but the vow and the richness of the finds, gleaming like diamonds, led the eager searcher on. 
The trail was followed into the dry dusty books of the ancients, where the path widened and 
truth was revealed that will answer some of the baffling problems of civilization today. Here 
were missing links of the chain of culture vainly sought for elsewhere.
Our story will deal with the ancient Cushite empire of Ethiopians, that covered three 
continents and held unbroken sway for three thousand years. We will visit old Ethiopia, where 
as Herodotus said, "the gods delighted to banquet with the pious inhabitants." We will study 
the land and the ancient race. The "Old Race," will next win our attention, that Petrie found in 
Egypt of distinct and unique culture, who were the people
of the earlier and superior civilization of the first dynasties. Down through this prehistoric 
vista we see "Happy Araby" with her brilliant primitive culture and her unrivalled literature of 
later days. On the screen flashes the rich and surpassing culture of old Chaldea, which 
belonged to the ancient Cushite empire of Ethiopians. Next comes veiled and mysterious 
India, the scene of charming story and magic fable, with her subtle mysticism and philosophy. 
Tarrying a while with the conquest and life of the ancient Medes and Persians, the trail runs 
far afield into the dominions of Western Europe and the striking questions array themselves 
demanding to be answered. Who were the Celts? Who were the Teutons? and what was the 
origin of the so-called Aryan race? The author was as much astounded as will be the reader, 
as to what this study reveals. It leaves us wondering if there is any Aryan race.
We learn in the study of the races of Western Europe, to understand the hatreds of Europe that 
underlaid the world war. We learn that when the Celt and Teuton call the Ethiopians of the 
new world "Uncle" and "Auntie," they are using titles that are scientifically true. Our story 
passes on to another remnant of the ancient Cushite empire, that baffling race, the Iberians, 
now represented by the Basques; then to the Berbers of North Africa,. another branch of the 
Cushite race. Some scientists have called them the descendents of the "People of Atlantis." 
Next succeed the singular facts about the life of the mysterious Etruscans of old Italy who 
were the
p. 4
teachers of the Romans; then we follow the life and tragedy of the fleeting Pelasgians, who 
were the fountain out of which later Greek culture welled. They were the people of the 
legends of Greek mythology. It is almost impossible to find anything but scanty fragments in 
the world's literature about any of these people of pre-historic days, but our text has compiled 
these fragments, so many of them, as to form fascinating chapters. Today all of these subjects 
remain unexplained mysteries in the average book. We dwell for a while on the marvels of the 
lost civilization of the Ægean and stop to study the Greece of Homer and the meaning of the 
Greek legends. All having direct relation to the ancient Cushites.
Historic Greece in all her glory, but viewed from new angles, passes before us with the older 
and superior civilization of Asia Minor, which has been almost entirely overlooked in modern 
literature. Next we come to the fact that the Phoenicians called themselves Ethiopians and that


--- PAGE 8 ---
the Hebrew writers gave them the same name; then we reflect upon the strange relationship of 
the family of Cushite tongues to the so-called Indo-European group of languages. The trail 
leads us high up to where we get a breathless view of the astounding Ethiopian religion, 
which gives us the answer to many strange and incomprehensible traits in the Ethiopian of 
today. Next follows the chapter on the "Wonderful Ethiopians," who produced fadeless colors 
that have held their hues for thousands of years, who drilled through solid rock and were 
masters
p. 5
of many other lost arts and who many scientists believe must have understood electricity, who 
made metal figures that could move and speak and may have invented flying machines, for 
the "flying horse Pegasus" and the "ram of the golden fleece" may not have been mere fairy 
tales. Next out of the forgotten wastes of the dark continent rise before us ancient African 
empires, representing other civilizations of the time of the Cretan age. Then across the screen 
comes flashing the "Ancient Cushite Trade Routes," which contrary to our notion were the 
medium by which rich and varied products were interchanged.
In the chapter on "Ancient Cushite Commerce," we follow the ships of these early, daring and 
skillful seamen, who before the dawn of history had blazed out the ocean trails that the 
Phoenicians later followed. We find irrefutable evidence of the presence of these daring 
conquerors in the primitive legends, religion and institutions of America. Next out of the dim 
haze of far antiquity, rise the indistinct lines of "Atlantis of Old," the race that gave 
civilization to the world, the race that tamed the animals and gave us domestication of plants. 
The gods of the ancient world were the kings and queens of mystic "Atlantis." The chapter the 
"Gods of Old" makes plain that the deities of Greece and Rome were also the kings and 
queens of the ancient Cushite empire of the Ethiopians, which was either the successor of the 
most famous branch of the Atlantic race. It was about these princes
p. 6
and heroes that all the wonderful mythology of the ancients was woven. They were the deities 
that were worshipped in India, Chaldea, Egypt, and in Greece and Rome, which nations 
themselves must have been related to the race of Atlantis, that tradition said had been 
overwhelmed by the sea. Atlantis could not have been mythical, for her rulers were the 
subjects of the art and literature of all the primitive nations until the fall of Paganism long 
after the birth of Christ.
Another division of Atlantis was trans-Atlantic America. There the mysterious Mound 
Builders represent the ancient Cushite race. We study the peculiar culture and genius of the 
fierce Aztec, who acknowledged that he received the germs of civilization from the earlier 
Cushite inhabitants. We pass southward and examine the higher development of the 
wonderful Mayas of North America, whose ruins are attracting special study today and we 
find there transplanted the Cushite arts of the ancient world. Next flash the pictures of the 
marvelous culture and arts of the Incas, superior to those of Western Europe in 1492. From 
America the story turns to the "Bronze and Iron Ages," we seek the origin of the mysterious 
bronze implements of Western Europe found in the hands of seemingly barbarous people. We 
seek for the place and the race that could have given the world the art of welding iron. The 
trail reveals that the land of the "Golden Fleece" and the garden of the "Golden Apples of 
Hesperides" were but centers of the ancient race, that as Cushite Ethiopians


--- PAGE 9 ---
p. 7
had extended themselves over the world. These are subjects that have attracted the study of 
world scholarship. They represent not mere myths but are all that vast ages have left to us of 
events of primitive race history. "Cushite Art" and "The Heart of the African" answer many 
questionings of our hearts about Ethiopians. The series closes with a comparison of ancient 
culture with modern forms. The intelligence of the Cushite, his original genius is held up 
beside the decadence of true ideals in the art and literature of the present. The "Revolt of 
Civilization" and "Dawn of a new World" voice the concern of the thoughtful over the present 
decay of culture.
We are sending forth this information because so few men today understand the primitive 
forces that are the root of modern culture. So superficial and prejudiced has been most 
modern research, that many important and accepted theories of universal history have no 
actual basis in fact. The average modern historical book contradicts what the ancients said 
about the nations. that preceeded them. We cannot solve the stupendous problems that the 
world faces, until we can read aright the riddle of the evolution of the races. Uninformed men 
make unsafe leaders. that is the primal cause for so many errors of judgment in state and 
national councils. We look upon them not as statesmen but as promoters of petty politics, for 
out of their deliberations spring no alleviation of the woes of the world. It is from this lack of 
understanding in leadership
p. 8
that the world suffers most today. We could discriminate between the true and false in our 
civilization, if we knew more about primitive culture. The way by which the first man 
climbed must ever be the human way. Racial prejudices are the greatest menace to world 
progress. Classes clash because the wealth of the world concentrates more and more in the 
hands of a few. The tragedy of human misery increases, the increase of defectives, the 
growing artificiality of modern living, compels us to seek and blazen forth the knowledge of 
the true origin of culture and the fundamental principles that through the ages have been the 
basis of true progress. Only by this wisdom shall we know how to lift human life today.
In most modern books there seems to be preconcerted understanding to calumniate and 
disgust the world with abominable pictures of the ruined Ethiopian, ruined by the African 
slave trade. of four hundred years. There seems to be a world wide conspiracy in literature to 
conceal the facts that this book unfolds. Because of this suppression of truth, world crimes 
have been easily made possible against the Ethiopian. These people are held in low estimation 
because truth is hidden which proves that today though more favored races are at the apex of 
human accomplishment; yet in the earlier ages the wheel of destiny carried upward those, who 
now seem hopelessly under. To wipe away the black stain of the slave trade, modern literature 
has represented the slave trader as having trafficked in depraved human beings. Today the 
lower types of
p. 9
the Aryan race look upon them as creatures only fit for political and economic spoilation, to 
fill the coffers of the colonial renegade, who could not succeed at home. This type of the 
world finds it easy to stifle the life of ruined and defenceless races. This spoilation of the 
weak, returned in a counter stroke from which it was impossible to escape in the world war.


--- PAGE 10 ---
Belgium reaped in identical measure and kind, what this type had meted out to the defenceless 
people of the Congo. Nations must reap what they sow.
This is not the nature or intention of the better men of the civilized nations but we are 
uninformed about alien peoples. We are narrow and provincial in our views. The hatred of the 
races springs out of misunderstanding. The men of the world who have traveled, and read, and 
thought, upon ethnological problems are the men who have the cultivated instincts of human 
brotherhood. Shall England, France, Germany, America, suffer further because we have not 
taught the uninformed of the nations that we must pay a still heavier toll for a continued 
measure of injustice to weaker peoples? Innocent must suffer with the guilty, for it is in our 
power to inform and curb the power of the selfish. The question looms large in the minds of 
thinking men today, whether Ethiopians are worthy of equal opportunity. Let us settle forever 
out of time's irrefutable evidence, whether if we gave him the chance, the Ethiopian would 
treat us as we have treated him. There need be no conjecturing; for the archives of the past 
hold the facts. The history of the
p. 10
[paragraph continues] Cushite Ethiopians down through the ages is one of the most thrilling as well as 
tragic of all time's age old stories. It is almost incredible that its rich treasure for developing 
our understanding has so long remained veiled.
The Ethiopian is a great race, probably the oldest. It is a race that does not die out under 
adversity. When other races are sullen, or despairing and turn to self destruction, these people 
cheerfully press on. When they think the way is blocked they turn aside to pick flowers along 
the pathway of pleasure. We hear their happy voices in the cotton field, they can be the life of 
the carnival, their zealous fervor in camp meeting and the swing song of the marching black 
regiments of the world war and the stevedore regiments in peace, show these people as they 
employ themselves, patiently waiting for bars to progress to rot down, if nothing else will 
remove them. Then again they take up the steady march onward, that has been the wonderful 
element of their history on down through the ages. We need our eyes opened, this type that we 
in ignorance despise, built the eternal pyramids of Egypt and laid the foundation of the 
civilization of the historic ages, Because the slave trade broke the threads of remembrance, 
they walk among us with bowed heads, themselves ignorant of the facts that this story 
unfolds.
Lift up your heads, discouraged and downtrodden Ethiopians. Listen to this marvelous story 
told of your ancestors, who wrought mightily for mankind and built the foundations of 
civilization
p. 11
true and square in the days of old. Awake ye sleeping Aryans, become aware of the acute 
need of the world today of this enchained energy and ability. The absence of this power is the 
cause of many a breakdown in modern, civilization. Out of our own accepted sciences, the 
chapters of this book, prove the Cushite race to have been the fountainhead of civilization. If 
you desire truth, if you desire to be fair minded, to be educated in vital knowledge not 
possessed by the average college student, if you desire to be an authority upon the life of the 
ancients, go down with me as archaeology, ethnology, geology and philology disclose; not in 
a dry and tedious way, but through the unfolding of this the most intensely interesting and 
startling drama of the ages. The Cushite race, its institutions, customs, laws and ideals were


--- PAGE 11 ---
the foundation upon which our modern culture was laid. Let this not stir the pride of the 
modern Cushite, but rather inspire him to a greater consecration to the high idealism that 
made the masteries of olden days.
Knowledge of the primal strength and weaknesses of each world group must be possessed by 
world leadership or we shall still further go astray. Without this knowledge international 
councils cannot intelligently assign each race to its rightful place in the consummation of 
God's plan of the Ages. Without this truth the nations cannot put over their programs. The 
world war proved that we have no international stability. The world's securities and 
diplomatic relations are propped. Because the real history of mankind
p. 12
is not a part of our general knowledge, we are discounting factors most needed to secure 
world balance. There can be no more needed contribution to civilization, than to gather from 
the archives of the past and present day science all the truth about the origin of culture. Only 
thus will we know how to develop better men today. If we knew just what contribution each 
race has made to art, science and religion, we would know what would be its fitness to take 
part in world government and control. Hag the influence of a race been creative or destructive 
throughout the ages? That should point plainly to the part they would be likely to play today.
Because we are without this knowledge, we cannot read aright the past or present history of 
civilization. Modern crimes of injustice toward weaker peoples have been made easy by this 
suppression of truth. It has been popular and remunerative to write and speak on the side of 
prejudice. A better spirit is rising in the world. Men are eager for information, for the truth. 
Through the teaching of sociology, the most popular and crowded classes of our great 
universities, in a scientific way, man is beginning to see the need of a realization of our 
common brotherhood and to reach out to solve unmastered problems and unfulfilled duties. 
Many problems are an international consternation because they are too gigantic for the 
handling of any one world group. Civilization was appalled at its helplessness in the world 
war. The leading nations faced annihilation, yet were unable to walk out of the trap
p. 13
until the flower of European manhood had perished. The noblest offered themselves for 
sacrifice, the more selfish remained at home. The world may never be capable of calculating 
its artistic and moral loss. We see the difference in the crime and debauchery breaking down 
the culture of today. Unless we can rouse men to truth and united effort, there is no hope for 
our civilization which is tottering and must fall.
In justice to that Divine Leading that piloted this search of a decade over trails, that otherwise 
might not have been found in a lifetime, in tribute to the pluck and consecration to a purpose--
to add to the light of truth, that has gathered such an avalanche of testimony from 
authoritative sources, we speak of this work which has taken all those spare moments, that are 
our right to spend in leisure, that a frail unflagging spirit might make possible this marvelous 
story, as strange as any olden fairy tale; yet by the light of our accepted sciences true. We lift 
the veil lightly lest the careless skim over these pages carelessly, little recking what they have 
cost. Often when limbs and weary brain cried out in protest, the searcher pressed on, seeing 
fully the power in this truth if patiently, carefully gathered, to lift the men of all races to a 
clearer comprehension of the contribution of each race to all that we prize in civilization, and 
to stir within us the determination to lift and bear aloft the "torch" lit in primitive ages by a


--- PAGE 12 ---
race today despised and misunderstood. The average book has its dozen helpers and advisors, 
this work has
p. 14
been done in hermitage. The hermitage of a life submerged in service. Humbly, reverently, 
this truth is offered in love to all races. Ten years more may be devoted to its final setting but 
the facts imbedded in these pages are too important to be longer withheld.
THE AUTHOR.            
p. 15
CHAPTER I.
THE EMPIRE'S AGE AND SCOPE.
The excavations of Petrie revealed in Egypt the remains of a distinct race that preceeded the 
historic Egyptians. The earliest civilization was higher than that of the later dynasties. Its 
purer art represents an "Old Race" that fills all the background of the pre-historic ages. It 
colonized the first civilized centers of the primitive world. The ancients called this pioneer 
ram which lit the torch of art and science, Cushite Ethiopians, the founders of primeval cities 
and civilized life. The wonders of India, to which Europe sought a passage in the age of 
Columbus, the costly products and coveted merchandise of Babylon, and the amazing 
prehistoric civilization of Asia Minor, sprang from this little recognized source. The 
achievements of this race in early ages were the result of co-operation. Cushites reached the 
true zenith of democracy. Their skillful hands raised Cyclopean walls dug out mighty lakes 
and laid imperishable roads that have endured throughout the ages. This was the uniform 
testimony of ancient records. Modern writers seem of superficial research, either being 
unaware of these facts, or knowing, purposely ignore them. Archaeologists dig up the proofs,
p. 16
ethnologists announce their origin, but history refuses to change its antiquated and exploded 
theories.
General history informs us that when the curtain of history was lifted, the civilization of 
Egypt was hoary with age. It was a culture that must have developed from thousands of years 
of growth. Why is the scholarship of the world so silent Is to what lay behind historic Egypt? 
No nation throughout the ages has "as Athene sprung full fledged into knowledge of all the 
arts and sciences." The story of what lay behind Egypt fascinated the whole ancient world. 
The culture of Egypt did not originate upon the Lower Nile. Who then was her teacher? It was 
the ancient Cushite empire of Ethiopians, which weighty authorities tell us ruled over three 
continents for thousands of years. Should the world wait longer to test the truth of these 
ancient witnesses? Beside, these gigantic achievements, the petty conquests of Alexander the 
Great, Julius Caesar, and of Napoleon Bonaparte, fade into insignificance. There seems to be 
fear to tell about these ancients, who built mighty cities, the ruins of which extend in 
uninterrupted succession around the shores of the Mediterranean Sea. Traces of this hoary


--- PAGE 13 ---
empire, works appearing to have been wrought by giants, hearing marks of Cushite genius, 
have been found by scientists all over the primitive world.
We marvel at the wonders recently unearthed in Egypt. Let us look behind her through the 
glasses of science at the "Old Race" of which
p. 17
she was in her beginning, only a colony. Ethiopia was the source of all that Egypt knew and 
transmitted to Greece and Rome. We are accustomed to think of Ethiopia as a restricted 
country in Africa but this was not true. The study of ancient maps and the descriptions of the 
geographers of old, reveals that the ancient Land of Cush was a very widespread and powerful 
empire. Rosenmuller shows us that the Hebrew scholars called Cush, all the countries of the 
torrid zone. It was the race that Huxley saw akin to the Dravidians of India, stretching in an 
empire from India to Spain. The Greeks described Ethiopia as the country around the Indus 
and Ganges. (Rosenmuller's Biblical Geography, Bk. III, p. 154.)
H. G. Wells says that the Hamitic tongue was a much wider and more varied language than 
the Semitic or Aryan in ancient days. 1 It was the language of the Neolithic peoples who 
occupied most of western and southern Asia, who may have been related to the Dravidians of 
India and the people of George Elliot's Heliolithic culture. Sir H. H. Johnson says that this lost 
Hamitic language was represented by the scattered branches of Crete, Lydia, the Basques, the 
Caucasian-Dravidian group, the ancient Sumerian and the Elamite. The peoples of this race 
were the first to give the world ideas of government. Stephanus of Byzantium, voicing the 
universal testimony of antiquity wrote, "Ethiopia was the
p. 18
first established country on earth and the Ethiopians were the first to set up the worship of the 
gods and to establish laws." The later ages gained from this ancient empire, the fundamental 
principles upon which republican governments are founded. The basic stones of that 
wonderful dominion were equality, temperence, industry, intelligence and justice.
The average historical book ignores this testimony and disputes in its theories the records and 
monuments of Egypt and Chaldea. They group the races in utter contradiction to the records 
of the Greeks and Hebrews. In the light of reason, who would know about the ethnic relations 
of the ancients, the scholars and historians of Egypt, Chaldea and Greece, who are more and 
more corroborated by the findings of science, or the theories of the men of today? The modern 
writer whose research has been superficial does not know that before the days of Grecian and 
Roman ascendency, the entire circle of the Mediterranean and her islands was dotted with the 
magic cities and the world-wide trade of Ethiopians. The gods and goddesses of the Greeks 
and Romans were but the borrowed kings and queens of this Cushite empire of Ethiopians. So 
marvelous had been their achievements in primitive ages, that in later days, they were 
worshipped as immortals by the people of India, Egypt, old Ethiopia, Asia Minor and the 
Mediterranean world.
Rawlinson, after his exhaustive research into the life of ancient nations, says, "For the last
p. 19


--- PAGE 14 ---
three thousand years the world has been mainly indebted to the Semitic and Indo-European 
races for its advancement, but it was otherwise in the first ages. Egypt and Babylon, Mizraim 
and Nimrod, both descendants of Ham, led the way and acted as the pioneers of mankind in 
the various untrodden fields of art, science and literature. Alphabetical writings, astronomy, 
history, chronology, architecture, plastic art, sculpture, navigation, agriculture and textile 
industries seem to have had their origin in one. or the other of these countries." (Rawlinson's 
Ancient Monarchies, Vol. I.) The taming of the animals was the gift to us of these prehistoric 
men. By skill and perseverence they developed from wild plants the wheat, oats and rye that 
are the foundation of our agriculture. This work was done so many ages ago, that their wild 
origin has disappeared. The average man little realizes the gifts of the prehistoric ages, or how 
helpless we would be without them today.
Rawlinson continues, "The first inventors, of any art are among the greatest benefactors of 
mankind and the bold steps they take from the known to the unknown, from blank ignorance, 
to discovery, are equal to many subsequent steps of progress." Bunsen says in his Philosophy 
of Ancient History, "The Hamitic family as Rawlinson proves must be given the credit for 
being the fountainhead of civilization. This family comprised the ancient Ethiopians, the 
Egyptians, the original Canaanites and the old Chaldeans. The inscriptions of the Chaldean 
monuments
p. 20
prove their race affinity. The Bible proves their relationship. It names the sons of Ham as 
Cush, Mizraim, Phut and the race of Canaan. Mizraim peopled Egypt and Canaan the land 
later possessed by the Hebrews. Phut located in Africa and Cush extended his colonies over a 
wide domain." (Philosophy of Ancient History, Bunsen, p. 51)
Bunsen concludes by saying, "Cushite colonies were all along the southern shores of Asia and 
Africa and by the archaeological remains, along the southern and eastern coasts of Arabia. 
The name Cush was given to four great areas, Media, Persia, Susiana and Aria, or the whole 
territory between the Indus and Tigris in prehistoric times. In Africa the Ethiopians, the 
Egyptians, the Libyans, the Canaanites and Phoenicians were all descendants of Ham. They 
were a black or dark colored race and the pioneers of our civilization. They were emphatically 
the monument builders on the plains of Shinar and the valley of the Nile from Meroe to 
Memphis. In southern Arabia they erected wonderful edifices. They were responsible for the 
monuments that dot southern Siberia and in America along the valley of the Mississippi down 
to Mexico and in Peru their images and monuments stand a "voiceless witnesses." This was 
the ancient Cushite Empire of Ethiopians that covered three worlds. Some of our later books 
recognizing their indisputable influence in primitive culture, speak of them as a brunet brown 
race representing a mysterious Heliolithic culture.
p. 21
Wells testifying from researches of Eliot Smith admits that this culture may have been oozing 
round the world from 1500 B.C. to 1000 B.C. He calls it the highest early culture of the 
world. It sustained the largest and most highly developed communities, but as in other modern 
books there is failure to give us clearer light upon this ancient culture and its origin. Baldwin 
speaking more frankly affirms that Hebrew writers describe these first inhabitants of cities 
and civilized life as Cushites. "The foundations of ancient religions, mythology, institutions 
and customs all had the same source. He considered the Egyptian and Chaldean civilizations 
as very old but the culture and political organization of Ethiopia was much older. They


--- PAGE 15 ---
belonged to what Egyptians and Chaldeans regarded as real antiquity, ages shrouded in doubt 
because they were so remote. The oldest nations mentioned in history did not originate 
civilization, the traditions of Asia bring civilization from the south, connecting it with the 
Erythraean Sea. These traditions are confirmed by the inscriptions found upon the old ruins of 
Chaldea." (Prehistoric Nations, Baldwin.)
Wilford, that eminent student of the literature of India, found that Ethiopia was often 
mentioned in the Sanskrit writings of the people of India. The world according to the Puranas, 
ancient historical books, was divided into seven dwipas or divisions. Ethiopia was Cusha-
Dwipa which included Arabia, Asia Minor, Syria, Nubia, Armenia, Mesopotamia, and an 
extended region
p. 22
in Africa. These Sanskrit writings prove that in remote ages these regions were the most 
powerful richest and most enlightened part of the world. From these authoritative records and 
the conclusions drawn by historians of deeper research we would decide that many ancient 
peoples, who have been assigned to other races in the average historical book of modern 
times, were in reality Ethiopians. There were nations that called themselves Cushites who 
never knew themselves under the titles and classifications that superficial students have given 
them. The Phoenicians in the days of Christ called themselves Ethiopians. The Scriptures and 
ancient records called the Samaritans Cushites. To create a true story of the ages the entire 
fabric of the ethnological relationship of the races will have to be torn down to be more 
honestly laid.
This Ethiopia, which existed for long ages before its wonderful power was broken, cannot be 
limited to the short chronological period of history, that, the facts of geology prove to be in 
error. The Bible gives no figures for the epochs of time. It speaks of Creation and its after 
periods in God cycles that we cannot resolve into figures. We read in Prehistoric Nations, "In 
the oldest recorded traditions, Cushite colonies were established in the valley of the Nile, 
Barabra and Chaldea. This beginning must have been not later than 7000 or 8000 B. C. or 
perhaps earlier. They brought to development astronomy and the other sciences, which have 
come down to us. The vast commercial system by which they
p. 23
joined together the "ends of the earth" was created and manufacturing skill established. The 
great period of Cushite control had closed many ages prior to Homer, although separate 
communities remained not only in Egypt but in southern Arabia, Phoenicia and elsewhere." 
(Prehistoric Nations, pp. 95, 96.)
Baldwin continues, "5000 B. C. Egypt and Chaldea became separate. The Cushites were still 
unrivaled. 3500 to 3000 B. C. the kingdom divided again. We do not know what caused the 
breaking up of the old empire, which for thousands of years had held imperial sway." It may 
have been that the first cities and civilization extended beyond the "Deluge." The Sabaeans, 
Himyarites, and Ethiopians maintained supremacy almost to modern times; but the ancient 
glory had departed previous to the rise of Assyria 1300 B. C. Not long before the Arabian 
peninsula had been overrun by Semites, chiefly nomads, who became the permanent 
inhabitants. The previous conquests of the ancient world denominated by modern books as 
Semitic were Cushite Arabian and not of the later Semitic Arabian race. Through this error 
many ancient branches of the Hamitic race are lined up its Semitic. After the rise of Assyria,


--- PAGE 16 ---
tire Ethiopians above Egypt became the central representatives of that power that had 
exercised world empire for thousands of years. What kind of race could this have been that 
could throw such giant shadows upon time's dawn?
The stories of the "Arabian Nights," which
p. 24
so enthralled us in childhood and to which the childhood of the world clings as though they 
were true has this historic basis. They picture the activities and world wide scope, of Cushite 
civilization in the declining days of Ethiopian glory. Its scenes represent India, Persia, Arabia 
and Chaldea, which were primitively Cushite, in the decline of the Gold and Silver Ages of 
ancient tradition. Archaeological research and findings are proving that there wore such ages. 
The tales of the Arabian Nights, so marvelous and gripping in interest, did not spring from 
mere fancy alone, and because of this have for mankind an alluring and undying fascination. 
These tales minus their genii and fairies form an imperishable book picturing a far distant but 
powerful civilization. In the land of the ancient Chaldean, in Egypt, in happy "Araby the 
Blest," and along the shores of the Mediterranean, the evidences of this prehistoric civilization 
are being dug up in wonder by the archaeologists of the civilized nations to-day. Relics in 
their way as wonderful as the gems called up by Alladin's Lamp, hidden just as were his finds 
in chambers of the earth.
Heeren, whose researches furnish invaluable information to the later historians says, "From 
the remotest times to the present, the Ethiopians have been the most celebrated and yet the 
most mysterious of nations. In the earliest traditions of the more civilized nations of antiquity, 
the name of this most distant people is found. The annals of the Egyptian priests were full of 
them, and the nations of inner Asia on the Euphrates
p. 25
and the Tigris have woven the fictions of the Ethiopians with their own traditions of the wars 
and conquests of their heroes; and at a period equally remote they glimmer in Greek 
mythology." Dionysus, Hercules, Saturn, Osiris, Zeus and Apollo were Cushite kings of the 
prehistoric ages. Around these and other Ethiopian deities the people of the Mediterranean 
and the Orient wove their mythologies. Prejudice and ignorance may have marked their deeds 
as fabulous but the imperishable monuments that they left are not imaginary. They are the 
realistic reminders of a people who deeply impressed and colored the life, art and literature of 
the ancient world.
The prehistoric achievements of Cushite heroes were the theme of ancient sculpture, painting 
and drama. They were the object of worship of all the nations that appear civilized at the 
dawn of history. The literature and music of Greece and Rome was permeated by this deep 
Ethiopian strain. These classic forms and ideals maintain supremacy in the art of modern 
times. Heeren continues, "When the Greeks scarcely knew Italy and Sicily by name, the 
Ethiopians were celebrated in the poems of their bards. They were the remotest nation, the 
most just of men, the favorites of the gods. The lofty inhabitants of Olympus journey to them 
and take part in their feasts. Their sacrifices are the most agreeable that mortals can offer and 
when the faint beams of tradition give way to the clear light of history, the lusture of the 
Ethiopians is not diminished. They still continue to be objects
p. 26


--- PAGE 17 ---
of curiosity and admiration; and the pens of cautious and clear sighted historians often place 
them in the highest rank of knowledge and civilization."
Footnotes
17:1 Outline of History, Vol. I, p. 158. Wells.
p. 27
CHAPTER II.
OLD ETHIOPIA--ITS PEOPLE.
Because of the great lapse. of time, it seems almost impossible to locate the original seat of 
the old Ethiopian empire. Bochart thought it was "Happy Araby," that from this central point 
the Cushite race spread eastward and westward. Some authorities like Gesenius thought it was 
Africa. The Greeks looked to old Ethiopia and called the Upper Nile the common cradle of 
mankind. Toward the rich luxurience of this region they looked for the "Garden of Eden." 
From these people of the Upper Nile arose the oldest traditions and rites and from them 
sprang the first colonies and arts of antiquity. The Greeks also said that Egyptians derived 
their civilization and religion from Ethiopia. "Egyptian religion was not an original 
conception, for three thousand years ago she had lost all true sense of its real meaning among 
even the priesthood." (Budge, Osiris and the Egyptian Resurrection--Preface.) Yet Egyptian 
forms of worship are understood and practiced among the Ethiopians of Nubia today. The 
common people of Egypt never truly understood their religion, this was why it so easily 
became debased.
Ptolemaic writers said that Egypt was formed of the mud carried down, from Ethiopia, that
p. 28
[paragraph continues] Ethiopians were the first men that ever lived, the only truly autochthonous race 
and the first to institute the worship of the gods and the rites of sacrifice. Egypt itself was a 
colony of Ethiopia and the laws and script of both lands were naturally the same; but the 
hieroglyphic script was more widely known to the vulgar in Ethiopia than in Egypt. (Diodorus 
Siculus, bk. iii, ch. 3.) This knowledge of writing was universal in Ethiopia but was confined 
to the priestly classes alone in Egypt. This was because the Egyptian priesthood was 
Ethiopian. The highly developed Merodic inscriptions are not found in Egypt north of the first 
cataract or in Nubia south of Soba. These are differences we would expect to find between a 
colony and a parent body. Herodotus (bk. ii, p. 29) says that Meroe was a great city and 
metropolis, most of its buildings were of red brick. 800 B. C. at Napata, the buildings were of 
hard stone. (Meroe--Crowfoot, pp. 6, 30.)
The Cyclopedia of Biblical Literature says, "There is every reason to conclude that the 
separate colonies of priestcraft spread from Meroe into Egypt; and the primeval monuments in 
Ethiopia strongly confirm the native traditions, reported by Diodorus Siculus, that the worship 
of Zeus-Ammon originated in Meroe, also the worship of Osiris. This would render highly


--- PAGE 18 ---
probable the opinion that commerce, science and art descended into Egypt from the Upper 
Nile. Herodotus called the Ethiopians "Wisemen occupying the Upper Nile, men of long life, 
whose manners and customs pertain to the Golden Age,
p. 29
those virtuous mortals, whose feasts and banquets are honored by Jupiter himself." In Greek 
times, the Egyptians depicted Ethiopia as an ideal state. The Puranas, the ancient historical 
books of India, speak of the civilization of Ethiopia as being older than that of Egypt. These 
Sanskrit books mention the names of old Cushite kings that were worshipped in India and 
who were adopted and changed to suit the fancy of the later people of Greece and Rome.
The Hindu Puranas speak of the Cushites going to India before they went to Egypt, proving 
Hindu civilization coeval with that of Chaldea and the country of the Nile. These ancients 
record that the Egyptians were a colony drawn out from Cusha-Dwipa and that the Palli, 
another colony that made the Phoenicians followed them from the land of Cush. In those 
primitive days, the central seat of Ethiopia was not the Meroe of our day, which is very 
ancient, but a kingdom that preceeded it by many ages; that was called Meru. Lenormant 
spoke of the first men of the ancient world as "Men of Meru." Sanskrit writers called Indra, 
chief god of the Hindu, king of Meru. He was deified and became the chief representative of 
the supreme being. Thus was primitive India settled by colonists from Ethiopia. Early writers 
said there was very little difference in the color or features of the people of the two countries.
Ancient traditions told of the deeds of Deva Nahusha, another sovereign of Meru, who 
extended his empire over three worlds. The lost
p. 30
literature of Asia Minor dealt with this extension of the Ethiopian domain. An old poem 
"Phrygia," was a history of Dionysus, one of the most celebrated of the old Ethiopians. It was 
written in a very old language and character. He preceeded Menes by many ages. Baldwin 
says that the authentic books that would have given us the true history concerning him, 
perished long before the Hellenes. The Greeks of historical times distorted the story of 
Dionysus and converted him into their drunken god of wine. "They misconstrued and misused 
the old Cushite mythology, wherever they failed to understand it, and sought to appropriate it 
entirely to themselves." One of the poetical versions of the taking of Troy, on the coast of 
Asia Minor, was entitled "The Æthiops," because the inhabitants of Troy, as we shall prove 
later, who fought so valiantly in the Trojan war, were Cushite Ethiopians. This version 
presented the conflict as an Egyptian war.
In those early ages Egypt was under Ethiopian domination. In proof of this fact, the 
Cyclopedia of Biblical Literature says, "Isaiah often mentions Ethiopia and Egypt in close 
political relations. In fine the name of Ethiopia chiefly stood as the name of the national and 
royal family of Egypt. In the beginning Egypt was ruled from Ethiopia. Ethiopia was ruined 
by her wars with Egypt, which she sometimes subdued and sometimes served." Modern books 
contain but little information about the country of the Upper Nile, but archaic books were full 
of the story of the
p. 31


--- PAGE 19 ---
wonderful Ethiopians. The ancients said that they settled Egypt. Is it possible that we could 
know more about the origin of this nation than they? Reclus says, "The people occupying the 
plateau of the Blue Nile, are conscious of a glorious past and proudly call themselves 
Ethiopians." He calls the whole triangular space between the Nile and the Red Sea, Ethiopia 
proper. This vast highland constituted a world apart. From it went forth the inspiration and 
light now bearing its fruit in the life of younger nations.
Heeren thought, that excepting the Egyptians, no aboriginal people of Africa so claim our 
attention as the Ethiopians. He asks, "To what shall we attribute the renown of this one of the 
most distant nations of the earth? How did the fame of her name permeate the terrible deserts 
that surrounded her: and even yet form an insuperable bar to all who approach. A great many 
nations distant and different from one another are called Ethiopians. Africa contains the 
greater number of them and a considerable tract in Asia was occupied by this race. The 
Ethiopians were distinguished from the other races by a very dark or completely black skin. " 
(Heeren's Historical Researches--Ethiopian Nations. Ch. 1, p. 46) Existing monuments 
confirm the high antiquity of Meroe. In the Persian period Ethiopia was an important and 
independent state, which Cambyses vainly attempted to subdue. Rosellini thinks that the right 
of Sabaco and Tirhakah, Ethiopian kings, who sat upon the throne of Egypt in the latter days, 
must have been more by right of descent
p. 32
than by usurpation or force of arms. "This may be judged," he says, "by the respect paid to 
their monuments by their successors."
The pictures on the Egyptian monuments reveal that Ethiopians were the builders. They, not 
the Egyptians, were the master-craftsmen of the earlier ages. The first courses of the pyramids 
were built of Ethiopian stone. The Cushites were a sacerdotal or priestly race. There was a 
religious and astronomical significance in the position and shape of the pyramids. Dubois 
points to the fact that in Upper Egypt there were pictured black priests who were conferring 
upon red Egyptians, the instruments and symbols of priesthood. Ethiopians in very early ages 
had an original and astounding religion, which included the rite of human sacrifice. It lingered 
on in the early life of Greece and Home. Dowd explains this rite in this way: "The African 
offered his nearest and dearest, not from depravity but from a greater love for the supreme 
being." The priestly caste was more influencial upon the Upper Nile than in Egypt. With the 
withdrawal of the Ethiopian priesthood from Egypt to Napata, the people of the Lower Nile 
lost the sense of the real meaning of their religion, which steadily deteriorated with their 
language after their separation from Ethiopia.
If we visit Nubia, modern Ethiopia today, we can plainly see in the inhabitants their 
superiority to the common Egyptian type. The Barabra or Nile Nubians are on a footing of 
perfect equality in Egypt because that was their plane in ancient
p. 33


--- PAGE 20 ---
RACE TYPE OF THE EARLY DYNASTIES.
(From Ridpath's History.)
 
p. 34
days. Baedecker describes them as strong, muscular, agricultural and more warlike and 
energetic than Egyptians. Keane says the Nubians excel in moral qualities. They are by his 
description obviously Negroid, very dark with full lips and dreamy eyes. They have the 
narrow heads which are the cranial formation of Ethiopia. Race may be told by shape of the 
skull far better than by color or feature, which are modified by climate. The members of the 
Tartar race have perfectly rounded skulls. The head of the Ethiopian races is very elongated. 
Europeans have an intermediate skull. The cranial formation of unmixed races never changes. 
Keane concludes by saying, "All Barbara have wooly hair with scant beards like the figures of 
Negroes on the walls of the Egyptian temples." The race of the Old Empire approached 
closely to this type.
Strabo mentions the Nubians as a great race west of the Nile. They came originally from 
Kordofan, whence they emigrated two thousand years ago. They have rejected the name 
Nubas as it has become synonymous with slave. They call themselves Barabra, their ancient 
race name. Sanskrit historians call the Old Race of the Upper Nile Barabra. These Nubians 
have become slightly modified but are still plainly Negroid. They look like the Wawa on the


--- PAGE 21 ---
Egyptian monuments. The Retu type number one was the ancient Egyptian, the Retu type 
number two was in feature an intermingling of the Ethiopian and Egyptian types. The Wawa 
were Cushites and the name occurs in the mural inscriptions five
p. 35
thousands years ago. Both people were much intermingled six thousand years ago. The faces 
of the Egyptians of the Old Monarchy are Ethiopian but as the ages went on they altered from 
the constant intermingling with Asiatic types. Also the intense furnace-like heat of Upper 
Egypt tended to change the features and darken the skin.
In the inscriptions relative to the campaigns of Pepi I, Negroes are represented as immediately 
adjoining the Egyptian frontier. This seems to perplex some authors. They had always been 
there. This was the Old Race of predynastic Egypt--the primitive Cushite type. This was the 
aboriginal race of Abyssinia. It was symbolized by the Great Sphinx and the marvelous face 
of Cheops. Take any book of Egyptian history containing authentic cuts and examine the 
faces of the first pharaohs, they are distinctively Ethiopian. The "Agu" of the monuments 
represented this aboriginal race. They were the ancestors of the Nubians. and were the ruling 
race of Egypt. Petrie in 1892 exhibited before the British Association, some skulls of the 
Third and Fourth Dynasties, showing distinct Negroid characteristics. They were 
dolichocephalic or long skulled. The findings of archaeology more and more reveal that Egypt 
was Cushite in her beginning and that Ethiopians were not a branch of the Japheth race in the 
sense that they are so represented in the average ethnological classifications of today.
Egyptians said that they and their religion had come from the land of Punt. Punt is generally 
accepted today to have been Somaliland south of
p. 36
[paragraph continues] Nubia. On the pictured plates at Deir-el-Baheri, the huts of the people of Punt 
were like the Toquls of the modern Sudanese, being built on piles approached by ladders. The 
birds were like a species common among the Somali. The fishes were not like those of Egypt. 
The wife of the king of Punt appears with a form like the Bongo women with exaggerated 
organs of maternity. This was a distinctive Ethiopian form. The king had the Cushite profile. 
The products carried by the wooly haired porters were ebony, piles of elephant tusks, all 
African products and trays of massive gold rings. Punt is mentioned in the inscriptions as a 
land of wonders. We find marvelous ruins in southeastern Africa that substantiate these 
reports. The inscription in the rocky valley of Hammat tells how 2000 B. C. a force gathered 
in the Thebaid to go on an expedition to Punt to bring back the products that made the costly 
incense of the ancients. The Stage Temple at Thebes showed in gorgeous pictures another 
expedition in 1600 B. C. We now know that Somaliland yielded the frankincense of ancient 
commerce, which was used in the ceremonials of all ancient kingdoms. Punt was called the 
"Holy Land" by the Egyptians.
In Egypt today, the most effective battalions are those commanded by black Nubians. In 
ancient ages the Egyptians followed the lead of the Ethiopian to battle and it is instinctive in 
them to do so today. Cushites were the backbone of the armies in the earliest ages. The 
Egyptian has no warlike qualities. It was the Cushite
p. 37


--- PAGE 22 ---
who was the head and brains of the foreign conquests. It was the Cushite element of the Old 
Empire that extended itself in foreign colonization eastward and westward around the world. 
Across Arabia and southwestern Asia, even to the central highlands, inscriptions and massive 
images in stone stand as voiceless witnesses that they were the commanders of the Egyptian 
armies and that the Ethiopian masses accompanied the soldiers as trusted allies and not as 
driven slaves. We must remember that in the early ages they were not a subject race but that 
their power as a great empire was at its zenith.
The Egyptian of today much changed from the ancient whom Herodotus called black, is 
content to live in a mud hut beside his beloved Nile. He is despised by the prouder Nubian, 
who saves his earnings to buy a home and piece of ground in his native Ethiopia. Reclus tells 
us that the dislike between Egyptians and Nubians is carried to such a great extent that the 
Nubians even in Egypt will not marry an Egyptian woman and that he refuses his daughter in 
marriage to the Egyptian and Arab. This could have come down alone front an age-old 
consciousness of superiority. He knows the proud traditions of his race. In books careless of 
ethnography, we find the Nubian classed with Semitic stock. They have no affinities at all 
with this race. Nubians are never able to speak the Arabic tongues gramatically. Nubian 
women are seldom seen in Egypt. They are the most faithful to the manners and customs of 
the Old Race. The Egyptian of today makes
p. 38
little showings of ambition or the spirit for great deeds. He squanders his earnings upon 
trinkets and seems content in the same mud hovel in which the masses of Egyptians 
primitively lived.
Prichard recognizes two branches of the Nubians, the Nubians of the Nile and those of the 
Red Sea. In the age of Herodotus, the countries known as Nubia and Senaar were occupied by 
two different races, one of which he includes under the name Ethiopian; the other was a 
pastorial race of Semitic decent which led a migratory life. This distinction continues to the 
present day. The Red Sea nomadic tribes are extremely savage and inhospitable. The Nile 
Nubas or Barabra are the original Ethiopians. They are agricultural and have the old Hamitic 
traits. They plant date trees and set up wheels for irrigation. These are the Ethiopians 
mentioned in chronicles as possessing war chariots. Their allies were the Libyans. Semites at 
that age of the world had no possession of iron vehicles. Heeren says "that the ancestors of 
these Ethiopians had long lived in cities and had erected magnificent temples and edifices, 
that they possessed law and government, and that the fame of their progress in knowledge and 
the social arts had spread in the earliest ages to a considerable part of the world."
Maurice, that reliable authority on ancient remains, declares, "The ancient Ethiopians were 
the architectural giants of the past. When the daring Cushite genius was in the full career of its 
glory, it was the peculiar delight of this enterprising race to erect stupendous edifices, 
excavate
p. 39
long subterranean passages in the living rock, form vast lakes and extend over the hollows of 
adjoining mountains magnificent arches for aqueducts and bridges. It was they who built the 
tower of Babel or Belus and raised the pyramids or Egypt; it was they who formed the 
grottoes near the Nile and scooped the caverns of Salsette end Elephante. (These latter are 
wonders of Hindu architecture.) Their skill in mechanical powers astonishes posterity, who


--- PAGE 23 ---
are unable to conceive by what means stones thirty, forty and even sixty feet in length from 
twelve to twenty in depth could ever be raised to the point of elevation at which they are seen 
in the ruined temples of Belbec and Thebais. Those comprising the pagodas of India are 
scarcely less wonderful in point of elevation and magnitude." (Maurice's Ancient History of 
Hindustan.)
p. 40
CHAPTER III.
ANCIENT ETHIOPIA, THE LAND.
The Nubo-Egyptian desert was once abundantly watered and a well timbered region. With the 
exclusion of the narrow Nile valley, all of this is generally a barren waste today. Geology 
reveals that in the primitive ages, this country had a moist climate like the Congo basin; but 
these conditions prevailed in remote geological times, probably before the creation of the 
delta. The changes that turned the Sahara into a burning waste in time made Upper Egypt dry 
and torrid. Keane describes its climate as often fatal to all but full blooded natives. Under 
those brazen skies the children of even Euro-African half castes seldom survive after the tenth 
or twelfth year. Passing southward, we find that ancient edifices occur throughout the whole 
extent of Ethiopia. In the olden days, the climate there was favorable to the nurturing and 
development of a high type of civilization and produced an Ethiopian so superior to the later 
types, that they were called by the ancients, "the handsomest men of the primeval world."
The whole of the space between the Nile and Abyssinia, and northward to Lower Egypt once 
constituted Ethiopia. It was called Beled-es-Soudan (land of the blacks). Once Egypt extended
p. 41
to Lower Nubia. The ancient kingdom of Meroe was Upper Nubia and was divided into 
agricultural and grazing lands. Crowfoot tells us in his Ancient Meroe, p. 29, that Meroe at the 
height of its prosperity was established upon as broad an economic basis as Egypt or 
Mesopotamia. Ancient authorities tell us that they grew grains upon lands richer and wider 
than the whole of Egypt, with pastures of limitless plains. Theirs were lands of heavy rains. 
Precious stones were there in abundance. They produced beautiful painted pottery and their 
princes were robed in magnificence. The yearning of the Ethiopian for all things beautiful, his 
love for ceremony and costly attire may not be mere imitation but springs from inheritance, 
from the possession of these things by his ancestors thousands of years ago.
Herodotus II, 29, says, "Meroe was a great city and metropolis." Here Zeus Ammon was 
worshipped in temples of the utmost splendor. The Cyclopedia of Biblical Literature explains, 
"The early prosperity and grandeur of Ethiopia sprang from the carrying trade of which it was 
the center, between India and Arabia on the one hand and the interior of Africa and especially 
Egypt on the other. There was intimate connection between Egypt and Ethiopia commercially. 
Thebes and Meroe founded a common colony in Libya." This would prove the close 
relationship of Thebes, which was Nubian and Meroe. Meroe was the seat of a great caravan 
route from the north of Africa. Another route went westward across the
p. 42


--- PAGE 24 ---
[paragraph continues] Soudan. Strabo spoke of this open way in the day of Tartesus, long before the 
ancient Gades was built. From Meroe eastward extended the great caravan route by which the 
wares of southern Arabia and Africa were interchanged. The great wealth of the Cushites 
arose from this net work of commerce which covered the prehistoric world.
Biblical Literature asks these pertinent questions, "Whence did Egypt obtain spices and drugs 
with which she embalmed her dead? Whence the incense that burned on her altars? Whence 
came into the empire the immense amount of cotton in which her inhabitants were clad, and 
which her own soil so sparingly produced? And whence came into Egypt the rumors of the 
Ethiopian gold countries which Cambyses set out to seek? Whence that profusion of ivory and 
ebony that Greek and Phoenician artists embellished? Whence the early spread of the name of 
Ethiopia celebrated by Jewish poets as well as by the earliest Grecian bards? Whence but 
from the international commerce of which Ethiopia was the center and seat?" These principal 
trade routes may still be pointed out by a chain of ruins, extending from the shores of the 
Indian Ocean to the Mediterranean. The cities Adule, Axum, Meroe, Thebes and Carthage 
were the links in the chain. The "merchandise of Ethiopia" of which the Bible so often speaks 
passed along this line of cities to less civilized portions of the earth.
Heeren in his Ancient Nations of Africa, tells us that commercial intercourse existed between
p. 43
the countries of southern Asia, between India and Arabia, Ethiopia, Libya and Egypt, which 
was founded upon their mutual necessities; and became the parent of the civilizations of these 
peoples. The fame of the Ethiopians, as a civilized people had forced its way into Greece in 
the time of Homer. Meroe, the hundred gated Thebes, Jupiter-Ammon, and the oracles in 
Lybia and Greece were woven with the most ancient Greek myths. The Argonautic 
Expedition, the Triton Sea, and the Garden of the Hesperides, were flashes from this ancient 
Ethiopian commerce. Its introduction into Hellas must have been made at a very early period 
as shown by the oracle and sanctuary of Dodona. Ethiopian commerce was carried on under 
the protection of sanctuaries. The priests of Ammon said, that the oracles were founded in 
Greece from Thebes and Meroe. The Pelasgians adopted the Egyptian names of these deities 
and passed them on to the later Greeks.
Heeren continues, "Meroe from time immemorial had been an oracle of Jupiter. Its soil was 
extremely fertile. As late as 1000 B. C. it was one of the most powerful states of the ancient 
world. Accounts left us by the ancients have been considered fabulous but not so to those who 
have viewed the ruins now covering the site of this once powerful and highly civilized state. 
Remnants of mighty buildings covered with sculptures, representations of priestly ceremonies 
and battles, rows of sphinxes and colossi, give rise to the question, as to which nation 
Ethiopia or Egypt imparted its knowledge to the other."
p. 44
[paragraph continues] Until historical times Ethiopia furnished Egypt with gold. Her ravines were 
worked until the middle of the 12th century. Gold was extracted by crushing, a very costly 
method, proving that these mines had been very rich and must have been a source of the great 
profusion of golden articles found in many African ruins and graves.
Keane describes the Fayum district, which grew in great profusion, roses, vine olives, sugar 
cane and cotton. Here the orange and lemon trees attained the size of our apple trees. The


--- PAGE 25 ---
district was in more primeval times an and depression. An early pharaoh cut a deep channel 
through the rocky barrier toward the Nile and let in the western river. Since the Twelfth 
Dynasty this lake had been one of blessing and abundance. This tract thus reclaimed from the 
desert was justly a wonder of Egypt. Here the marvelous Lake Moeris received the discharge 
of the Bahr Yusef, which was one half the volume of the Nile. It was one of the astounding 
engineering feats of the old world and still ranks as one of the most marvelous achievements 
of mankind. Notwithstanding the drying up of Lake Moeris the Fayum is still an important 
and fertile province.
Gold appears in the Elba Hills. Topaz mines are worked, while perhaps its emerald mines 
were then the oldest and most extensive in the world, and the only ones known until the 
conquest of Peru. Ethiopia seems to have had an inexhaustible supply of building material of 
the first quality, sandstone, limestone and granite were worked there for ages. In ancient days 
the buildings
p. 45
seem to have been of red brick, now the people live in mud huts. Barth speaks of the 
numerous ruins of Upper Nubia, which attest the splendor of the ancient cities. The average 
student does not know that in Nubia are infinitely more monuments and temples than in 
Egypt; besides this Arabs say that Europeans are acquainted with few of the monuments 
concealed by the encroaching sands in the desert. Twelve miles north of Naga is a labyrinth of 
ruined buildings. The Arabs call it Massaurrat. The central building is one of the largest 
known edifices, being 2700 feet in circumference. Its columns are fluted but without 
hieroglyphics. (The Earth and Its Inhabitants--Reclus. Vol. I, p. 246.)
The two temples of Jebel Arden are covered with sculpture, representing the victories of a 
king who bears the titles of one of the Egyptian pharaohs. One of the buildings is approached 
by an avenue of sphinxs. The pyramids, temples, colonades, avenues of animals and statutes 
are still standing at Meroe. Their sandstone was not so durable as that of Egypt. Eighty 
pyramids have been damaged by sightseers. Lepius with difficulty prevented the systematic 
destruction of the monuments of Meroe. Cairo was built by removing the marble facing of the 
Great Pyramid. Thus have many ancient ruins disappeared. The pyramids of Meroe do not 
compare with those of Egypt in magnitude, though they are more artistic. Reclus describes the 
two temples at Abu Simbel, that take their place as marvels of ancient art. They are the 
monuments of Ibsambul.
p. 46
[paragraph continues] The southern temple is hewn out of the living rock. Before the gate sit four 
colossi over sixty feet high, of noble and placid countenance. All these colossi. are covered 
with inscriptions. In the interior of the rock, follow three large halls in succession and twelve 
smaller ones whose walls contain brilliant paintings. If you will examine the faces of these 
colossi in any book of authentic cuts you will find that they are the faces of full featured 
Ethiopians.
"Many temples succeed these as far as the first cataract, containing burial grottoes, gateways 
and towers. Almost buried in the sand, travelers find the ancient town of Mabendi, whose 
tunnel shaped galleries like those of Crete are still to be seen passing under the houses. We 
see Dakka with its gigantic gateways only possible of erection by the hand of the ancient 
Cushite. In the sepulchral cave Beit-el-Walli are sculptures representing triumphal


--- PAGE 26 ---
processions, assaults, court and battle scenes. These have been rendered more popular by 
engravings than any other. The colors of these paintings are still remarkably brilliant." (The 
Earth and Its Inhabitants, Vol. 1, p. 306.) The temples of Dabod and Dakka were built by the 
Ethiopian king Ergamenes. Many of these ruins and this art appear to us as Egyptian but as 
Sayce points out the little temple of Amada in Nubia built by Thotmes III in honor of his 
young wife, in delicately finished and brilliantly painted sculpture on stone, is worth far more 
than the colossal monuments of Ramses II. Ramses cared more for size and
p. 47
 
"An Ancient Cushite.
RAMESES II, SURNAMED ''THE GREAT.''
From a group in red granite. Tanis. Photographed by Mr. W. M. F. Petrie."}
p. 48
number of buildings than for their careful construction and artistic finish. Sayce describes the 
building of his era as mostly scamped, the walls ill built and the sculpture coarse and tasteless. 
Even here in Nubia the monument of Abu Simbel forms a striking contrast. Wrought by the 
hands of Nubians it forms one of the world's wonders carved in rock. It is as Sayce says the 
noblest monument left us by the barren wars and vain glorious monuments of Ramses-
Sesostris. (Ancient Empires of the East--A. H. Sayce.)


--- PAGE 27 ---
Meroe had an army of 250,000 trained men and 400,000 artisans when her rule reached Syria. 
One note-worthy feature was the enormous size of the city of Meroe. It covered an almost 
unbelievable area. The ruins that Pliny described had disappeared in Roman times, so ancient 
was their origin. That is why so little can be learned about Ethiopia by the study of the 
country today. The period of her ancient glory was too far beyond the ages of our times. 
Hoskins thought the pyramids of Gizeh magnificent and wonderful in effect and artistic 
design. There were pyramids used for burial places at the site of Meroe. On the reliefs on the 
walls of the burial chambers the rulers appear purely Cushite. Calliund thought Massaurrat, a 
unique place having no parallel in Egypt, to have been a great college. Heeren thought it the 
site of the oracle of Jupiter, at whose command colonies issued forth which carried 
civilization, arts and religion from Ethiopia into the Delta, to Greece and to far Nordic lands.
p. 49
The Encyclopedia Britannica says, "The Nubians are supposed by some authorities to agree 
with the ancient Egyptians more closely than the Copts, usually deemed their representatives." 
According to Dr. Pritchard, it is probable that the Barabra may be an offshoot from the 
original stock that first peopled Egypt and Nubia. It was the Old Race of the higher 
civilization that ruled Egypt in the pre-dynastic ages. It was from this nation went forth the 
colonies that spread civilization. This old race of the Upper Nile, the Agu or Anu of the 
ancient traditions, spread their arts from Egypt to the Ægean, from Sicily to Italy and Spain. 
Mosso Angelo says that the characteristic decorations on the pottery of the Mediterranean 
race of prehistoric times is identical with that of pre-dynastic Egypt. Reisner in 1899 
examined 1200 tombs in the Nile valley. He found the remains of a distinct race who buried 
their dead with legs doubled up against abdomen and thorax. This was an old Ethiopian form 
of burial, which preceeded embalming and may be traced through ancient Cushite lands.
Earnest and consciencious students, seeking the facts about ancient Ethiopia, find but scanty 
and unsatisfactory references in modern books. Going back to ancient records we find 
voluminous testimony. Out of this material the modern author selects what he sees fit and 
rejects much authentic history about Ethiopia. One book will tell us that the Ethiopians 
belonged to the Japhetic stock, in fact this is the favored theory; yet the encyclopedia says that 
Nubians are a Negroid
p. 50
stock. Others say that they are Semitic. There is a world of contradiction in modern books 
from an ethnological standpoint. Without the untangling of these threads one must have a 
narrow and twisted conception of true history., In ancient days the African nations were proud 
and mighty. Cambyses marched against the Egyptians because their king had refused him a 
daughter in marriage. A stele in the British museum shows how the fleet of Cambyses was 
destroyed by Ethiopians on the Nile and the land forces succumbed to famine. At this time the 
temples of Napata were already in ruins.
Pyramids were erected for a long line of queens called Candace. The high treasurer of one of 
these queens was converted to Christianity under the preaching of Philip. To prove how 
lasting is the religious impression upon the heart of the Ethiopian, Abyssinia is the only great 
Christian nation of any importance in the east today. The Candace queens ruled over an 
Ethiopia that included Abyssinia, but their center was near Meroe, where they were buried. 
The Scriptures spoke of the treasure of queen Candace, accumulated from the merchandise 
and wealth of Ethiopia. Strabo spoke of a queen warrior of Ethiopia. This line of queens was


--- PAGE 28 ---
of a race type never seen among Egyptians. They had the pronounced Bushman figure. The 
renowned queen of Sheba, queen of the south, who visited Solomon belonged to this line of 
queens.
Ethiopia furnished the perfumes of the ancient world. "From Meroe to Memphis the most 
common
p. 51
object carved or painted in the interior of the temples was the censor in the bands of the priest. 
They worshipped the presiding deity with gold and silver vessels, rich vestments, gems and 
many other offerings. Various substances were used for incense but the most esteemed came 
from Ethiopia. It was from these costly products that this nation derived much of its wealth 
that has seemed fabulous to the thoughtless. For the embalming of the dead, spicery in vast 
quantities was used. The Hindu and Egyptians use incense to this day. The Hebrews burned 
incense. Nineveh, Persepolis, the earthenware of China, all show innumerable forms of 
censors; Greece, Rome and on down to our day in Catholic ceremonies we find that the 
incense, first necessary to allay the odors of animal sacrifice, and finally taking its place, still 
persists. In ancient days when the dead were buried in churches, the burning of incense was 
thought necessary to preserve men's health. For these reasons; we must recognize how 
enormous must have been the traffic to supply such demands. Early writers said that 
Ethiopians had fountains with the odor of violets, and that her prisoners were fettered with 
gold chains.
Considering the natural products of Ethiopia, her commerce, the strength of her armies, 
spoken of by the Scriptures as a thousand thousand, we find them a substantial foundation for 
ancient traditions about that nation. Another remarkable people of these regions were the 
Microbians, Herodotus describes the visit of the ambassadors
p. 52
of Cambyses to them. He directed his expedition against them because of their reputed 
wealth. His spies brought presents to this king of the Ethiopians. They were a very tall race 
and the king was chosen for his great stature, They were a civilized people with their own 
laws and institutions. The spies brought a purple robe, gold and perfumes, and a cask of palm 
wine. This king looked at their presents and despised them, he inquired how long they lived 
and what they ate. When told that they lived eighty years, he said, "I do not wonder that you 
who feed upon such rubbish should live no longer. The Microbians," he said, "lived one 
hundred and twenty years and sometimes longer," their chief food being flesh and milk. This 
diet was evidence of civilization. He sent a message to the Persian king that filled him with 
rage, "When you can bend the bow which I send you then you may undertake an expedition to 
the Microbians."
The ambassadors were shown the "Table of the Sun," a meadow at the outskirts of the city in 
which much boiled flesh was laid, placed there every night by the magistrates. This seems a 
strange custom to the unthinking, but was a part of the commercial policy of the Ethiopians, a 
way by which the vast trains of caravans, that swept through the country were fed. At the 
table of the Sun, all who wished might eat. The ambassadors were next led to the prisons, 
where the captives, were bound with gold fetters. This was before the iron age. Ethiopia had a 
skill in embalming superior to Egypt. The Ethiopian


--- PAGE 29 ---
p. 53
mummy could be seen all around and they were preserved in columns of transparent glass. 
The Egyptian mummy could only be seen from the front. In the sepulchers the corpses were 
covered with plaster on which were painted lifelike portraits of the deceased. They were then 
placed in the cases of crystal which was dug up in abundance. his report of Herodotus proves 
the Ethiopians in possession of laws, prisons, commerce, knowledge of working metals and 
the fine arts.
p. 54
CHAPTER IV.
THE AMAZING CIVILIZATION OF ETHIOPIA.
At the beginning of the historical period of Egypt most inhabitants of the earth were rude 
savages. In western Europe and northern Asia the half-human Neanderthal lived in eaves 
under overhanging ledges and fed upon the untamed products of the wild. Outside of Africa, 
we find over the earth the rude stone tools of the first barbaric inhabitants, that mark the 
evolution of these races, from savagery, through long stages of development to the civilized 
state. In Africa we mud no evidences of this slow progress of man up from the barbaric state. 
The Soudan shows no evidence of a stone age. The African seems to have passed directly to 
the use of metals without intermediate steps. The Semitic and Japhetic races upon the more 
sterile lands of the east, and north, as nomadic shepherds, were slow to change to the more 
settled life, that developed naturally in the rich regions of Egypt and the Upper Nile. Without 
agriculture they could not advance to the handicraft stage. Going back only three thousand 
years we find these nations still very ignorant. Semites made no showings of culture until the 
rise of half barbarous Assyria, which copied its arts and sciences from Cushite
p. 55
Chaldea. The Hebrews learned agriculture and building from the Hamitic race of Canaan.
Some one civilized race of prehistoric times had tamed the domestic animals; for when the 
curtain of history was raised we find them in attendance upon man. With the same infinite 
patience, this race developed wild plants into tamed fruits and cereals. The Cushite was the 
only race that could have performed this service, for the other races in historic times despised 
agriculture. Nomadic races are fierce and impatient, they have a nature the opposite to habits 
that make for patient and perseverence, which are the steps to art and literature. Before the 
dawn of history Cushites were working in metals and they had perfected the tools with which 
we conquer the forces of nature today. Our masons tools are identical with those unearthed in 
Egypt. Joly calls the three significant factors of progress in the life of man: the hearth, the 
altar and the forge. All three of these were given to the world by the African. The ancients 
said that Ethiopians first taught them the worship of the gods and sacrifice. The agricultural 
Ethiopian developed the idea of a settled hearth and home. He developed very early the art of 
smelting iron, which is found in the pyramids and gave knowledge of its manufacture to the 
world.


--- PAGE 30 ---
Donnelly points out that in the thousands of years since the domestication of animals, the 
historic nations of our times have tamed one bird. In the light of these facts, is it helpful to our 
development, that we blazen forth the boast that
p. 56
from later races has come the sum total of civilization? Ancient Africans yoked the wild ox, 
tamed the cow, the horse and sheep. This is why animals play such an important part in the 
old Cushite mythology. Africans subdued the elephant as early as the Cushites of Asia. 
Ancient sculptures show the African lion tamed. These indefatigable men domesticated 
wheat, barley, oats, rye and rice, in fact all the staple plants of our civilization were fully 
developed so far back in the distant ages, that their wild species have disappeared.
Think how helpless we would be today without them. Reclus declares, "We are indebted to 
the African for sorghum, dates, kaffir, coffee and the banana, also for the dog, cat, pig, ferret, 
ass and perhaps for the goat, sheep and ox. The first African explorers, found the country 
covered with cattle parks, in which the natives kept thousands and tens of thousands of cattle 
of remarkable breeds, rare skill being shown in their handling.
A botanist of the, Smithsonian Institute recently traveled nine thousand miles through Africa, 
finding species from which valuable grasses, grains, forage, and fruit may be obtained. We 
are still reaping the fruits of the earlier zeal and genius that tamed the first plants. Ancient 
Ethiopians were wonderful agriculturalists. The melon and sweet potato produced there are 
far more delicious than ours. The races to which agriculture was not native present the 
spectacle today of crowding their populations into cities.
p. 57
Ethiopians developed long staple cotton, millet, kaffir and Soudan grass. The, unusual size 
and flavor of African fruits were not the result of accident but of labored perseverance and 
skill. Primeval man gave us the gift of language. Myers says, "Rich and copious languages 
were. upon the lips of the great peoples of antiquity, when they first appear in the morning 
light of history." This was of incalculable value to succeeding ages. They also gave us the 
alphabet. Baldwin affirms that the writings used by the peoples of the first ages of history 
were all derived from a common source. The Phoenicians said the art was invented by Taut.
The primitive worship of the Ethiopians was pure. They worshipped one supreme being. 
Their rulers were priest-kings and at death were deified. As the ages ensued this extended 
itself in ancestor worship, which was original with the Cushite race. It flourishes on the 
African continent today. Ancestor worship spread over all the countries Which the Cushites 
conquered. Frobenius, the great anthropologist, says, "Ethiopia is an ancient classical land. In 
olden days its inhabitants were considered the most pious and oldest of mankind. In many 
quarters Meroe is thought to be indebted to primitive Egypt. From a standpoint of ethnology, 
we must unhesitatingly reject this supposition. The Nubians possessed an independent and 
individual religion in the earliest known times, the cult of which impressed the Egyptians, 
who gave an account of it to the, authors of old." (Voice of Africa. Vol. II p. 621)
p. 58
Champollion, the father of Egyptology, in his valuable memoirs declared, that the Lower 
Valley of the Nile was originally peopled from Abyssinia and Meroe. The most ancient cities


--- PAGE 31 ---
that they founded were Thebes and Edfou. In the beginning Egypt was ruled by priest-kings, 
who reigned in the name of some deity. This sacerdotal class were overthrown by the warrior 
caste, whose chiefs raised themselves to the rank of kings. This new establishment of power 
took place about 2000 B, C. Thebes under them reached the height of her glory. The Old Race 
of the first dynasties, the race of Thot, Amen-Ra and Osiris had turned its greatest strength in 
wider and wider circles across North Africa and up the coast of western Europe. To the 
eastward they had civilized the Mesopotamian plains and had swept on to India. Their relation 
toward Egypt became, more and more hostile, though full blooded Ethiopians still sat upon 
the throne. The idols of Egypt to the last detail were gods of Meroe.
Heeren says, "The best informed travelers and the most accurate observers recognize the same 
color, features and mostly the same fashions and weapons in the inhabitants of the Upper Nile 
as they find portrayed on the Egyptian monuments. The race which we now discover in the 
Nubian, though by loss of liberty and religion much degenerated; yet, which was once the 
ruling race in Egypt. This Nubian race did not come from Arabia. Their color, language and 
manner of life were different. According to their own
p. 59
traditions the Egyptians were originally savages without tillage or government. They lived in 
huts made of reeds. A race of different descent and color settled among them and lifted them 
to civilization. The men of this race were the ancestors of the Nubians, who planted other 
colonies in opposite regions of the world, in Greece, Colchis, Babylonia, and even India." All 
of these regions had priest-kings.
There had been a rich literature in ancient Ethiopia, which endured until the time of Christ. 
There are now in existence more than two thousand Ethiopian manuscripts. The early 
Christian missionaries who entered Ethiopia considered it a duty to destroy all the ancient 
pagan literature. The two thousand extant are but a remnant of olden writings, which if in the 
possession of me world today would unfold many a baffling mystery. The literature of 
Ethiopia that remains is almost wholly Christian. Nubia long resisted the inroads of 
foreigners. The Barabra knew what the entrance of aliens would mean to their land, but its 
confiscation and violence to their rights. Nubians mothers would drown or mutilate their 
daughters, that they could not carry away, to save them from dishonor. Virtue is highly prized 
among them today. Frobenius tells us that Nubians adopted Christianity as early as 500 A. D. 
Determinedly for a thousand years they refused to accept Mohammedism. When Islam began 
to persecute the Christians in Egypt, Nubia sent her cry, "Stay your hand," ringing down the
p. 60
[paragraph continues] Nile with both energy and effect. The Arab spared Egypt for fear of the Nubian.
The Barabra or Nubian hated the Turk and the Arab and were right in their determination not 
to let them enter their land, Which was blooming and prosperous but which later came to utter 
ruin. Sir Samuel Baker describing the Nile between Berber and Karthum said, that as late as 
1862 the banks were crowded with populous villages. The land everywhere was cultivated 
and produced heavy crops. Under the Turks in thirty years it had become a howling 
wilderness. Gaps in the bank show where wheels once stood, which have entirely 
disappeared. Their channels have been choked for years. Budge paints a pathetic picture of 
the few inhabitants who remain, who are nearly naked and slowly starve for months. They 
lack sufficient covering at night, the cold being intense. These Nubians get up long before


--- PAGE 32 ---
dawn and sit shivering, waiting for the needed warmth of the sun. They love their 
independence and are content to endure hardship.
700 A. D. Moslem Arabs overran the Delta and transformed the old Retu type of Egyptian 
into an Arab speaking fellahin. The old Egyptian intermixed with Greeks, Romans and Arabs, 
produced a physical type quite unlike the people of earlier days. Along the Nubian Nile 
ancient prestige prevented their onrush. The old Ethiopian empire with its northern and 
southern capitals, blocked Moslem progress for almost a thousand years. In 1316, this 
Christian kingdom was overthrown but the race loving Nubian peasantry
p. 61
clung to and still retain their Hamitic speech, which is the key to their origin. After 1300 A. 
D. massacre was introduced to compel the Nubian to change his faith. Slave raiding brought 
inconceivable ruin. "Four-fifth of the population was destroyed and the greater part of this 
once best cultivated region of the world went back to wilderness. The cattle were killed, the 
young men slain, and the daughters of Ethiopia ravished."
A look at Ethiopia today in her ruined condition, makes it difficult for the average observer to 
receive the deductions of explorers, geologists and ethnologists. The great lapse of time has 
erased traces of a civilization that was decaying in the days of Cambyses. Many of the 
massive ruins and relics of those declining days as described in books are conceived by the 
readers to be products of the lower Nile, When they existed far up in Nubia. The museums of 
the world contain much of Ethiopian art that is labeled as Egyptian. Ferlini in 1820 found in 
the tomb of the Great Queen of Meroe, a bronze vessel, the handles of which were 
ornamented with Dionysus masks, also necklaces, bracelets, rings and other articles of 
jewelry. Dionysus was the Bacchus of the Greeks, the Osiris of Egypt and a very famous ruler 
of the ancient Cushite empire of Ethiopians. These jewels and the bronze jar are in the 
museum at Munich. Ferlini was greatly surprised at the workmanship, which he considered 
finer than any to which the Greeks had attained. (Egyptian Soudan--Budge.)
In 1863, Marriette discovered at Jebel Barkal
p. 62
among the monuments, five columns of the highest importance, proving Ethiopia to have had 
a very important position among the Egyptian dynasties, in later historical times. These 
Ethiopian kings residing in Nubia ruled Egypt. One of these conquerors, Takarka carried his 
expeditions into Asia. He was doing no more than Ethiopians of earlier ages had done. 
European museums contain some of the monuments of Jebel Barkal. Groups of pyramids are 
near the temple. In twenty-five structures at Nuri in interior vaults is a method of support, 
until recently thought to be an Etruscan invention. At the time of the Old Empire the 
population of Upper Egypt was Nubian. In the Sixth Dynasty Nubia was a part of the 
Egyptian Kingdom. In the inscriptions of Ethiopia the ruler is called "King of the Two Lands" 
and the symbol of the Uraei proves their authority over Egypt and Ethiopia. The pyramids of 
the Queens of Meroe show the authority of this line over the Two Lands. This was why 
Egyptian monarchs so often married princesses of Ethiopia. It seemed to strengthen their 
claim to the throne.
Late excavations of Harvard University in old Ethiopia have unearthed at Napata a royal 
cemetery more than two thousand years old. At Nuri they examined the tombs of twenty kings


--- PAGE 33 ---
and twenty-five queens of Ethiopia from 660 B. C. to 250 B. C. The line of Candace was 
highly honored in Ethiopia. Their jewelry was very elaborate and purely Merotic in style and 
workmanship. At the feet of the Great Queen were the gods of
p. 63
the north and south tying the two lands together. The two lands that in their beginning had 
been one. The symbolic representation of the union of the north and south is found at a very 
early period in Egypt. Her Pharaohs bearing the title, King of the Two Lands. Hoskins 
infinitely preferred the pyramids of Meroe for their elegance of architectural effect to those of 
Gezeh. He viewed the ruins of Meroe as the last architectural efforts of a people whose 
greatness had passed away. These rulers were fully Ethiopian in feature and hair. In their titles 
was the name Amen-Ra.
Some of the largest temples of Nubia were built by this line of kings and queens. The power 
of Tarkaka and Pankhi who subjugated Egypt is attested by the sculptured reliefs of the scenes 
of their battles. In XXII Dynasty of Egypt, the country having become so intermingled with 
foreign blood, the main body of the priests of Amen, who had ruled so long at Thebes, 
emigrated into Ethiopia. Favors shown foreigners so displeased the military class that they 
deserted in a body to Ethiopia, 240,000 soldiers. Pharaoh made overtures to them but they 
would not return. These were the former ruling class of Egypt returning to the land and 
culture from which they had originated.
The term Nubia was unknown to the ancients. Everything south of Egypt was called Ethiopia, 
the land of the dark races. Though the local traffic is small, a very large caravan trade still 
passes through Nubia between Central Africa
p. 64
and Egypt. The Nuba tribes of Kordofan seem to constitute the original stock. The Nile Nubas 
are closely allied to the Nubas of Kordofan who are admittedly, says Britannica (Vol. XVII. 
Nubia.), of Negro stock and speech, so the Nile Nubas must be regarded as essentially a 
Negro people. The Nile above Egypt has always hen occupied by this people. Many Nubians 
are artizans, small dealers, porters and soldiers in Egypt where they are noted for their honesty 
and cheerful and frank temperaments. The native tongue is very sonorous and expressive. It is 
of distinctly Negro character. These Barbarians in Nubia are labored agriculturists, faithful, 
obedient, cleanly and Keane insists that nearly all of them understand arithmetic and know 
how to read and write.
Many Nubians recall the Retu type upon the Egyptian monuments. These people of old 
Ethiopia wear today the plaited turned up beard of the Egyptian gods and a style seen in 
Etruscan sculptures. Amen-Ra, from whom a long line of Egyptian monarchs descended, was 
an Ethiopian god. He was the most terrible of the Egyptian gods to look upon, with his blue-
black complexion. Ancient Egyptians were so determined to represent him as black that they 
produced a singular black effect by laying on a dead black color and treating it with blue 
through which the black remained visible. The Soudan in those ancient days was considered 
as but a continuation of Egypt. The greatest of the Soudanese gods ranked with the Egyptian 
gods. Thotmes III of Egypt called
p. 65


--- PAGE 34 ---
himself royal son of the land of the south. His son, Amenhotep, appears on the reliefs of the 
temple of Thelmes making offerings to the Nubian gods.
Reclus tells us that at Dongola, the capital of Nubia, is the ruin of one of the largest and finest 
specimens of ancient architecture. The columns are as elegant as those of Greek temples. The 
crests of the neighboring rocks are crowned with towers and strongholds and walls of ancient 
entrenched camps. Nubian castles differ but little from those of the Rhine. They were both 
built by the descendants of the Cushite dolmen builders. These Nubian castles are the 
remnants of a feudal system similar to that of Europe. This system is still alive in Abyssinia 
today. In the Nubian castles the battlements, keeps and roofs are all broader at the base than at 
the summit and all the towers are conical. Ramses II built wonderful temples in Nubia, the 
rock hewn temple of Abu Simbel for simple grandeur and majesty is second to none in all 
Egypt. He built another temple to Amen-Ra at Napata. The Harvard expedition found the 
ancient Ethiopian kingdom had been called Seba or Sheba. It was that part of the empire from 
which the Queen of Sheba had come with rich gifts to Solomon. Josephus, the Jewish 
historian called her a queen of Egypt and Ethiopia. This was in the ages when Egypt probably 
was the Two Lands.
p. 66
CHAPTER V.
PREHISTORIC EGYPT, THE LAND OF WONDERS.
The native name of Egypt was Khem, the black land. The name came not so much from the 
color of the soil as the hue of the inhabitants. Egypt was called the "Gift of the Nile," because 
Lower Egypt was formed out of soil brought down by the mighty river. Without the Nile, 
Egypt would be but a desert. The ancient peoples seemed to know more about the sources of 
the Nile than later nations. In our age Livingston explored the branches of the White and Blue 
Nile far into the highlands of the equator. The land through the ages has been raised by the 
deposits left by each annual overflow. Failure of the river to rise means drouth and famine. At 
the time of overflow Egypt is a vast sea with her cities on the tops, of continuous natural 
mounds. Numerous canals traverse the country connecting the natural channels. Egypt was 
inhabited in ancient days by two races or two distinct divisions of one race. Ancient records 
all testify that the ruling class in those times was the Ethiopian. They founded the powerful 
priest caste. "This priesthood included the judges, physicians, astrologers, architects--in a 
word they united within themselves all the highest culture and the most distinguished offices 
of the land." (Biblical Literature.)
p. 67
Calumet testifies, that from ancient accounts and from all recent research, culture and 
civilization spread into Egypt from the south and especially from Meroe. Egypt, ruled at first 
by several contemporary kings, was finally united into one great kingdom. A priesthood 
seemed to have governed the land. The head of the state was a priest. The sacred books of the 
Hindu speak of an "Old Race," that came down from Upper Egypt and peopled the delta. 
They mentioned the Mountains of the Moon and the Nile flowing through Barabra. Herodotus 
says in his Second Book, "They say that in the time of Menes all Egypt except the district of 
Thebes was a morass, and that no part of the land now existing below Lake Myris was then


--- PAGE 35 ---
above water. To this place from the sea is seven days passage up the river." Diodorus Siculus 
says in Book Three, "The Ethiopians say that the Egyptians are a colony drawn out of them by 
Osiris; and that Egypt was formerly no part of the continent; but a sea at the beginning of the 
world, and that it was afterwards made land by the river Nile."
This testimony is corroborated by geology. Rennel after scientific investigation says, "The 
configuration and composition of the low lands of Egypt leave no room to doubt that the sea 
once washed the base of the rocks on which the pyramids of Memphis stand; the present base 
of which is, reached by the inundations of the Nile at an elevation of seventy or eighty feet 
above the Mediterranean." How remote, must be the period when Egypt was not the gift of the 
Nile. Renan
p. 68
declares that Egypt had no infancy because, its first colonists had been civilized in Ethiopia.
Sayce thinks Egypt did not begin with Menes, that when Abraham went down in Egypt 4000 
years ago, the origin and meaning of the Sphinx was lost in mystery.
The Sphinx and the pyramids were symbols of some form of religion of the Old Race. 
Baldwin quotes from Diodorus Siculus, "The laws, customs, religious observances and letters 
of the ancient Egyptians closely resembled the Ethiopians, the colony still observing the 
customs of their ancestors." Egyptians in later days affirmed, that they and their civilization 
came from the black tribes of Punt. Some scholars seek to derive Egyptian civilization from 
some Oriental source. There is evidence that the culture of Egypt was not developed in Egypt 
from their traditions and their earliest remains. It did not come from the north or east but must 
have been imported from the south for as Budge affirms, Egyptians had all the characteristics 
of an African race. Sergi shows that the discoveries of Flinders Petrie and De Morgan prove 
that prehistoric Egypt was not influenced by any Oriental civilization.
The primitive people of Egypt, as revealed by archaeology, dressed in skins and used rude 
stone implements of the stone age men. They lived in mud and reed buts and hunted wild 
animals. We do not And any such rude beginnings for the race of the Soudan. From these 
people of Punt, came Cushite colonists bearing to the children of Mizraim
p. 69
knowledge of copper, bronze, cereals, oxen, sheep, goats, and brickmaking. The historic 
Egyptian rose probably from the union of the aborigines and the invaders. Sayce says that the 
ancient Egyptians had the elongated type of skull. With the intermixture of later times the 
heads of the Egyptians have widened. The race of today has returned to the aboriginal mud 
hut on the bank of the Nile. In the days of Egyptian supremacy the cranial formation was 
Ethiopian. James Henry Breasted, world famous archaeologist, discovered in Egypt the studio 
of an Egyptian sculptor of 1400 B. C. It was called the house of the chief sculptor Thutmos. 
All the portraits were remarkable in that they were unmistakably African.
The early population of Thebes was Nubian. The reign of Menes was no nearer our time than 
4000 B. C. One of the temple records call him a Theban. Thebes was settled from Meroe. 
Menes had been a priest of Upper Egypt, the older of the two countries. He made a change in 
the channel of the Nile. Many ages of civilization had preceded him. Bunsen believed that the 
time preceeding Menes was greater than since. Lepius says, "Under the Fourth Dynasty, six


--- PAGE 36 ---
thousand years ago, the nation had approached the highest development at which we find her, 
of which the ruins still bear witness. The admirable system of monumental writings showed 
its highest perfection in the oldest ruins. This certainly indicated a long previous 
development." This was the age when Egypt was under domination
p. 70
of the Ethiopians. The farther back we go the more perfect the art and the purer the ideals. 
The ancient temples were almost covered with inscriptions. So universal was education that 
even workmen wrote upon the stones.
Chronology as we have computed it, makes no allowance for the many ages through which 
Egypt must have passed to have reached the high stage of culture which she had obtained at 
the dawn of recorded history. The chronology of Berosos, Mantheo, and the Hindu sages, 
include ages of which other races possess no history and seem incomprehensible to us. These 
were Cushite races, the first men, and bring over a record of ages preceeding the Deluge. 
Their chronology is backed by the findings of science, which has shown that the earth is older 
than the puny period allowed by Usher's Chronology. The Bible says that a thousand years 
with our God is as a day. Examination of prehistoric culture, reveals bat the rich languages, 
complex systems of religion, and astounding architectural achievements, which appear when 
the curtain of history was lifted, are proof that the earth is older than we perceive.
The priests of Sais said to Solon, "You Greeks are novices in all the knowledge of antiquity. 
You are ignorant of what passed here or among yourselves in the days of old. The history of 
eight thousand years is deposited in our sacred books, but we can ascend to much higher 
antiquity and tell you what our fathers have done for nine thousand years. I mean their 
institutions, their
p. 71
laws, and their brilliant accomplishments." Baldwin points out that neither Solon nor Plato 
thought this improbable. The Greeks could tell nothing of their progenitors and but little of 
the Pelasgian race that preceded them in Hellenic lands. "There can be no doubt," says 
Baldwin, "that the Egyptians preserved old records of the early period of their history 
extending beyond Menes." This knowledge was lost to our times by the destruction of the 
Alexandrian library and the fanatical zeal which destroyed all pagan manuscripts.
Again the significant questions arise, why were the Greeks so ignorant as to their ancestors, 
and why did Egypt hold the knowledge of earlier Hellenic life? It must have been that the 
historic Greeks were but emigrants into Hellenic lands; that in prehistoric ages had been filled 
with the rich culture of another race Akin to the Egyptians. That the deluge did not reach this 
portion of the human race, may be the reason why Ethiopia was able to introduce civilization 
to the other races. All of the races of the earth have their traditions of a universal deluge but 
the African. They may have brought over to us the knowledge of the arts and wisdom of the 
ante-diluvian world.. Reclus also declares, "All the marvels of Egypt were not tire work of the 
Retu. Neither Usher's. chronology nor the little country Phoenicia can suffice to explain that 
mighty and widespread influence of the Cushite race in human affairs, whose traces are 
visible from Farther India to Norway."
p. 72


--- PAGE 37 ---
Egypt falls into natural divisions, Lower and Upper. Lower Egypt stretches from the 
Mediterranean to the limit of the Delta. Upper Egypt extends six hundred miles south of the 
Delta to the first cataract. The broad plains of the Delta and the comparatively narrow valley 
higher up, make up the divisions of Egypt. In the primitive days Upper Egypt was wholly 
Ethiopian. Bunsen says that the early monuments reveal the primitive Egyptian, with head 
low and elongated, the forehead not amply developed, the nose short, thick, the lips full and 
large, the chin short and receding. In those days the rulers of Egypt were wholly Ethiopian. 
Look at authentic plates of early Egyptian Pharaohs, they are undeniably Cushite. The Great 
Sphinx, emblematic of an earlier king, is the full featured Ethiopian type. Look at the 
astounding countenance of Cheops. The counterpart of such a face can only be found among 
Ethiopians today. He is a perfect representation of the Cushite Ethiopian race, that cast such 
giant shadows on time's dawn.
The Delta is a rich cultivated plain, which travelers describe as dotted with lofty mounds, 
under which lie buried cities. Here and there on the mounds are villages in groves of palm, 
where they may be above the flood waters of the Nile. Dews as well as rains are more copious 
toward the sea. At Alexandria, after sunset, clothes exposed to the dew become soaked as if it 
had rained. When rain falls in Lower Egypt there is general rejoicing. The people assemble in 
the streets and sing. From the middle of spring one
p. 73
sees nothing but grey dusty soil full of cracks and chasms. At the time of the autumnal 
equinox, the whole country presents an immeasurable surface of reddish yellow water out of 
which rises date trees and villages. After the water retreats, we may see only black and slimy 
mud. In winter nature puts on all her splendor. Egypt is then a beautiful garden, a verdant 
meadow, sown with fields of waving grain.
Upper Egypt is a rich narrow valley hemmed in by mountains. It has a clear dry climate and is 
much healthier than Lower Egypt. The atmosphere has a brilliance, which is almost 
intolerable, and the torrid sun is unrelieved by any shade. This is all right for the races that 
can bear great heat. Rain rarely ever falls up the Nile valley. Because of this scarcity of 
moisture, agriculture depends upon canals much below the level of the land. Their greatest 
need lies in proper machines by which the water may be lifted. This extreme difference in 
Upper and Lower Egypt accounts for the physical difference in the two race types of the land. 
The bronzed hues are in the Delta but the black hues are under the brazen skies of Upper 
Egypt. In the Delta many diseases are prevalent, due to the weakness and poverty of the 
people and the insufficient food because of the exploitation of a rapacious government. The 
plague and dissentry cause many deaths. In Upper Egypt all is different. Disease is not 
prevalent and the natives are comely, kindly and thrifty.
The Egyptian in general is simple, cheerful and
p. 74
hospitable. These are genuine African traits. The fellahs are a quiet, contented, submissive 
race. Amrou says, that they have always been toiling for others never for themselves. The 
love of the fellah for his native Egypt is deep and absorbing. Remove him and he perishes. He 
would rather die than revolt. The whole family fortune is lavished upon diadems and 
necklaces of true or false gems. They have no other wealth. The Egyptian was made for 
peace, not for war, though his patriotism is intense, he has no spirit for conquest. The miseries


--- PAGE 38 ---
of soldiers is a favorite subject for satire with Egyptian literary men. At the first rumor of war, 
half the tribe takes refuge in the mountains, until the recruiting agents are gone. The armies of 
ancient Egypt were led and very largely manned in the days of her supremacy by the 
Ethiopian element, which today is much more warlike than the fellah. Egyptians make 
themselves cripples to escape military service. This would also lead us to decide that it was 
the Old Race, not these, who extended themselves over so great an area of the ancient world.
Because of mistreatment the Egyptian of today resorts to fraud, trickery, and subterfuge, that 
is easily detected. Nubians are frank and honest. We have every reason to see why the nature 
of the Egyptian can be no better. Niebhur says, "When we reflect that Egypt has been 
successively subdued by Persians, Greeks, Romans, Arabians, and Turks, and has enjoyed no 
interval of tranquility or freedom but has been
p. 75
constantly oppressed and pillaged, we need not be surprised that agriculture has been ruined 
or that her cities have declined. The population is decreasing and the inhabitants of this fertile 
country are miserably poor. The exactions of the government leave him nothing remaining to 
lay out in the improvement or culture of his land, and many unhappy restraints render it 
impossible for him to engage in any lucrative occupation. They are reduced to a small number 
compared to the Arabs who have poured like a flood over the country." The mass of 
Egyptians live in a mere hut or heap of clods dug out of a neighboring ditch. A few cakes of 
durrah suffice to nourish him. 1
Reclus says, "The Retu still greatly resemble their fathers, in spite of interminglings, the 
Copts are still known as the people of Pharaoh. Under the Ptolemies they must have been 
greatly mixed. The Copts concentrate chiefly in Upper Egypt. They possess whole villages to 
themselves. In the towns they are artizans, money changers, and employers. They marry later 
than other Egyptians and regard more the family ties and their children. The old Coptic 
language, key to the hieroglyphics, is no longer spoken anywhere. Since the seventeenth 
century, Arabic is the general language throughout Egypt, simply the language imposed upon 
them by conquerors. Scribes and notaries are found among the Copts. They constitute the 
lower official class, and are
p. 76
decidedly voracious and more corrupt than the Turkish officials themselves. Copts are 
somewhat darker than Arabs. Their hair is of a soft wooly texture, their noses short and their 
lips wide. They are supposed to be the direct descendants of the Pharaohs and are about one 
sixteenth of the population of Egypt. Reclus thinks they do but little credit to those ancient 
sovereigns. (Africa, Vol. I, Reclus.)
Modern research is leading us to the belief that culture was spread in Egypt from the south, 
especially from Meroe. The country was first ruled over by contemporary kings, who were at 
war with each other. At last the common difficulties in harnessing the Nile united them under 
Menes 5500 years B. C. For a thousand years the capital remained at Memphis. This was the 
Old Kingdom, the period of the Pyramid builders. Sayce found the shape of the skulls 
subsequent to the Sixth Dynasty different from those that preceded it. This was a period of 
absolute decadence and must represent the domination of some other race in which time the 
monuments are silent as to any true achievement. It must have been during this silent period 
that Ethiopia turned from continued colonization in Egypt to send her swarms westward into


--- PAGE 39 ---
the European continent and spread out into that broad band of nations that extended from 
India to Spain and in whom Huxley said there was a common origin. Sayce tells us in Ancient 
Empires that with the passing of the Old Empire the religion of Egypt
p. 77
became gloomy and that in art the light-hearted freedom of the Ethiopian was gone.
2400 to 2000 B. C. was the beginning of the, Middle Kingdom. This period is represented by 
the rise of Thebes, with its magnificent temples and its introduction of mysteries. A new deity 
Amen-Ra, god of Thebes presides. It had been thought that Amen was not one of the gods of 
Egypt until this 11th Dynasty, but when the pyramids of the 5th and 6th Dynasties were 
opened Amen was there. The Pharaohs claimed to be literal and lineally descended from 
Amen-Ra. This was implicitly believed by their subjects. Let us seek to trace who Amen-Ra 
was. He was originally the god of Ethiopia. Amen-Ra was Cush, the son of Ham from whom 
the Cushites sprang. He was not one of the oldest deities of Egypt because he was preceeded 
by the gods of the ages of Noah (Saturn) and Ham. About the time of the rise of Thebes his 
name from his worldwide conquests must have been entered into the cycle of gods; for 
Africans deified their dead kings. Undoubtedly descendants of the great Cush sat upon the 
throne of Egypt This is why his name and form appear in the 11th Dynasty and its line of 
kings assumed his name.
His became the predominent shrine of Egypt and its enrichment became the chief object of the 
Pharaohs. Amen or Cush was recognized by Egypt as its chief god. All the mummery of the 
world which tries to resolve the gods of old into anything else presents the height of folly. The 
ancients looked upon Zeus, Apollo and
p. 78
[paragraph continues] Osiris as persons. Amen-Ra was the Zeus of Greece, that was why they said the 
gods banqueted with the Ethiopians. He was the Jupiter of Rome. Zeus was king of kings 
because he was chief ruler in Ethiopia and over the lesser kings in his wide domains 
stretching from India to farther Norway. Horus, Apollo, Belus and Nimrod his son, were 
recognized and worshipped by all Cushite colonies. In the sculptures the Negro types of 
Africa are the assistants at the festivals in Amen's honor. He, himself, was of the same 
ancestry. In the later chapters of the Egyptian ritual his name is in the language of the Negroes 
of Punt.
Footnotes
75:1 Niebhur's Travels, Vol. 1, p. 104.
p. 79
CHAPTER VI.
EGYPT AND HER "GOLDEN AGE."


--- PAGE 40 ---
There are few voices to be heard underrating the greatness of Egypt. Reclus declares, that 
when the whole of Europe was still overrun by savage tribes, that have left no records behind 
them, Egypt existed a civilized power of greatness. Astronomical observations, arithmetic, 
geometry, architecture, all the arts, and nearly all the sciences, and industries of the present 
day, were known when the Greeks were still cave men. The origin of the sciences and many 
moral precepts, still taught from the wisdom of the ancients were recorded upon the Egyptian 
papyri or on the monuments. The very groove of our present thought had its origin upon the 
banks of the Nile. (The Earth and Its Inhabitants. Africa.--Vol. 1. p. 207.) Earlier works of art 
show the Egyptians to have been a kindly people who did not believe in charms. As the ages 
succeeded and Egypt became mingled with other races, her arts declined, she seemed to forget 
the meaning of her religion, and finally only animal worship remained.
Reclus continues, "So ancient is the civilization of Egypt, that it is known by virtue of its 
decadence. The most powerful epoch is the most ancient known to us. After Ramses II there
p. 80
was a rapid decline in art." Unlike the eastern rulers no had the power of life and death over 
their subjects, the life of the Pharaoh was prescribed by religious rule. The rights and property 
of his subjects were protected by law. .In the earlier creative days Egypt attained some arts 
not yet equaled and some that today are lost. They, perhaps, developed embalming, because 
of the dampness of the soil from the rising Nile. Embalming enabled them to better preserve 
the body. Sayce described the statue of Khaf-Re in the museum of Gizeh as a living 
portraiture. There is a sublime charm about it. The work is of exquisite finish; yet it is carved 
out of diorite rock, the hardest of hard stone. The stone mason of today possesses no tools 
with which to work it.
Donnelly affirms that Egypt, Chaldea, India, Greece and Rome passed the torch of civilization 
from one to another. They added nothing to the arts that existed at the earliest period of 
Egyptian history. These arts continued without material change until two or three hundred 
years ago. For all these years men did not improve, but perpetuated. The age of Columbus 
possessed only printing that was unknown to the Egyptians. Egyptian civilization was highest 
at its first appearance showing that they drew from a fountain higher than themselves. In that 
day Egypt worshipped only one supreme being. At the time of Menes, this race had long been 
architects, sculptors, painters, mythologists and theologians. What king of modern times ever
p. 81
devoted himself to medicine and the writing of medical books to benefit mankind, as did the 
son of Menes? For six thousand years men did not advance beyond the arts of Egypt.
The primitive religious beliefs of the Egyptians lie back in obscurity. The later monuments 
reveal the worship of many gods. De Rouge thinks that this polytheism developed from the 
worship of one God. Ptah was the greatest of the Egyptian gods. He was Lord of Truth, Ruler 
of the Sky, and King of both Worlds. After Ptah came Ra, the god of the Sun. His worship 
was more general than that of any deity save Osiris. The Ethiopians said that Egypt was a 
colony drawn out of them by Osiris. The greatest of all the Egyptian myths centered about 
Osiris and Isis. Their primitive seats of worship were at Philae and Abydos high up the Nile. 
Here Petrie found many relies of the Old Race. At Abydos was the tomb of Osiris. Every 
Egyptian of sufficient wealth and dignity desired to be buried there. Horus was the son of 
Osiris and Isis. Isis wears the horned crescent, the moon disk between. She was a black


--- PAGE 41 ---
goddess of the Soudan. Thot was a magician priest. One text calls him the brother of Osiris. 
He was the chief Moon-god and deity of knowledge, wisdom and art. The seat of Moon 
worship was the Soudan. Thot originally was of those regions.
After Thot, from whom the ancients said came writing, were many lesser gods. Certain 
animals, were sacred to each. No intelligent Egyptian worshipped the bull. It was only the
p. 82
symbol that represented Osiris. Any offense to it was an insult to him. Therefore the sacred 
animals were respected as deities. To injure one meant death from the fury of the populace. 
The sacred animals were chosen by certain markings, they were fed the finest of foods, clad in 
costly raiment and at their death, the wealth of the king and the noblemen was squandered in a 
gorgeous funeral. Osiris had the power of awakening life out of death. He examined the soul 
and judged its deeds. Each spirit must pass before the judgment seat of Osiris. Thot recorded 
the sentence of eternal doom. All the art and literature of Egypt was woven about her religion 
and in honor of her gods. 3500 B. C. Egypt believed that God became incarnate in man.
Circumcision was a rite universally practiced as a part of the religion of the old Egyptians, as 
long as the native institutions flourished. It was a rite of the ruling Ethiopian element. Under 
Greek and Roman rule it fell into disuse but was always retained by the priesthood and those 
who desired to cultivate ancient wisdom. Herodotus said that all Ethiopians circumcised. 
Lenormant calls it original with them. The Coptic church practices it to this day. Abyssinians 
do the same. They did not adopt it from the Jews for they circumcise both sexes. Oldendorpe 
finds the rite in western Africa. It must be a relic of ancient African customs. It is older than 
Mohammed, who did not regard it as a religious rite. Southern Arabia had the rite from 
Ethiopia. Himyartic Arabs (Cushites), circumcise their
p. 83
children on the eighth day. Pocock found that other Semitic Arabs circumcise between the 
tenth and fifteenth years.
Budge in Osiris and the Egyptian Resurrection, preface, tells us, "that the knowledge of the 
Egyptian priests of the real meaning of their religion after 1200 B. C. seemed extremely vague 
and uncertain. The early beliefs became buried in magic spells and amulets." Only a few 
clung to the old faith. 3400 B. C., Egypt had possessed a conception of truth, justice and 
righteousness. He continues page XIV, "that all characteristics indicate that the Egyptian 
religion was of African rather than Asiatic origin. Its true form died about 3000 years ago. 
The best explanation of the Egyptian religion could only be obtained from the religion of the 
Soudan." The priest caste of Egypt had been Ethiopian and the first rulers priest-kings. As 
they were overthrown the priesthood was not able so perfectly to dominate the thought of the 
empire. When the priests of Amen, the Ethiopian priesthood emigrated to Napata it is clear 
why Egypt lost the inner meaning of the religious cults.
In commercial life the Egyptians were consciencious and honest. In the towns there was little. 
quarrelling or disorder. Justice was administered speedily and impartially. Among the many 
crafts were blacksmiths, gold and coppersmiths, cabinet makers, weavers, upholsterers, 
potters, glass Mowers, shoe makers, tanners, tailors and armorers. West describes them as 
workmen of marvelous dexterity, masters of processes


--- PAGE 42 ---
p. 84
that are now unknown. Weavers in particular produced delicate and exquisite linen, almost as 
fine as silk, workers in glass and gold were famous for their skill. Jewels were imitated in 
colored glass so artfully that only an expert today can detect the fraud by appearance. The 
belief that a good life would win reward after death appeared upon the monuments hundreds 
of years before the Hebrew Ten Commandments. Some of their writings were medical 
treatises. One a recipe for an application whereby Osiris cured his father Amen-Ra of the 
headache. (World Progress--West.) It seems unreasonable that Osiris could have done this if 
Amen-Ra was as the sun.
Unlike the Cretan and Ethiopian inscriptions, the Egyptians never took the final steps to a true 
alphabet. "Their writing remained to the end a queer mixture of hundreds of signs of things." 
Sayce speaks of Egyptian manuscripts that contain versions of stories very similar to those we 
have read in the Arabian Nights. There tire tales with plots like Cinderella. The Taking of 
Joppa, is almost identical with the Forty Thieves. There are other stories like Sinbad the 
Sailor. Africans tell many tales like those of Aesop. Many nations claimed Aesop. This was 
because he was a Cushite of which they were all divisions, so by identity of race he belonged 
to them all. Tradition said that he was black and deformed. It is very likely that he was a part 
of the life of Alexandria and the cities of Asia The great similarity or the old Egyptian
p. 85
tales and those of the Arabian Nights lay in the fact that they originated and were the common 
property of all the colonies of the widespread empire of Cushite Ethiopians, of which Egypt 
was for many centuries a part.
The ordinary homes of sun dried bricks showed no small degree of skill. They were generally 
square of two stories in height with an open gallery above. There were many latticed 
windows. The rooms ranged around three and sometimes four sides of an open square or 
courtyard. In this trees were planted, cisterns and fountains constructed. The public edifices 
were built of stone. The men of Egypt worked at the loom and carried on the trades. The 
women looked after the marketing and frequently transacted the business. This is a custom 
among all African nations. The warrior class enjoyed great privileges. They possessed fully 
one-third of the soil exempt from taxation. The husbandman was attached to the soil, paying 
rent. The modern fellah owns no land. The Cushite habit of India, where the wife died with 
her husband, may be seen among the rites of the Cushite Pharaohs. The tomb of Amen-hotep 
II, at Thebes, shows his favorite wives buried with him.
The domestic life of Egypt is described by Duncker, in his History of Antiquity Vol. I, p. 118. 
"On the tombs, five varieties of plows can be seen. There were herds of bullocks, calves, 
asses, sheep, goats, cows, and fowl. Butter and cheese were made. In other sculptures, we see 
spinners and weavers at their -work. Potters, smiths,
p. 86
painters, masons, shoemakers and glass blowers, performed their tasks as they worked four 
thousand years ago." There representations of their social occupations, attainments, and all 
forms of social, political, and religious life are truly marvelous. The pictures referring to rural 
affairs reveal a state of life at that early day, which may lead us to speak modestly of our own 
attainments. An Egyptian villa contained all the conveniences of one of Europe at the present


--- PAGE 43 ---
day. In weaving and all processes connected with the manufacture of linen, they have never 
been surpassed. In the making of furniture, musical instruments, vessels and arms they 
showed great taste and skill.
Among Semitic people herding is highly esteemed. The fact that shepherds and swineherds 
were the lowest strata of Egyptian society, proves that they were not Semitic in origin. Exodus 
VIII, 26, says: "Egyptians would not eat with Hebrews because they were. shepherds, who 
sacrificed beasts that were an abomination to Egyptians." The people of the Nile were 
primarily agriculturalists which was the basic occupation of all the Hamitic races, coupled 
with great skill in the arts and industries. The trade of father descended to son. One inscription 
speaks of the profession of architect in one family for twenty-three generations. This may 
account for the unequalled genius of the ancient in many lost arts. Intermarriage between the 
various castes was never forbidden. The domestic tie was strong. The monuments reveal 
courtesy, kindness and affection
p. 87
as the rule. The homes of the mechanics and husbandmen 4000 years ago were generally of 
brick, well furnished and better built than the homes of today. In the houses of the wealthy, 
tables, chairs and beds were elaborately finished and ornamented. Vases and cups were of 
silver and gold.
The Egyptians were fond of amusements. The jugglers' art was carried to perfection. All the 
athletic sports were greatly enjoyed. Indoor games were popular. There were ingenious toys 
and amusements for their children. Among the higher classes music was the delight of all. 
Egyptian musicians played upon harps, lyres, guitars, flutes, triangles, pipes, horns, trumpets 
and drums. The dancing was but graceful and pleasing gestures to music. Ancestor worship 
and the belief in immortality, caused them to embalm their dead. Their bodies treated five 
thousand years ago are today in perfect state of preservation. The. secrets of their methods are 
unknown to us. We can preserve the body for only a few weeks. The cost of preparing a 
mummy in the highest style was twelve hundred dollars. The lowest style was in the reach or 
all. In the museums of the world we may look upon the faces of the Pharaohs as they appeared 
four thousand years ago.
The Egyptians were master engineers. The Nile was diverted from its course to build 
Memphis. Moeris was an artificial lake 450 miles in circumference. It was 350 feet deep, with 
flood gates, locks and dams. The joints were no wider
p. 88
than silver paper. Cement still clings to the casing stones. The Labyrinth astonished 
Herodotus. It had three thousand chambers, one-half above, the other half below, the surface 
of the earth. The Temple of Karnak covers a square eighteen hundred feet each way. Travelers 
are unable to find words to express its sublimity. It is a sight too much for human 
comprehension. They must have had the knowledge of the principles of the derrick, the lever 
and the inclined plane to put into position the monstrous obelisks and stone animals that stood 
in rows before the temples. Greeks appropriated the Doric style of architecture from Egypt. 
We shall see in the chapter on art that Egypt was the originator of almost all of the designs of 
Greek decorative art. Huge statutes were covered with highly finished hieroglyphics. It seems 
impossible to tell how they carved this stubborn material. Our best modern steel, with 
difficulty carves even plain letters in granite.


--- PAGE 44 ---
Amelia B. Edwards in A Thousand Miles Up the Nile, says, "The distinguishing feature of 
Egyptian architecture is it vastness and sublimity. The avenues of colossal sphinxes and lines 
of obelisks led to stupendous palaces and temples elaborately sculptured and containing balls 
of solemn and gloomy grandeur, in which the largest of our cathedrals might stand. The 
earliest monuments reveal a considerable degree of skill which never advanced. Egyptian 
walls and ceilings were painted in beautiful patterns which we still imitate. The great hall of 
Karnak
p. 89
is the noblest work ever executed by the hand of man. In the doorway of the Hall of Pillars, 
the columns are the wonder of the world. How was that lintel-stone raised? Beside it we feel 
shrunk to the feebleness of a fly. We are stupefied by the thought of the mighty men who 
made them." Perhaps not untruly the builders called themselves the descendants of the gods.
The Great Pyramid contains ninety million cubic feet of masonry. It stands on the thirtieth 
parallel facing the four cardinal points with geometrical exactitude. Beneath the pyramids lie 
the bodies of Egyptians. Within were sepulchral chambers containing mummies, long ago 
despoiled of the rich treasures buried with them. So perfectly were they built that after the 
lapse of tens of centuries the stones are still in position supporting the mountain weight above 
them. Sayce says that in the pyramid of Khufa, the stones are in exact contact and cemented 
so perfectly as to seem impossible. Petrie believes that the stones were cut with tubular drills 
fitted with jewel points. The lines marked upon the stones by the drills can still be seen, with 
evidence that not only the tool but the stone was rotated. The machinery with which the latter 
was erected is still unknown. The Egyptian carved the hardest granite, regarded now as 
impossible to work, as though it was so much soapstone.
How the letters and figures were elaborately embossed and counter-sunk is astonishing to 
modern workers in granite. The edges of the inscriptions after forty centuries are as sharp and
p. 90
beautifully delineated as though the work of yesterday. It is thought by some that they must 
have possessed the knowledge of electricity. Solomon truly said, "There is no new thing under 
the sun." Sayce asserts, "Those who view Egyptian art in museums, have but little idea of the 
perfection of the Egyptian sculptors and painters of the fifth and sixth Dynasties. The wooden 
figure of Sheik-el-Beled is one of the noblest works of human genius. Pictures in low relief 
resemble exquisite embroidery in stone. In statuary they have never been surpassed. They 
have excelled the artists of every age in solemn dignity and everlasting repose. In the laws of 
color harmony Theban painters were as well versed as those of today."
The blocks of the pyramids weighing from two and a half to fifty tons were squared and fitted 
and levelled with an accuracy that puts to shame our very best work. Acres of buildings were 
put together with an accuracy of measurement equalled only by the optician fitting glasses. 
The Egyptians were surpassed only in the plastic arts by the Greeks. Nude figures are seen as 
through a veil. Naked figures can be seen when the body is clothed. The paintings on the 
tombs after the lapse of three thousand years retain the distinctness of outline and brillancy of 
color of recent productions. The lions of Gebel Barkal Nubia, now in the British museum, are 
probably the finest example of the idealization of animal forms that any age has produced. 
The Grottoes of Beni-Hasan contain many pictures characterized


--- PAGE 45 ---
p. 91
by remarkable fidelity and beauty. Very many of the monuments of Egypt have been 
mutilated and destroyed, not always by Arabs. Some of the work has been done by 
Englishmen and Americans, to the everlasting shame of our claim to culture.
p. 92
CHAPTER VII.
EGYPT AND HER MIGHTY PHARAOHS.
M. Chabas regards a space at least of 4000 years, preceeding the first Dynasty as absolutely 
necessary to such development as Egypt possessed at the time of the fourth Dynasty. The art 
of the Old Empire was vigorous and full of original genius but the art of later times was stiff 
and conventional. The oldest religion had been pure, as proved by the monuments. The reign 
of Menes began about 3895 B. C. He was a prince of Upper Egypt. The records of Egypt say 
that prior to Menes were ten Thinite kings of Upper Egypt, the older of the two countries, as 
proved by this statement. There were still earlier ages when demi-gods ruled and a vast period 
when God himself ruled the universe. There is nothing at all in this incongruous with Bible 
statements. The Scriptures said that there were ten ante-diluvian patriarchs preceeding the 
Deluge. The Hindu, Chaldean, Arabian, Greek and Celtic chronicles named ten primitive 
kings. The part of Egyptian chronology, which we cannot understand is that division 
extending beyond the Hood.
Sir J. Gardner Wilkerson in The Manners and Customs of the Ancient Egyptians thought that 
civilization advanced northward from the
p. 93
[paragraph continues] Thebaid to Lower Egypt. Hieroglyphics show that in Upper Egypt were the 
older cities. Menes founded Memphis, but This on the Upper Nile was a royal city, where 
kings ruled long before the time of Menes. This was a suburb of Abydos. Here have been 
unearthed many relies of the Old Race. Because of this evidence, Renan asserts that Egypt 
had no infancy, no archaic period, because her first colonists were civilized in Ethiopia. 
Athotis, a successor of Menes, wrote anatomical facts. A medical papyrus in the British 
museum curiously illustrates this fact. Under the fourth Thinite king a great famine ravaged 
Egypt. Mantheo speaks of many wonders and a very great plague under the seventh king. In 
the Second Dynasty the worship of the bull Aphis was introduced at Memphis. Under another 
of these kings a law was passed where women could hold sovereign power.
Dynasty III was Memphite. We read of a revolt of Libyans showing that Egypt even then held 
dominion beyond the Nile. The Rebu, a dark people, appear on the monuments as kindred of 
the Egyptians. Dr. Brugsch calls attention to the general absence in the titles of the kings of 
the name Ra, which afterwards was essential to throne names. Dynasty IV the first king was 
Khufu or the Cheops of Herodotus. This was an epoch when pyramid building reached its 
zenith and was the beginning of the brilliant era of Egyptian history. We can judge this by the 
magnificence of the sepulchers of these Pharaohs. The kingly power was then supreme.


--- PAGE 46 ---
p. 94
[paragraph continues] These rulers were positively worshipped. These were reigns of peace the age 
before the Old Empire extended itself out over the continents. Khufu built the Great Pyramid 
and the temple of Isis. near the Great Sphinx, which was carved by some earlier monarch. 
This disproves the charge of impiety against him. Britannica says that the cost of life in 
building the pyramids could scarcely have equaled the loss in long wars.
Dynasty IV was 3700 B. C. Recent excavations have enabled us to look upon the face of 
Khufu. He possessed a giant Ethiopian profile. Petrie says of him: "The first thing that strikes 
us about him is the enormous driving power of the man, the ruling nature which it seems 
impossible to resist. As far as force of will goes, the strongest characters of history would 
look pliable in his presence. There is no face quite parallel to this in all the portraits that we 
know--Egyptian, Greek, Roman or modern." Myers says that these figures standing so far 
back in the gray dawn of the historic morning mark not the beginning but in some respects the 
perfection of Egyptian art. It is this vast and mysterious background that impresses us more 
than these giant forms cast up against it. The ancient Cushite looks at you out of the face of 
Khufu. Examination of the countenances of any of these first Pharaohs reveals all of the true 
Ethiopian types and there was more than one of them. Their parallels may easily be found in 
Ethiopian types around us today. Khufu was author of part of
p. 95


--- PAGE 47 ---
KHUFU, BUILDER OF THE GREAT PYRAMID.
(From Petrie's ''Abydos,'' Part II.)
p. 96
the funeral ritual. His wife was a priestess of Thot.
An ivory statute of a king of the First Dynasty taken from Petrie's Abydos shows the flat nose, 
prognathous jaws, and the long head of the Cushite. Sheikh-el-Beled, in the museum of 
Gizeh, a supposed overseer of the Great Pyramid is the exact prototype of a modern mulatto. 
The Sphinx was the form of the ancient god Horus. This Great Sphinx, the sphinxes at Tanis 
and the colossi at Bubastis, all represent black, full featured Africans, that are emblematic, 
says Dr. Dubois, of kings of the earliest dynasties. Under the rulers of the fifth and sixth 
Dynasties, there was a notable decline in power and achievement. A less careful style of 
architecture appeared and there were less pains in the excavation of tombs. In the Fifth 
Dynasty the capital was moved to Middle Egypt. . The royal forces at this time were 
composed chiefly of Ethiopians and their pictures appear largely in the pictured priesthood. 
Tylor points, out that 2000 B. C. Negroes by the tens of thousands were in the Egyptian 
service, carrying her dominion into Syria and Arabia. After the Sixth Dynasty there is a blank 
in the records. We have no monuments to guide us.
2400 to 2000 B. C. brings us to the Middle Kingdom. The reigns preceeding it were probably 
Memphite. The three following were Theban, Egypt always rose in art and achievement when 
the south was supreme. With Dynasty Twelve came the Golden Age of Egypt. These Theban


--- PAGE 48 ---
p. 97
rulers laid Syria waste. Amenemhat I of Cushite blood ruled beyond Egypt southward as Lord 
of the Two Lands. All Egypt came under his domination. He extended her boundaries. 
Sculpture and architecture were revived. The blood that had given Egypt her civilization was 
again upon the throne. Tens of thousands of acres of marsh were drained and a wonderful 
system of artificial reservoirs built to hold the surplus waters of the Me. Theban glory began 
with the rise of these monarchs. Amenemhat reclaimed 20,000 acres of fertile land. He settled 
these districts with people from the south. Under these Cushite cultivators the yields of 
grapes, flax, cotton, peas, beans, radishes, melons and other vegetables were enormous. Under 
Usurtesen II, the kingdom reached the highest prosperity. The monuments tell of the grandeur 
of the works and the armies that marched out of the Hundred gated Thebes to foreign 
conquests. In Dynasty XII Cushites were formidable rivals of Egypt.
The Two Lands were pulling apart, though Ethiopians still sat upon the throne of Egypt. By 
the Two Lands we mean Egypt and Ethiopia. Ethiopia in those ages extended to the northern 
confines of Upper Egypt. Amenemhat II and III and Usurtesen I were Ethiopian Pharaohs of 
this Nubian line. Look at authentic cuts of these kings (see page 209) and you will be satisfied 
that they were Cushites. During their reigns, the ancient glories of Egypt were restored. No 
Pharaoh had had a reign so glorious for conquest and works of engineering as Usurtesen III.
p. 98
[paragraph continues] On his cartouch was the symbol of the union of the Two Lands. He was 
worshipped as a god in Nubia in subsequent times. Amenemhat III of the same Nubian line, 
constructed a vast artificial reservoir, Lake Moeris. Near the lake he built the famous 
Labyrinth, the most justly celebrated structure of antiquity. Herodotus who saw a declared it 
greater than all the temples of Greece. He was struck dumb by the magnificence of its three 
thousand apartments. The domestic life of this age excites our admiration. We read of no 
expeditions into Nubia. These monarchs seemed anxious to build up the country.
1700 B. C. finds Egypt invaded and conquered. Dynasty XIII brought another blank in the 
monumental records. Egypt had broken into two really separate kingdoms. This enfeebled the 
country for the conquest of the Hyksos. During their stay, the native princes at the south 
maintained themselves. 2080-1525 B. C. these Shepherd kings ruled over Egypt. They were a 
barbaric and nomadic race from Asia which destroyed the temples and left no monuments 
standing in Egypt. Those who contend that the origin of the civilization of the Nile was from 
Asia should note that under these Asiatics, Egypt entered into the darkest period of her 
history. The Shepherds were expelled from Egypt by Aahmes, a mulatto and a Theban. He 
was the Amoisis of the Greeks and king of the north and south. He secured the favor of the 
Cushites by marrying Nefruari, the black princess of Ethiopia, famous for her dusky charms, 
wealth and accomplishments.
p. 99
[paragraph continues] The marriage of the Pharaohs to black princesses was frequent and seemed to 
establish the legality of the claim of descent from the black god Amen-Ra, whom the ancients 
represented as Cush of Ethiopia.
Nefruari or Nefertari was by the inscriptions, the most venerated figure of Egyptian history. 
She was a queen of great beauty, strong personality and administrative ability. Her son,


--- PAGE 49 ---
Amenhotep the Amenophis of the Greeks, reigned jointly with her for many years. Mariette 
discovered in 1850 the mummy of Queen Aahotep, the Nubian mother of Aahmes. The 
ornaments now preserved in a museum near Cairo are of such marvelous workmanship that 
modern jewelers confess their inability to even imitate them. Under Aahmes Egypt again 
became supreme. The decayed and ruined temples were restored to their ancient richness and 
splendor. In a few years she had regained what had been lost in the five Centuries of rule of 
the Hyksos. The country became covered with edifices and new roads were opened for 
commerce and trade. Aahmes founded an empire that lasted 1500 years, a period rich in its 
records of history and growth for Egypt. As late as 663 B. C., Psamtik, a Pharaoh of Libyan 
origin strengthened his claim to the Egyptian throne by marriage to an Ethiopian princess, the 
daughter of Sabako. The father of the great Ramses II followed the same procedure.
Dynasty XVIII, 1500-1300 B. C. Egypt attained the summit of her power. She became the 
arbitress of the whole world. Sayce says that
p. 100
they returned with new rolls of conquered provinces and with the plunder and tribute of the 
east. Amenophis I, son of Aahmes and Nefertari, carried on the Ethiopian wars. Ethiopia was 
breaking away from Egypt. His son Thotmes I, subdued Phoenicia and Syria. His daughter, 
Hatasu, called herself daughter of Amen and his incarnation. She had a strongly mulatto 
countenance. The name of her father occurs at Meroe. His son Thothmes I ordered offerings 
made to the gods of the south. He sent out expeditions to Khent-hen-nefar, probably the 
country known today as the western Soudan. He was called sovereign of the Two Lands. He 
was the first of a long line of conquering pharaohs. The astonishing resemblance of the art of 
the Fourth, Twelfth and Eighteenth Dynasties, the great periods of Egyptian history lies in the 
fact that they were dynasties that were purely Ethiopian. They represented the best genius of 
the race that had given Egypt her civilization. When they were out of power her culture 
always declined.
The great Thotmes III was of all the Pharaohs, unquestionably the greatest. During his long 
reign of fifty-four years, the country was covered with monuments and became the center of 
trade and intercourse. Sayce says that countless treasures flowed into Egypt and Thebes 
became the capital of the world. Thotmes created a considerable navy upon the Mediterranean 
and was absolutely supreme upon its waters. Monuments of his reign have been found in 
Algeria. In the Hall of Ancestors, Karnak, Thotmes III, may be
p. 101
seen making offerings before sixty-one of his ancestors. This will give us some idea of how 
many Ethiopian monarchs had sat upon the Egyptian throne. He called himself the royal son 
of the land of the South. He erected in Nubia many more edifices than any other monarch. 
There he appears worshipping the gods of the south. From his expeditions into Asia he 
returned with enormous spoil. He was undoubtedly, the Alexander of Egyptian history. He 
conquered the known world. Thothmes III carved the names of 628 vanquished nations and 
captured cities on the walls at Karnak. Syria, Mesopotamia, Arabia, Armenia, Abyssinia and 
Nubia were parts of his domain.
This Pharaoh was also a magnificent builder. His works are almost numberless. One being a 
portion of the temple of Karnak, the most magnificent ruin in the world. During the reign of 
Thotmes III, Mycenaean culture was at its zenith. Sayce shows that he established royal


--- PAGE 50 ---
botanical and zoological gardens, stocked with curious plants and animals which he brought 
back with him. Year after year tribute and taxes of every kind came regularly to the Egyptian 
treasury from the towns of Palestine, Phœnicia and northern Syria. From Cush and Punt came 
offerings. He received also the tribute and homage of the Assyrian and Chaldean kings. This 
was without doubt the Middle Ages when the Cushite race ruling from Thebes as a center, 
sought to follow and hold the old lines of the more ancient Cushite empire of Ethiopians. that 
in the ages of
p. 102
[paragraph continues] Amen-Ra and Osiris had covered three worlds. In an earlier age, the central seat 
had been the primitive Meru. In the latter days of the Egyptian empire, the priestcraft and 
soldiers retired and set up a new capital at Napata; but the days of world empire were over, 
which empire had lasted, some authorities say, for six thousand years.
The next king of this dynasty was Amenhotep II, the son of Thothmes III. The Egyptians 
under his lead captured Nineveh. He brought back the bodies of seven kings that he had taken 
in battle. He put up their heads as trophies on the walls of Thebes. A new strain of Ethiopian 
blood appears in this line through the Nubian queen, Metuma, about 1400, B. C. Her son, 
Amenhotep III, the Amenophis of the Greeks, covered the banks of the Nile with monuments 
remarkable for their grandeur and perfection. He was the Memnon of the Iliad, who came to 
the relief of Troy. There he is called the black prince. He built monuments inscribed with his 
name. At Sulb, he and his wife, Tai, appear making offerings to Amen-Ra. He built the great 
temple at Luxor and the colossi at Thebes and was called by the Greeks the miracle working 
Memnon, who each morning with musical sounds greeted his mother. His rule extended from 
southern Ethiopia to Mesopotamia. He seemed to have wished to make the Soudan 
prosperous.
Thotmes III, Amenophis III and Amenophis IV were in appearance unmixed Negro types. 
Darwin was struck by the extremely Ethiopian
p. 103
characteristics of the statute of Amenophis III. We will pause here to glance at a son of 
Amenophis who in our day has aroused universal interest. Tut-ankh-amen was born 1350 B. 
C., long before the days of Athens and Rome. His tomb was discovered in a limestone cliff in 
the Valley of Tombs about five miles from ancient Thebes. It had practically been unmolested 
for thirty centuries. Here were the tombs of the other Pharaohs of the 18th, 19th and 20th 
Dynasties. All had been ruthlessly pillaged. Every effort had been made to conceal the spot. 
Herbert Carter, for thirty years had searched for the tomb. He found it in 1922. He knew by 
the seals on the door that it had been undisturbed. He sent at once to his generous patron Lord 
Carnarvan, and sought the aid of the world's greatest Egyptologists.
One of the first visitors to enter the tomb was Professor Breasted. He said: "It is a sight I 
never dreamed of seeing--the antechamber of a Pharaoh's tomb, filled with the magnificent 
equipment which only the wealth and splendor of the imperial age of Egypt could have 
wrought or conceived. In quality it is an astonishing revelation of the beauty and refinement 
of Egyptian art--beyond anything I had imagined." The first room of the tomb entered 
contained statutes, caskets, chests, beds, chairs and chariots all beautifully carved and 
decorated. On the lid of one chest were hunting scenes. The beauty and minuteness of the 
details of the painting excels the finest Chinese and Japanese art. Still more valuable


--- PAGE 51 ---
p. 104
articles besides these which filled the room had been plundered. The kings robes were 
elaborately decorated with beads of gold. There was a beautiful amber necklace. His sandals 
of leather were inlaid with gold. The king's throne was one of the finest specimens of 
Egyptian art ever found in a tomb. It was covered with gold and silver and inlaid with 
sparkling gems. Several very beautiful alabaster vases were found. Perfumes 3000 years old 
still gave forth a pleasant odor. Behind this chamber was another packed five feet high with 
innumerable objects.
Harold M. Weeks says, "This imperial age or first empire, now shines out as one of the 
world's most astounding epochs. It is needful only to point out that objects in Tut-ankh-amen's 
tomb have been valued at such sums as $10,000,000 (though it is futile, to price the priceless), 
and then to remember that Tut-ankh-amen was but a weak declining star compared to the 
other brilliant Pharaohs of the Eighteenth Dynasty constellation." At this age the nations of 
Asia were pouring tribute into Egypt. These nations remembered the terrible power of 
Amenophis and trembled. From the statutes and the wall paintings, the king of this tomb was 
black. This may have had something to do with the hasty closing of the tomb. His name ended 
with Amen, the black god of the Soudan and Egypt. With his name the Egyptians began and 
ended their prayers. We of the Christian world, through the Hebrews have appropriated it and 
use the title of the great Amen at the close of our petitions.
p. 105
[paragraph continues] During the Hyksos invasion, the native royal family of lower Egypt took refuge 
in Ethiopia. Alliance with Cushite princesses was common. Moses, says Giekie, only 
followed their example.
Amenophis IV. tried to establish a new religion. Open war broke out between him and the 
priests of Amen. In enforced flight he retired to a new capital. Weakened by this strife he lost 
his hold upon the Asiatic provinces. The close of his reign found Egypt shorn of all that had 
been won by his predecessors. His successor speedily made peace with the priests of Amen 
and was permitted to be buried in the royal burying ground. Dynasty XIX, 1300 B. C. brings 
us to Ramses I and Seti I who restored the waning glory of Egypt. He strengthened his claim 
to the throne by marrying princess Tai, granddaughter of Amenophis III. Remeses II, the son 
of this marriage became the legitimate king. He was the Sesostris of the Greeks. He reigned 
sixty-seven years. The temple of Abydos records the names of sixty daughters and fifty-nine 
sons. He built two magnificent temples in Nubia and part of the temples of Karnak and Luxor. 
Around his name, says Lenormant, clustered the lustre of his predecessors. We know he 
subdued Syria, Mesopotamia, Assyria, Media, Persia, Bactrina and India even to the Ganges, 
the Scythians and the inhabitants of Asia Minor. All of these regions were anciently Cushite. 
He returned after nine years loaded with captives and spoil.
Great changes were taking place in world populations. The emigration southward had begun
p. 106
that made the modern Persian nation, Armenians, Turo-Scythic populations were pouring 
down upon Greece. The old Cushite colonists of the great belt that had once stretched from 
India to Spain became restless and chaffing under the inroads of these barbaric hoards they 
began a movement southward--an attempted return to the regions of their origin. Egypt


--- PAGE 52 ---
strong, fully populated, did not feel inclined to receive them. As these new infusions entered 
and changed the life and ideals of Mesopotamia, Syria, Asia Minor and the Ægean, their 
attitude toward Egypt became more hostile. These conquered nations revolted and the 
Egyptians were driven back to almost the valley of the Nile. Remeses III was the last of the 
heroes, when he assumed the crown Egypt was surrounded by enemies. The Libyans had 
established themselves in the western portion of the Delta. They attacked Egypt but were 
repulsed. The successors of Remeses were insignificant sovereigns; the high priests of 
Ammon at Thebes usurped their power and 1100 B. C. set aside the heirs and seized the 
throne. They did not long retain this dignity.
The Tanites 1090 B. C. succeeded in expelling the priests of Ammon and established 
dominion over Egypt. They reigned one hundred years. They were succeeded by the Bubastes 
of Lower Egypt. With the Tanite dynasty, the high priesthood which had been so powerful 
from early ages, with the royalty, retired to Ethiopia and set up a rival state at Napata. Azerch-
Amen, King of Ethiopia starting from Napata invaded Egypt,
p. 107
traversed the whole length and penetrated Palestine at the head of an army of Ethiopians and 
Libyans. 800 B. C. Pianki made the Thebaid a simple province dependent upon Ethiopia. The 
people of Egypt favorably received his accession to the throne at Thebes. They were better 
disposed toward an Ethiopian king than one from the Delta. 693 B. C. Tarkaka conquered the 
whole Nile valley. Thebes welcomed him with enthusiasm. Priests opened the gates of 
Memphis. He fixed his capital at Thebes. Strabo said that Tarkaka rivalled Remses II in his 
conquests, which extended westward to the Pillars of Hercules and eastward to the Assyrian 
domains. With the wrestling of Egypt from Ethiopian conquerors, the old empire died.
670 B. C. in the twenty-third year of his reign, the Assyrians drove Tarkaka out of Egypt. His 
successor Tanut-Amen determined to wrest Egypt from Asia. Thebes and Memphis opened 
their gates and even Tyre sent help, but the Assyrians returned and executed a terrible 
vengeance. 660 B C. Psammeticus, of Libyan origin, threw off the yoke. He married an 
Ethiopian princess as so many Pharaohs that had preceeded him. This prince of the final line 
of native sovereigns gained the throne by aid of Greek mercenaries. He throw open the door 
of Egypt to foreigners, especially Greeks. Greek travelers visited the cities of the Nile. The 
Greek colony of Naucrates was given special privileges. He entrusted some of the highest 
offices of Egypt to foreigners. The military class because of this
p. 108
emigrated to Ethiopia. Psammeticus humbled his pride and sued for their return but these two 
hundred thousand preferred Ethiopia. 343 B. C. the last native dynasty ceased, with the flight 
of Nektanebos with the treasury of Egypt to Ethiopia, upon the approach of Persian 
conquerors. Persia did not enjoy sway over Egypt very long, her sceptre soon passed to 
Alexander.
332 B. C. Egypt was glad when the empire fell to Alexander the Great. He was welcomed in 
Egypt as a deliverer. 331 B. C. he visited the oases of Ammon in the Libyan desert where he 
was recognized by the priests as the son of Amon. In the winter of the same year he founded 
the city of Alexandria. Ptolemy I, 306 B. C., raised Egypt again to first rank. Alexandria 
became the foremost city of the world as a center of commerce and culture. The famous 
museum and library attracted to Alexandria men of science and letters from all parts of the


--- PAGE 53 ---
Hellenic world. Under his successors Egypt prospered greatly. Philadelphus is said to have 
suggested the preparation of Manetho's Egyptian History from native sources. The line of 
Ptolemies ended with Cleopatra, who through her influence over Caesar managed to preserve 
the nominal independence of Egypt. At her death the land of the Pharaohs became a Roman 
province. Christianity was early introduced and at first was severely persecuted. 391 A. D. it 
became the state religion 639-641. A. D. Mohammedan Arabs conquered Egypt. Cairo 
became the capital and a great center of religion and learning.
p. 109
So we might continue on down the line of changing sovereigns to modern times, but that is 
not the purpose of this book, which seeks only to follow the more ancient traces in Egypt of 
the ancient Cushite empire of Ethiopians. Diodorus Siculus said of the work of the closing 
Ethiopian dynasty, that there were numerous canals built and embankments, intended to keep 
the towns above the level of the Nile. Hosea, king of Israel, sent presents to Shabaka. Amen-
Iritis his sister was a woman of rare intelligence and superior merit. She was three times 
regent of Egypt under three sovereigns of the Ethiopian dynasties, showing the respect the 
Ethiopian had for his womankind. Amen-Iritis was very popular at Thebes. Shabaka abolished 
capital punishment and substituted hard labor. At Luxor he appears making offerings to the 
gods of Thebes as a native sovereign. Tarkaka in 693 built the great temple of Gebel Barkel. 
Many of the reliefs of the pyramids present the Ethiopian rulers as Lord of the Two Lands, 
with the throne titles Amen and Ra. They wear the same symbols upon their heads. We read 
the names Ankh-Ka-Ra, Alu-Amen, Amen-Ark-Neb, showing that for ages Nubia and Egypt 
were ruled as one land, ages far earlier than the period marked in the average history as the 
Ethiopian dynasty.
The original inhabitants of Asia Minor, of the South Caspian and the basin of the 
Mediterranean were closely related to Egypt. They had the cranial formation of Upper Egypt. 
In Egyptian war scenes there appeared very strangely formed
p. 110
and remote nations, that because of distance had lost the ancient race type. We see red hair, 
blue eyes and tatooing on the legs like the ancient Scythian. These may not have been aliens 
but northern branches of the Cushite race. The extended conquests of the Egyptian kings do 
not seem at all impossible when we remember that they were recovering and reclaiming 
regions anciently their own. We know by the records that Amenophis (Memnon), seized the 
whole coast of Arabia, Libya and Ethiopia. In the Iranian histories he had extended his 
conquests to far Bactrina. Amenophis subdued the Scythic nations in the Caucasus. He 
marched into Colchis which was Ethiopian (Her. II, 104) and marched as far as the Don. 
These were but old Cushite dominions. The passage of Hercules represents the early 
colonization of Western Europe by the race. Other ancient records tell us that the Ethiopian 
Cymandes led an immense army to conquer the Bactrians. The triumphant arms of Osiris 
reached from the sources of the Ganges to the Danube in Europe. Western Europe had its 
legends of the passage of Bacchus and Dionysus.
p. 111
CHAPTER VIII.


--- PAGE 54 ---
ARABIA AND HER ANCIENT RACES.
Arabia was once a portion of the ancient Cushite empire. Some authorities claim that it was 
the original seat of Ethiopian culture. The ordinary encyclopedia and historical book give but 
little light upon the early race life of Arabia. When our research has gone deeper we will find 
that the true ethnic story of Arabia, Asia Minor and India have not yet been told. Recent 
books have rewritten the history of ancient Greece, as the findings or archaeology reveal other 
races and other sources for the civilization of Hellenic lands. The history of Arabia needs 
rewriting. This chapter is a contribution in that direction; the sum total of the careful 
investigations of scholars and investigators whom we can trust. The ancients gave Arabia a 
triple division. Petrea the stony, Deserta the desert, and Felix the happy. They did not assign 
to these any very distinct boundries and much of the real surface of Arabia is unknown to us 
today. Yemen includes the whole southwest quarter which possesses many advantages in 
climate and soil. Here existed to almost our times the late flowers of a rich primeval 
civilization, which did not spring from the Semitic race, which is in possession of Arabia 
today.
p. 112
Arabia Deserta, is the land of the Semitic Arabian for we, find two races incorporated in the 
term Arabian. The ancient Adites and Thamudites were of Ham. The ancient inhabitants of 
Arabia Petrae were of the "Anu" of the "Old Race" of Egypt. The Semitic Arabians trace their 
descent from Heber of the race of Shem. Deserta had the Euphrates for its eastern boundary. 
The inhabitants live a wandering life, having no cities or fixed habitations, but wholly 
dwelling in tents. These are called Bedouins. When the Scriptures spoke of Arabia it referred 
to a smaller territory than the vast region we call Arabia today. Hebrews spoke of Kedem as 
the land to the east of them. Arabia Petrae lies south of the Holy Land. In this region dwelt the 
Edomites, Amalkites, Cushites and other tribes. Arabia Felix lay still farther south being 
bounded by the Persian Gulf, the Red Sea and the ocean. This country abounded in riches and 
especially in spices and is now called Hedjaz. It is much celebrated because the cities of 
Mecca and Medina are situated in it.
Having never been really conquered, Arabia has known no changes saving those of nature. 
There the deserts and mountains have always secured them from conquest. Nejd the central 
plateau is an important region regarded by the Arabians as the stronghold of their cherished 
institutions and traditions. Nejd is the favored land of the date palm of superior species. It is 
the special pride and ornament of the country. The coffee plant is highly prized. This central
p. 113
highland is surrounded on all sides by a broad desert belt. In general features, Arabia 
resembles the African Sahara of which it is but a continuation. Its general characteristics are 
African. Arabia roughly summed up is composed of one third coast ring and mountains, one 
third central plateau which is tolerably fertile, and one third desert circle. Throughout the 
highland of Nejd, though the days are hot, the nights are cool and pleasant. Here epidemic 
diseases are rare. It is very hot below in the plains. Sayce says that the divisions of "sandy," 
"stony" and "happy," so familiar to the Greeks and Latins is unknown to the Arabians of 
today. This is because they were terms used by the earlier Cushite Arabians.
Arabia was originally settled by two distinct races, an earlier Cushite Ethiopian race and a 
later Semitic Arabian. 'The Cushites were the original Arabians and dwelt there before


--- PAGE 55 ---
Abraham came to Canaan. Ancient literature assigns their first settlement to the extreme 
southwestern point of the peninsula. From thence they spread northward and eastward over 
Yemen, Hadramaut and Oman. A proof that they were Hamites lay in the name Himyar or 
dusky, given to the ruling race. The Himyaritic language, now lost, but some of which is 
preserved, is African in origin and character. Its grammar is identical with the Abyssinian. 
The Encyclopedia Britannica in its article on Arabia says, "The institutions of Yemen bear a 
close resemblance to African types. The inhabitants of Yemen, Hadramaut,
p. 114
[paragraph continues] Oman and the adjoining districts, in shape of head, color, length and 
slenderness of limbs and scantiness of hair, point to an African origin." The first inhabitants 
of Arabia were known to the national traditions as Adites. The Scriptures called Ad a 
descendant of Ham.
These Cushite Arabians were given to a settled life and not to the wandering habits of the 
Semitic Arabians. They were fond of village life, society, the dance, and music. Among the 
cities the most ancient and populous were in "Happy Yemen." Like the Cushites of Egypt, 
here was the marvelous reservoir of Marib constructed by the Himyaritic kings. Their 
descendants of today are good cultivators of the soil, traders and artizans and averse to 
pastoral pursuits. All of these traits distinguish them from the Semitic race. They have much 
more to do with the African coast than the Asiatic. Marriage with extreme facility exists 
between all classes of southern Arabia and the African races. There is the absence of any caste 
feeling between these Arabs and the still darker natives of Africa. All of this points to a 
common origin. Keane thinks that these people of southwestern Arabia, at a remote period 
found their way across the narrow strait of Bab-el-Mandeb and secured a permanent foothold 
on the Nubian steppes. These Himyaritic Arabians call themselves Æthiopians still in 
diplomatic and elevated circles.
Arabia in the average book is described as a dreary barren waste, the home of the Semitic 
Arabian. In the most sterile regions we do find
p. 115
this race. They are a nomadic people wandering from pasturage to pasturage, as their 
ancestors have done from time immemorial and as they shall probably do to the end. The 
Arab despises agriculture and the customs and restraints of civilized life. There is constant 
resistance among them to anything like regal power or organization. There is some similitude 
between them and the Cushite Arabians for they have long lived in proximity; yet there is 
rivalry and the enmity that would spring from difference in race. The Semitic Arabians are 
compelled to a pastoral life because they occupy the most waste portions of the plateau. Their 
condition involves them in constant quarrels over wells and pasturage. This caused the 
separation of Abraham and Lot. Extreme want makes them plunderers of caravans. They are 
utterly ignorant of writing or books. This division of the inhabitants has no remembrance of 
the ancient geography of Arabia, because they were not then the inhabitants. The only 
authority that they recognize is that of an elder.
These Arabs trace their descent from Heber, from whom the line of Abraham descended. 
Abraham's son Joktan became the first king of the country. According to Herodotus their 
original home lay between Colchis and the Medes. They lived in Arabia without mingling 
until Ishmael, the son of Hagar settled among them. Some of these Ishmaelites applied


--- PAGE 56 ---
themselves to traffic and husbandry; for Hagar was Hamitic. It was from this class in later 
days arose the Mohammedan conquest. The tribe of Koreysh claimed
p. 116
to have descended from Ishmael through Hagar. They were intimately connected with the 
southern Cushite tribes that were the originators of the idol worship of the Kaaba at Mecca. 
The great majority of the Ishmaelites lived a life like the modern Bedouin, who too traced 
back to Ishmael. Their domains stretched from the Persian Gulf to the Red Sea. Their hand 
was against every man and every man's hand against them. These Arabs will not marry with 
the settled tribes or with Turks or Moors. The third division of pure Semitic Arabians 
probably sprang from the children of Abraham and Keturah. In prodigious multitude they 
cover Syria, Mesopotamia, Palestine, Egypt, and a great part of Africa.
These Semitic Arabians are quite unlike in nature to the Cushite and Hebrew stock, which in 
early ages must have been deeply permeated with Ethiopian blood. This made the Jew more 
gentle than the fierce nature of his wilder unmixed Semitic brethren. This intermingling of 
Hebrew and Ethiopic blood could easily have taken place in the four hundred years of the 
Jewish exile in Egypt, and later in Canaan they intermingled with the original inhabitants who 
were Cushite. Let us examine the nature of the pure Semitic race. Sayce. describes their life as 
full of danger and distress. Our private citizens possess more solid and pleasing luxuries than 
the proudest emir, head of ten thousand horse. The care of the sheep and camels is abandoned 
to the women, while under the banner of the emir the men practice the use of the bow, javelin 
and scimitar.
p. 117
[paragraph continues] The dignities of sheik and emir descend in an order that is loose and precarious. 
If an Arabian prince abuses his power, he is quickly punished by the desertion of his subjects. 
The natural state of the nation is free, each of her sons disdains submission to the will of a 
master.
Caravans from the remote times of Job and Sesostris have been the victims of their rapacious 
spirit. They pretend that the riches of the earth and the fertile climates were given to the other 
branches of the human family and that they must recover the portion of their inheritance of 
which they have been unjustly deprived. The caravans that traverse the deserts are ransomed 
or pillaged. The temper of a people thus armed against mankind is doubly inflamed by this 
domestic license of rapine, murder and revenge. Each Arab might point his javelin against the 
life of his countryman with impunity and renown. The jurisdiction of the magistrate was 
impotent. The recital in prose or verse of an obsolete feud was sufficient to kindle the same 
passions among the descendants of the hostile tribes. They would wait whole months and 
years for the opportunity of revenge. The refined malice of the Arab refuses even the head of 
the murderer, substitutes the innocent for the guilty person and transfers the penalty to the 
best and most considerable of the race by whom they have been injured.
The bitter hardships of the son of Abraham, cast out without succor, seems to have 
accentuated the evil of his nature. Sayce reveals a better side of Abraham showing in their 
hospitality. This
p. 118


--- PAGE 57 ---
ferocious Arab, the terror of the desert, embraces freely without inquiry, the stranger who, 
dares to confide in his honor and enter his tent. He is kind and respectful. He shares his wealth 
or property with his guest and dismisses him with gifts. Though disdaining law he proudly 
indulges the impulse of pity and alms. Thus everywhere over the earth where we find people 
crowded back by climate or conquest to bleak and barren districts we see the change of 
human nature from gentleness to ferocity. Columbus found a peaceful and gentle people in 
America.
The foregoing description of Arabia and Arabians found in Ancient Empires of the East, is not 
sufficient to give us a clear idea of Arabia and Arabians. It is a true and faithful account of the 
Semitic branch but does not amount for other conditions and races there. Palgrave's 
expedition to Arabia in 1862 found beside wandering Bedouins and wastes, a rich and 
beautiful country. Arabia is a vast region. Baldwin reports that he found throughout almost all 
his journey a settled and civilized country, with cities, towns, villages and a settled 
government. All of this was the legacy of the earlier culture. In these regions the Bedouin or 
later Arab counted for nothing. He found central Arabia an extensive, fertile tableland, 
surrounded by a circle of desert waste. Here were settled nations of the Cushite Arabian stock. 
Here they had developed for thousands of years the noble breed of Arabian horse. Naturalists 
agree hat Arabia is the genuine and original home of the horse. Here
p. 119
it attained its highest perfection, not perhaps in size, but in form, symmetry and beauty. For 
endurance, docility and speed for incredible distances these horses have no equals. Sayce 
says, that the Barb, the Spanish and the English breed are all built on the foundation of the 
imported Arabian horse.
The development of the camel is Arabian. It does not appear on any of the Egyptian 
monuments. The Bedouin has superstitious love for the pure horses of Arabia. A female is 
rarely sold. These horses are educated in the tents among the children of the Arabs. This trains 
them to habits of gentleness and attachment. Their senses are not blunted by abuse of spur or 
whip. As they feel the touch of the hand or stirrup, they dart away like the wind, if the rider is 
dismounted in the rapid chase, they instantly stop till he has recovered his seat. They 
disappear before the enemy like the mist. In the sands of the deserts of Africa and Arabia the 
camel is a sacred and precious gift. The driest thistle and the barest thorn is all the food they 
require, Nature has formed cisterns within the camel. He can lay up a store of water that will 
last him from twenty to thirty days. The value of the camel to the Arabs and Oriental nations 
is inestimable. They regard it as a peculiar gift of heaven to their race. They were called the 
"ships of Persia," so dependent was commerce upon their instinct to cross the trackless 
wastes. A dromedary can cover ten times as much ground
p. 120
as a horse. Every part of the camel filled some Arabian need.
To the Cushite race belonged the oldest and purest Arabian blood. They were the original 
Arabians and the creators of the ancient civilization, evidences of which may be seen in the 
stupendous ruins to be found in every part of the country. At the time that Ethiopians began to 
show power as monarchs of Egypt about 3000 to 3500 B. C. the western part of Arabia was 
divided into two powerful kingdoms. In those days the princes of Arabia belonged wholly to 
the descendants of the Cushites, who ruled Yemen for thousands of years. Zohak, celebrated


--- PAGE 58 ---
in Iranian history was one of these famous rulers. These Arabians hid the sources of their 
commerce and the Greeks had of them only cunning stories that the Arabians put in 
circulation about their country. Much of the rich commerce of India, the treasurers of Africa, 
crossed between Yeman and Syria avoiding the tedious navigation of the Red Sea. Strabo, 
Pliny, Diodorus and Ptolemy tell us that in very early ages, Yemen reached a high state of 
civilization. Arts and commerce flourished and wealth was accumulated, literature was 
cultivated and talent held in esteem. The national writings that survive to this day, tell the 
same story. This culture had declined before its extinction in the seventh century.
The Encyclopedia Britannica (Vol. II, p. 222, 223) says, "The first dawning gleams that 
deserve to be called history find Arabia under the rule of a southern race. They claimed 
descent
p. 121
from Khatan. They were divided anciently into several aristocratic monarchies. These 
Yemenite kings descendants of Khatan and Himyar 'the dusky,' a name denoting African 
origin, whose rulers were called 'Tobba,' of Hamitic etymology, reigned with a few dynastic 
interruptions for about 2500 years. They demanded the obedience of the entire southern half 
of the peninsula and the northern by tribute collectors. The general characteristics of the 
institutions of Yemen bore considerable resemblance to the neighboring one of the Nile 
Valley." One of its monarchs subdued the whole of central Asia, reaching even the boundries 
of China. Another made conquests in Africa. Their chroniclers appropriated the glories and 
some of the exploits of the early kings of Ethiopia, because Arabia, Egypt, Chaldea, and India 
were colonies of the Cushite empire. Ethiopia was mother of them all and her rulers under 
various titles were their rulers. Modern histories speak of the Semitic conquest of Babylon as 
early as 4500 B. C. which is erroneous unless they explain that these Arabians were Cushite 
Arabians, another division of the race of the black Sumerians. The line of Sargon 3800 B. C. 
was of the same race. Each one of these early Arabian conquests was of African Arabs.
While the sceptre of Yemen was outstretched far over the length and breadth of the land and 
the genuine or African Arabs formed a complete and dense circle all around, the deserts of 
Arabia remained the stronghold of a different
p. 122
race, wild, ferocious tribes, less susceptible to culture, but of a far greater energy. This race 
was the Semitic Arabian, that had come into the land from the north. They spoke a language 
akin to the Syriac and Hebrew. Unlike the African Arabians they had little disposition for 
agriculture, architecture or the fine arts. Their instincts led them to a nomadic, pastoral life. 
History has left unrecorded the exact date of their arrival and the period that they remained 
tributary, though often refractory, to the kings of Yemen. In the fifth century of the Christian 
era, a late date, a leader arose who broke off the bonds of Yemen. He slew the tax gatherer 
and raised the banner of revolt. He was assassinated and in the sixth century they had 
narrowed the boundries of the earlier Cushite Arabian monarchies, and both northern and 
southern communities were coming under the growing power of the tribe of Koreysh.
The Koreysh figure as the descendants of Ishmael. In their artificial annals, says Britannica, 
me Yemenites or genuine Arabs appear under a cousinly character. On all these points 
Mohammedan annalists are equally positive. All other trusty testimony is adverse. Their 
falsifications have found favor with our European writers. Baldwin in Prehistoric Nations, pp.


--- PAGE 59 ---
76, 77, says, that the Semitic Arabians and later Mohammedans confused and altered the 
earlier Arabian history. They sought to bring upon themselves the glory of the Cushite 
Arabian name. They have appropriated the names of the old Ethiopians, whose career had 
long since closed before the entrance
p. 123
of the Semites into Arabia. Mohammedan writers give but vague pictures of the conditions of 
their country. They were not a literary people. and their first attempts were after the death of 
their prophet. The times of Mohammed were becoming ancient when these men wrote. They 
had entered Arabia after the extended empire of the Cushite Arabians had declined and 
disunited. The Semitic Arabian lived a rude nomadic life in obscurity until 700 A. D., Arabian 
civilization extended back behind them for thousands of years.
To sum up, 3000 to 3,500 B. C. Arabian civilization equaled that of Egypt and Babylon. The 
ancient glory had departed prior to the rise of Assyria. The same wave that entered Arabia 
from the north had become predominant in Assyria, which from its monuments had in its 
origin been Cushite. The fierce nature of the Semitic Arabian and of the children of Esau, 
whom Abraham had said in blessing their father, "they shall live by the sword," showed in the 
merciless tortures and cruelties of the later Assyrians. The first Adite empire of Arabia was 
overthrown 1800 B. C., so long ago that the cause now is mythical. The ancient chronicles 
speak of a "Flood of Arem," which dispersed the families of Yemen over the northern part of 
Arabia. This flood destroyed Mareb the ancient capital. Lenormant says in the Ancient 
History of the East, Vol. II, p. 306, "The Jokanites were subject to the Cushites until the end 
of the second Adite empire. We may be sure the Sabaeans, who at first
p. 124
let them in peaceably made a stout resistance. The Cushites were their superiors in knowledge 
and, civilization." It had been a Cushite principle to mete out equal justice to aliens. For many 
years the Semites lived subject to the laws of the Sabaeans, silently increasing in strength. 
They accepted in part the language, manners and institutions of the Cushites. At last they rose 
and overthrew those who had given them the light.
None of the ancient empires were able to subjugate Arabia. Bravely for thousands of years 
she maintained her freedom. When the second Adite empire was overthrown, masses of the 
Sabaeans emigrated to Abyssinia. Ghez is a living relic of the ancient speech of Yemen. 
These Cushites clung long to their faith and peculiar institutions. Alexander the Great, hearing 
of her rich treasures, desired to pit his great strength against her, but death interrupted his 
plans. Ælius Gallus, Roman prefect of Egypt, undertook an expedition against Yemen, with 
an army of ten thousand infantry and fifteen hundred horsemen. He crossed the Red Sea but 
his soldiers, disorganized by the intense beat, were incapable of laying siege to Mareb. The 
old Cushites of Yemen stoutly maintained their independence, when other dominions were 
forced to yield to Rome. After me Mohammedan conquests, which exhausted the Arabians, 
they were easy prey for the Turks. Thus came the fall of that empire, as Assyrians, taught and 
inspired by an earlier culture, which carried the arms, language
p. 125
and institutions of Arabia over half of the old world, "from the banks of the Indus to the 
shores of the Atlantic ' from the mid-African desert with its burning sands to the green


--- PAGE 60 ---
vineyards of pleasant France." This later flower of Semitic culture "s grafted upon the old 
Cushite root. The later lines of conquest following the identical pathways of the ancient 
Cushite empire of Ethiopians.
p. 126
CHAPTER IX.
THE MARVELOUS ARABIAN CIVILIZATION.
Arabia was one of the earliest colonies of the ancient Cushite Empire of Ethiopians. Baldwin 
claims that it was the original land of Cush. He says, "In the oldest recorded traditions, Arabia 
is the land of Cush, the celebrated Ethiopia of very remote times." He continues, "In ages 
older than Egypt or Chaldea, Arabia was the seat of an enlightened and enterprising 
civilization that went far into neighboring countries. At that time Arabia was the exalted and 
wonderful Ethiopia of olden tradition, the center and life of what in western Asia was known 
as the civilized world. Traditions of the ancient world rightly interpreted can have no other 
meaning. In the early traditions and records of Greece, Arabia was described as Ethiopia." 
Arabia was only separated from old Ethiopia by the Red Sea. We would decide that the "Old 
Race" of the Upper Nile early sent colonies across the sea, which built up the cities and 
communities along the opposite Arabian coast. This happening before the founding of 
Memphis or the colonizing of Chaldea.
The Scriptures unite Arabia with the most intimate dealings of God with men. Here says the 
Cyclopedia of Biblical Literature, were transacted
p. 127
the marvelous panorama of the life of the Patriarch Job, who was described as one of the 
greatest men of the east. To this land Moses escaped after killing the Egyptian. Here he lived 
(put to school as it were) among the Midianites, descendants of Cush. Here he married a 
daughter of Ethiopia, here: he saw the burning bush and here he talked with God. Here Elijah 
was fed by the ravens. In Arabia was the scene of all the marvelous displays of divine power 
and mercy that followed the deliverance of Israel from Egypt and accompanied their 
journeyings into the Promised Land, and here Jehovah manifested himself in visible glory to 
his people. Here today in the desert of Sin, manna still forms a tiny cereal upon the rocks. It 
was out of this region that God selected the race through which in two religions, one supreme 
God should be revealed to the world, the Hebrews and Mohammedans spring from the same 
race.
These primitive Semites were a north Arabian race. Southern Arabia was occupied by the 
older and more civilized Ethiopian race. Gibbon speaks of Sabaeans in north Arabia, if they 
were it was families that had passed northward after the Flood of Arem, which dispersed the 
families of old Yemen over northern Arabia. These people were advanced in civilization. The 
fact that the father-in-law of Moses could show him defects in his administration of 
government, proves that he was in possession of an older and more seasoned form of law. The 
Scriptures tell us that Moses harkened to the voice of his father-in-law
p. 128


--- PAGE 61 ---
and did all that he said. There is marked similarity between the Jewish law and the code of 
Hammurabi, which was the essence of the old laws that for thousands of years had ruled the 
Cushite race. The Jewish law maker was thus placed in close contact with the race which in 
earlier ages had possessed the revelations of God in law and equity. This is why the code of 
Hammurabi, though it preceded Jewish law by many ages, yet in many features was the same 
code.
Arabia possessed many products in ancient days, that were coveted by the rest of the world. 
Nothing then was considered more costly and desirable than frankincense and myrrh, which 
were Arabia's fabled products. It was by this commerce that she amassed her fabulous wealth. 
The treasures of Africa were conveyed over the peninsula to Gerrha. Joined by the pearls of 
the Persian Gulf, this commerce was floated on rafts to the mouth of the Euphrates. Diodorus 
Siculus says, Bk. II, ch. 3, "The perfumes of Arabia ravished the senses and were conveyed 
by the winds to those who sailed near the coast. Having never been conquered, by the 
largeness of their country, they flow in gold and silver; and likewise their beds, chairs and 
stools have their feet of silver; and all their house stuff is so sumptuous and magnificent that it 
is incredible. The porticoes of their homes and temples, in some cases are overlaid with gold. 
They have enjoyed a constant uninterrupted peace for many ages and generations. 
Archaeological research has proved
p. 129
these assertions to have been true of the southern Arabians of the Hamitic race.
Pliny said of these Arabians that they were the richest nations in the world. The harbors of 
Oman and Aden were laden with the precious cargo of perfumes. Agatharchides declared, 
"The Sabaeans surpass in wealth and magnificence not only the neighboring barbarians but all 
the nations whatsoever. As their distant situation protects them from foreign plunderers, 
immense stores of precious metals have, been accumulated among them, especially in the 
capital. They have curiously wrought gold and silver drinking vessels in great variety, 
couches and tripods, with silver feet; an incredible profusion of costly furniture in general; 
porticoes with large columns partly gilt and capitals ornamented with gold fretwork set with 
precious stones; besides an extraordinary magnificence reigning in the decorations of their 
houses, where they use silver, gold, ivory and the most precious stones and all other things 
that men deem valuable." (De Mari Erythraeo, 102.) This civilization was one that rose and 
perished long before the day of the Saracens.
From Baldwin's researches we learn that Strabo, Pliny, Ptolemy, as well as the Hebrew 
writers speak of the great cities of Arabia, that no longer exist. So fax back does this ancient 
civilization extend that from the great length of time its literature has disappeared. The 
monuments of these Himyarites were inscribed with an obsolete and mysterious alphabet. The 
present Cufic letters
p. 130
were invented on the banks of the Euphrates, Gibbon tells us. The present inhabitants cannot 
explain the ancient ruins. They owe their origin to very remote antiquity. At Mareb is the 
Great Tank, so famous in Arabic tradition. The history of its origin was lost before the age of 
Solomon. Then the solid and vast embankment was going to decay. The ancient city of Saba 
was in ruins before the time of Christ. Throughout Yemen are to be found gigantic ruins 
which bewilder the beholders, who cannot understand how they were raised by human hands.


--- PAGE 62 ---
They were built by the same race that reared the columns at Belbec and Karnak. These 
original Arabians were spoken of by later Arabs as Adites, Men of Ad, giants of old.
Lenormant in his painstaking researches found that Cushites were the first inhabitants of 
Arabia and were known in the national traditions as Adites. These descended from Ad, a 
grandson of Ham. His sons were Shedid and Shedad. To them was attributed the Shepherd 
invasion of Egypt. It was recorded in the traditions that one of them built a palace of superb 
columns surrounded by a magnificent garden. He tried to imitate the celestial paradise and 
God took him away. The Adites, were depicted as men of gigantic stature. Fanciful tales like 
the Arabian Nights exist in Arabian legends, springing from the same source as those of the 
Egyptian manuscripts. Lenormant says, "We may perceive in all this the remembrance of a 
powerful empire founded by Cushites in very early ages. We find
p. 131
traces of a wealthy nation, constructors of great buildings, with an advanced civilization like 
that of Chaldea. This must be true as everywhere we find traces of Cushites in Arabian 
literature and their brothers the Canaanites." (Ancient History of the East, Lenormant, Vol. III, 
Arabians, p. 296 )
Alexander the Great said that Arabia was inferior to no country of the earth. He referred to the 
once famous town of Oman, which had been a harbor of the ancient commerce. It was in the 
day of Alexander a wilderness. His estimate of these Cushites was, "Taking them all in all, 
they are the richest nation of the world." Alexander lived in the declining days of Ethiopian 
power. Himyar was the son of Seba, the son of Cush. These were the people of Yemen and 
the Sabaeans of the Greeks. Lenormant called them related to the Accadians of Shinar and the 
Ghez of Abyssinia. Himyar became the head of the dynasty of Himyarites. These Cushite 
Arabians were a fine race of remarkable stature, and dark complexion. The Semitic Arabians 
are brown, thin, small, well formed and of opposite traits from the Cushite Arabian. The 
Omanee kingdom attained a latter great splendor at the beginning of the Nineteenth Century. 
The conquering Mohammedan tribes of the north in idol-destroying mood have effaced all the 
pagan temples that once covered Arabia. Several enormous stone circles like those of some 
parts of Europe, built as a form of primitive religion, still remain.
At Hagerein, Gen. E. T. Haig saw the ruins
p. 132
of once fertile districts under the weight of sand that had overwhelmed them. There were 
ruins of once lofty square buildings. The ground lies strewn with fragments of Himyaritic 
inscriptions and pottery. Wherever he found ruins they were on elevated spots. The centers of 
civilization in the valleys must have been buried very deeply. Arabia, just as once fertile spots 
of the Sahara, has been overwhelmed by the sand. At Al Azorem are many ancient stone 
monuments on slightly elevated ground. The old Cushite stones of cromlech type abound. 
They are decorated with geometric patterns, which are like the Cushite decorations of 
Rhodesia in Africa and those of Asia Minor. There were buildings surrounded by stone walls. 
Welsted uncovered at Nakab-el-Hajar a massive wall, thirty or forty feet high flanked with 
square towers. On the face of the building he found an inscription in the ancient Himyaritic 
writing, which is a form of the primitive African language and has no relation to the Semitic 
tongues.


--- PAGE 63 ---
In Yemen appears another evidence of Cushite occupation, the terracing to be found on all 
ancient Hamitic sites. In one district the whole mountainside was terraced from top to bottom. 
Gen. Haig saw in this district everywhere above, below and around, endless flights of terraced 
walls. One can hardly realize the enormous amount of labor, toil and perseverance, these 
represent. These walls were usually four or five feet in height, but toward the top, they were 
sometimes is high as fifteen to eighteen feet. Agriculture
p. 133
among these indefatigable people was brought to the highest degree of perfection. They 
constructed immense dikes, forming permanent reservoirs, which irrigated the lowlands in dry 
weather. The Semitic Arabian abhors agriculture. It is by these differences in traits that we 
can unerringly detect race. When the Israelites first appear in the light of Bible history, they 
were keepers of flocks. Pastorals do not originate culture. The nature of their life renders it 
impossible. Nomadic people. have been the invincible opponents of culture.
A primitive form of religion called Sabaeanism spread all over the Arabian provinces in the 
earlier ages. We find a gross form of Sabaeanism among the Turanian nations mixed with 
magic, but this religion in Arabia was without images, idolatry or priesthood. Once this 
religion was spread over the whole primitive world wherever Cushites were established. They 
addressed worship to the stars from high places. It was probably from this observation of the 
stars, that the science of astronomy first developed among them. To this use was put the tops 
of the pyramids. The pyramids of the ancients were built by this race for sacerdotal purposes. 
In India, Egypt, Rhodesia, in West Africa and western Europe this worship from high 
mountains was slow to die out. The ancient inhabitants of Arabia Petraea and Yemen believed 
in one god and a future life. .Dead ancestors were canonized and worshipped by their 
families. This one custom marked the race of "Anu" one of the names of the "Old
p. 134
[paragraph continues] Race" of the Upper Nile. The people that by the traditions of Western Europe 
settled old Gaul, Ireland, Spain, and ancient Thrace.
Myers tells us in his Ancient History, that just as the "Odyssey" of Homer mirrored the trade 
voyages of the prehistoric Greeks, so the marvelous tales of Sinbad the Sailor pictured the 
adventures of the Cushite Arabian sailors upon the seas. The ships of these Ethiopians in the 
early ages of their dominion covered the ancient world. It was from this branch of the race, 
that the early race of India gained the knowledge that appears in Sanskrit books, that contain 
maps upon which we can trace the outlines of Western Europe and the British Isles. These 
books portray knowledge of ages prior to 2000 B. C. The Phoenicians in later times only 
followed courses that their Cushite cousins had pursued in earlier ages. They learned 
geography from their wide conquests and extended trade relations. The Portuguese found 
maps and charts in their possession when they first came in contact with them on the coasts of 
East Africa, which were original and authentic. Some showed routes extending to the new 
world long before the age of Columbus.
One early Portuguese map, gained from these Arabians marks South America, Western Africa 
and Southern Europe, as three ancient centers of civilization. The remains of primitive 
American nations give forth relics, proving ancient Cushite communication. Before the arrival 
of the Portuguese, Arabian navigators had kept this knowledge secret. With declining 
Ethiopian power the


--- PAGE 64 ---
p. 135
links of this great chain had been broken to the Americas but they still kept up the ancient 
lines of trade with the nations peculiarly Cushite, India, Chaldea, South Africa, and Western 
Europe. By caravan routes they crossed deserts and delivered merchandise to the North 
African colonies, which in ages earlier than Phoenician dominion had been Cushite Ethiopian 
nations. To sum up we must decide that the meager information of the average historical book 
is very misleading as to who were the original Arabians and the giving of the right credit to 
the race which was responsible for the earlier so-called Arabian conquest of Babylonia. The 
later spurious stock, the Semitic Arabians appeared there in comparatively modern times. 
They were a pastoral, warlike people who in their mode of life, their food, their dress, their 
traits, manners, customs, and government were wholly unlike the original Arabians.
Through the ages these differences have remained unalterable. The riches to be gained as 
carriers induced some of the Semitic Arabian tribes from the more wild life to the service of 
bearers of the rich ancient commerce over the, deserts. Having to constantly change their 
residence these Semites live in movable tents. These are divided into two parts one of which 
is for the women. The tents are arranged in an irregular circle, the space between being 
reserved as a fold for the cattle at night. As they have no land belonging to themselves they 
change their abode as often as they please. Col. Capper thus
p. 126
describes an Arab encampment, "From this hill, we could see at a distance of about three 
miles an Arab encampment, an immense body. There were nearly twenty thousand of them 
including women and children. They demanded and received tribute from us and promised a 
protecting guard until we were past all danger of attack from their detached bands." Those too 
poor to own a tent sheltered themselves under a piece of cloth suspended from poles Their 
tents are of coarse black material woven by the women from goats' hair.
The primitive nature of the Semitic Arabian is to be seen in the religion of Mohammed, in the 
presentation of his gospel, at the point of the sword; as Gibbon says, if they professed the 
creed of Islam they were admitted to all spiritual and material benefits. His apostles united the 
professions of merchant and robber. The distribution of the spoil was regulated according to 
Mohammed by divine law. From all sides the roving Arabs were allured to his standard by 
this combination of religion and plunder. In one incidence seven hundred Jews were dragged 
in chains to the market place of the city and descended alive into the grave prepared for their 
execution and burial; and the Apostle beheld with an inflexible eye the slaughter of his 
helpless enemies. In 628, the town of Khaibar surrendered, the chief of the tribe was tortured 
in the presence of Mohammed, to force confession of his hidden treasure.
Gibbon looks on the other side of Mohammed's character. He seemed endowed, whether he 
was
p. 137
an imposter or enthusiast, with a pious and contemplative disposition. He despised the pomp 
of royalty; he observed without effort or vanity the abstemious diet of an Arab and a soldier. 
The interdiction of wine arose and was confirmed by his example. The freedom of divorce 
was discouraged and adultery made a capital offense. During the twenty-four years of his 
marriage to his first wife, he abstained from polygamy. At her death he placed her in the rank


--- PAGE 65 ---
of the four perfect women. The triumphant banners of Mohammed after his death waved over 
the cities of the Euphrates. Persia was reduced. Turning to Syria, his followers invested 
Damascus, which fell; then Jerusalem, until all Syria, bowed under the scepter of the caliphs. 
Greek rule had become odious in Egypt and it was gladly exchanged for the rule of the 
Saracens. The Greeks retreated from Upper Egypt and made their last stand at Alexandria. 
After a siege of fourteen months the Saracens prevailed. Mohammed's standard was set up on 
the walls of the capital of Egypt.
Let us examine the passage of the Semitic Arabians across Africa. Was his influence for the 
making of civilization? They burned the priceless collection of books that made up the 
Alexandrian library, in which were locked up the secrets of the lost arts and the knowledge of 
the origin of civilization. So great was the number of books that six months were needed for 
the consumption of this precious fuel. Every scholar with pious indignation has deplored this 
irreparable shipwreck of the learning and genius of antiquity. Many
p. 138
[paragraph continues] Africans and Moors helped to make up the numbers and strength of the armies 
of the Saracens. After successive expeditions, the arms of Hassan reduced and pillaged 
Carthage. Greeks and Goths who came to the aid of Carthage were defeated and the city given 
to the flames. This ancient Metropolis of Africa was destroyed, all but the broken arches of an 
aqueduct. The Moors under the standard of a queen attacked the invaders with an enthusiasm 
equal to their own and the Arabians were driven back to the confines of Egypt. In later 
expeditions the blood of the Moors and Semites was insensibly mixed.
Moor and Arab attacked Spain then under the crumbling domination of the Goth. They landed 
at the Pillars of Hercules. The royal city of Toledo fell. Their conquest spread northward. A 
table of emerald, Gothic spoil from the Romans, was sent to the caliph at Damascus. In 712 
A. D. 10,000 Arabs and 8,000 Africans passed over from Mauritania into Spain. The ports 
were thrown open to the vessels of Syria and the Goths were pursued to Gaul. Spain imbibed 
in a few generations the name and manners of the Arabs. This need not be surprising for in 
Spain was the basic blood of the Cushite, that ran in the Moor and the Cushite Arabian, who 
as natives of Yemen and other Cushite centers of Arabia, represented the proudest and noblest 
of the Arabian tribes. From this combination of conquerors sprang a most prosperous era of 
wealth, cultivation and populousness for Spain. Those who were willing to pay a moderate 
tribute were allowed freedom of
p. 139
conscience in religious worship. Where it paid the Moslem practiced moderation.
A glance taken over the vast empire of the Semitic Arabians finds them extended from the 
confines of Tartary and India to the shores of the Atlantic. The laws of the Koran were studied 
with equal zeal at Samaracand and Seville. Hindu and Moor embraced as brothers on the 
pilgrimage to Mecca. Yet this does not seem strange for the Moor and Hindu in race were 
brothers. Forty-six years after the flight of Mohammed from Mecca, Arabian arms appeared 
under the walls of Constantinople in siege of the city. The solid and lofty walls were guarded 
by numbers and discipline. For six summers they made an attack with a retreat. This revived 
me reputation of the Roman arms and cast a momentary shade over the glory of the Saracens. 
Persia and Syria revolted. 717 A. D. the attack was made on Constantinople by 120,000 Arabs 
and Persians. A huge armada approached from Egypt and Syria. Entering the harbor they


--- PAGE 66 ---
were assailed with Greek Be and the Arabian arms and vessels were involved in flames. In a 
later attempt the Egyptian ships deserted to the Christian emperor. The arms of Arabia retired 
after almost incredible disasters.
The deliverance of Constantinople sprang from the terror and efficacy of Greek fire. The skill 
of a chemist defeated fleets and armies, a distant forerunner of the gases of the world war of 
our day. Its composition was guarded by the Greeks with zealous care. It was the invention of 
a Cushite
p. 140
Arabian but was bought by the emperor and it filled the Semitic Arabs with superstitious 
terror. The secret of Greek fire was finally stolen by the Mohammedans and returned upon the 
heads of the Christians in the holy wars of Syria and Egypt. This Arabian invention effected a 
revolution in the art of war and in the history of mankind. Turning for a survey of the onward 
sweep of the Saracens of the west, we find them invading Gaul (France). Here we find Goth, 
Gascon and Franks assembled under the standard of the Duke of Iberian (Cushite) Aquitaine. 
He repelled their first invasion. In a second engagement the Arabs conquered and overran 
Aquitaine They stripped the churches of their ornaments and delivered them to the flames. 
Their invasion formed the groundwork of many a weird tale of chivalry.
Had they not been checked, instead of the Bible, interpretations of the Koran would today be 
taught at Oxford. To a circumcised people would be demonstrated the revelations of 
Mohammed. Christendom was delivered by the genius of one man. Half the kingdom was in 
the hands of the Saracens when Charles Martel, Duke of the Franks aided by the Germans met 
the enemy in the, center of France. At the close of seven days of fighting the leader of the 
Saracens was slain. The tribes of Yemen, Damascus, Africa and Spain were provoked to turn 
their arms against one an-other. A hasty and separate retreat was made the spoils being left in 
the tents. The victory of the Franks was complete and final. Aquitaine
p. 141
was recovered by the arms of Eudes. Thus the ancient Franks saved the Christian world. 
Arabia at this time was convulsed with the massacre of the warring factions claiming their 
right of succession to the authority of Mohammed. The chair of Mohammed was disputed by 
three caliphs. At Bagdad they aspired to emulate the magnificence of the Persian kings. 
$150,000,000 was exhausted in a few years by the children of Caliph Almansor. His grandson 
showered a thousand pearls of largest size upon the head of his bride. Barges and boats of 
superb decoration were seen on the Tigris. In the palace were 38,000 pieces of tapestry, 
12,500 of which were embroidered with gold.
Here was a perfect setting for the stories of the Arabian Nights, Gibbons continues this 
description, "A hundred lions were brought out with a keeper to each lion. Among the other 
spectacles of rare and stupendous luxury was a tree of gold and silver spreading into eighteen 
large branches, on the lesser branches sat a variety of birds made of the same precious metals, 
as well as the leaves of the tree. While the machinery effected spontaneous motions, the 
several birds warbled their natural harmony." In the west the Caliphs of Cordova supported an 
equal pomp. The hall of audience was incrusted with gold and pearls. The caliph was attended 
to the field by a guard of 12,000 horse, whose belts and scimitars were studded with gold. 
Luxury terminated the progress of the Arabian empire. 786 A. D. Harun, the most powerful 
and vigorous


--- PAGE 67 ---
p. 142
monarch of his race, ascended the throne. He was the perpetual hero of the Arabian tales. He 
swept the surface of Asia Minor. The ruin was complete, the spoil was ample, 823 A. D. the 
islands of Crete and Sicily fell and the cities of the age of Minos became thirty.
846 A. D. a fleet of Saracens from the African coast entered the Tiber and approached Rome. 
Her gates and ramparts were guarded by a trembling people. The costly offerings were torn 
from the altars. The Arabians divided their forces to pillage the neighboring towns of Fundi 
and Gaeta, and this division saved the capital from the yoke of the Prophet of Mecca. 838 
Saracens advanced again upon Constantinople. A domestic traitor after fifty-five days of 
fruitless fighting pointed out the weakest part of the wall. Constantinople fell, the Arabs 
satiated with destruction then returned to Bagdad. Quarter was seldom given in the field. 
Those who escaped the edge of the sword were condemned to helpless servitude or exquisite 
torture. As the Arabian conquerors mingled with the servile crowds of Persia, Syria and 
Egypt, they lost the free-born virtues of the desert. Therefore the mercenary forces of the 
caliphs were recruited from the north. Mutasm introduced into the capital fifty thousand 
Turks. His son was cut in seven pieces by their swords. In three years they created, deposed 
and murdered three commanders of the faithful. Then Abbasids curbed and divided their 
power.
Near the end of the ninth century an imposter
p. 143
arose. He relaxed the duties, ablution, fasting and pilgrimage. His twelve apostles dispersed 
themselves among the Bedouins, a race of men whom Abulfeda called equally devoid of 
reason and religion. His subjects were ripe for revolt disclaiming the title of the house of 
Abbas and abhorring the worldly pomp of the caliphs of Bagdad. 107,000 fanatics took and 
pillaged the cities of Racca, Baalbec, Cufa and Bassora. Bagdad was filled with consternation. 
The city was taken. They stormed and trampled upon the most venerable relics of the 
Mohammedan faith. Their sect was finally broken into sections but they were a second visible 
cause of the fall of the empire of caliphs. A third cause was the unwieldiness of the empire 
resulting from its magnitude. The provinces of Syria and Egypt were twice dismembered by 
Turkish slaves. The sons of the caliphs were educated in the vices of kings. 1000 A. D. Persia 
became free and her language and genius revived. Radhi the thirty-ninth of the successors of 
the Prophet was the last to represent the wealth and magnificence of the caliphs. After him the 
lords of the eastern world were reduced to abject misery. The treasury was no longer 
replenished by the spoil and tribute of nations. The African and Turkish guards turned their 
swords against each other. The chief commanders imprisoned or deposed their sovereigns. 
945 A. D. the caliph was dragged from the throne to a dungeon. His palace was pillaged and 
his eyes put out.
In this school of adversity the caliphs went
p. 144
back to the rigid virtues of the more primitive times. Sometimes through the division of their 
tyrants the Abbasids were restored to the sovereignty of Bagdad. Their misfortunes were 
embittered by the triumphs of the Fatimites, claimed progeny of the daughter of Mohammed. 
Rising from the extremity of Africa, they put an end to the authority of the Abbasids. In the


--- PAGE 68 ---
declining age of the caliphs the arms of the Byzantine empire extirpated the nest of the 
Arabian pirates upon the island of Crete. 963 A. D. and 969 A. D. was the most splendid 
period of the Byzantine annals. Roman arms were carried into the heart of Syria. The reign of 
Caesar and of Christ was restored at Antioch the ancient metropolis of the east. At Aleppo 
they found in the stately palace outside the walls a magazine of arms, 1400 mules and three 
hundred bags of silver and gold. A hundred cities were reduced to obedience. Greek ardor was 
quickened to seize the virgin treasures of Bagdad but they had already been dissipated by the 
avarice and prodigality of the domestic tyrants. The fears of Bagdad were relieved by the 
retreat of the Greeks. Hunger and thirst had guarded the deserts of Mesopotamia. The emperor 
laden with oriental spoils returned to Byzantium. The Moslems purified their temples and 
overturned their idols but the old days of glory were fled. 1538 the claim to the caliphate 
passed to the Ottoman Turks. Their sultan called himself head of the Mohammedan world.
p. 145
CHAPTER X.
THE RICH ARABIAN LITERATURE.
Gibbon speaks of the times of ignorance that preceeded Mohammed. This is true if we speak 
of Semitic Arabia, but later research has revealed a different source for the literature of the 
land. Britannica says of Arabia (Vol. 2, p. 230), "Arabia if poor in monuments is 
superabundantly rich in manuscripts. There are verses inscribed to the kings and heroes of 
Yemen dated a thousand years or more before the Christian era. We find undeniable 
specimens of at least two full centuries before Mohammed, of poems which in vigor and 
polish yield to few composed in Arabic or any other tongue. At this early date we find 
metrical and rhythmical laws simple, yet susceptible to the highest art, with a scansion of 
almost Horatian elegance and variety, that Pope himself might have admired but could hardly 
have imitated." The nations of Arabia that were nomadic were tardy in the arts of peace. 
Before the time of Mohammed they had no literature. The times of the prophet were growing 
ancient when his disciples wrote. To whom then would we attribute this earlier literature of 
Arabia? Let us go deeper into research to find out.
Oriental histories say that the language spoken in the more ancient times was wholly different
p. 146
from the Arabic of Mohammed. The fragments of verse composed at least a thousand years 
before Christ were in the ancient Himyaritic tongue and the language of Yemen glorifying its 
heroes was the same Himyaritic dialect. In the days before Islam, not far from Mecca at Okad, 
was held a national meeting like the Olympiads of the Greeks. It was an annual fair, 
frequented by men of all conditions from every quarter of Arabia. It lasted thirty days, 
preceeding the annual pilgrimage, which itself was taken over by Mohammed from the earlier 
life. As well as the exchange of corn and wine, there was the enjoyment of eloquence and 
poetry. We may read in our own language the seven original poems which were inscribed in 
letters of gold and suspended in the temple at Mecca. In the Fourth and Fifth Centuries A. D. 
poetry had become a refined art. The metrical contests were firmly established. The most 
renowned poets crowned at these festivals were Antar, Amur-El-Kais and Tarafab. This


--- PAGE 69 ---
Arabian Olympiad was abolished by the ignorance and fanaticism of the first followers of 
Mohammed.
Let us examine this fair that had sprung out of the culture of the earlier Cushite Arabian races 
Horse races, poetical recitals, and every kind of amusement, was used to offset the weightier 
commercial transactions of an open fair. It had the proportions of a national exhibition. Here 
the best masters of art met for the purpose of reciting their compositions and receiving the 
reward. Metenebhe was esteemed by many as the greatest
p. 147
[paragraph continues] Arabian poet. In range of thought and excellence of diction he surpassed all. 
Toghrai furnished Tennyson with his model for Locksley Hall. Ebn Farigh composed poetry 
that has never in its kind been surpassed or even equaled by the poets of any land. We find in 
the annals Noseyyeb, a Negro who was master of descriptive poetry. This is the estimate of 
the Arabian poets by the literary critics of high repute of other lands. Many European writers 
drew their inspirations from romances and legends like the Exploits of Antar, and the Arabian 
Nights, which have become a part of the real literature of the world.
The culture of the Saracens and Islam arose and flourished from ingrafting of Semitic blood 
upon the older Cushite root. The mingled language was distinguished for its richness, softness 
and high degree of development. By the spread of Islam it became the sole written language 
of all southwestern Asia, eastern and northern Africa and for a time of southern Spain, Malta 
and Sicily. Arabic writers of the Semitic division, wrote so late, that from religious prejudice 
and lapse of time they were incapable of being faithful historians of the older Cushite 
civilization. In their versions those old cities of the Adites and Thalmonites were enterprising 
rich and powerful. They represented them as of wonderful magnificence, but Mohammedan 
ardor, as Baldwin points out, executed upon these cities miraculous judgments, because of 
unbelief in Islam, which did not then exist. "These are but faint and confused recollections of 
a civilization that had decaying
p. 148
monuments, ruined cities, and mysterious antiquities before the, time of Khatan which itself 
was ancient. These wonderful creations disappeared, not in fiery wrath from heaven but under 
the influence of thousands of years of time and change." (Prehistoric Nations, Baldwin, p. 
104.)
The Koreysh to whom many European and American writers delight in dedicating the 
Arabian genius have carefully, too carefully, built up the family tree that includes Mohammed 
himself and in their annals the Yemenites, the genuine Arabs of genius, appear as cousins and 
descendants of Heber. On these points all Mohammedan annalists are equally positive and 
that we should accept these falsities, the fruit of vanity and ignorance, Britannica says, is 
surprising. Mohammedan chroniclers adopted much from the Jewish records, their country at 
that time was full of the Jews dispersed by the conquest of their own lands. They conceal the 
facts of their own late appearance in Arabia by childish fictions. Saracen conquest was 
directly represented by the tribes of Mustareb origin, but the civilizing influence sprang from 
the accompanying arms of the old culture, the ancient aristocratic tribes of Yemen. Nations in 
the south, east and north, of the same ancestry had sunk to half vassalage to Persian or 
Byzantine authority. In their hands had been the custody of the temple of Mecca which was


--- PAGE 70 ---
seized and forever after held by the Koreysh who thus gained religious preeminence by 
possession of the treasures of gold, silver,
p. 149
jewels and other offerings gathered by pagan piety of Cushite Arabians. The Semitic Arabian 
race has not been noted for any creative or constructive qualities and until united in conquest 
with the more ancient Cushite. race was wholly destructive. Mohammed took over a primitive 
Cushite pilgrimage to Mecca.
Myers says, "The poetry of the Arabians was wholly original. It was the natural and beautiful 
expression of Arabic genius." The fanciful imagery of the Arabian poetry and the legends 
were very much like the literature of the same type in India. It showed in the superior 
development of the speech of Islam, the lustre of the empire of the caliphs, and in the 
knowledge of the arts and sciences carried to western Europe by the Saracens. This rich 
Arabian language was the union of the dialects of northern and central Semitic Arabians and 
the Himyaritic of southern Arabia. This can be proved by the similarity of the roots. The 
languages had so overlapped that the Cushite inhabitants of Palestine, who were called 
Samaritans, could converse with the Hebrews. Christ talked with the Samaritan woman at the 
well. Constant trade, relations had unified the tongues. Moses in earlier days had been able to 
converse with the Ethiopian daughters of Jethro. Gideon and his servant went down to the 
camp of the Midianites, who were Cushites, he overboard their conversation and understood 
it. The Queen of Sheba, who was Ethiopian, was able to converse with Solomon. The 
Ethiopian treasurer of Queen Candace was reading a Hebrew
p. 150
version of the Scriptures, when Peter was told by the Spirit to preach to him Christ crucified.
Students of philology know that there was great dissimilarity between the Hebrew of later 
times and the Arabic; for the language of the Israelites underwent a change during the 
captivity in Babylon. After the exile, the Hebrews spoke Aramaic. The order of Hebrew 
letters and Arabic are different. The Arabic of the earliest form have that of the Himyaritic 
alphabet, and are strikingly like this Ethiopian language in form. Thus we see how easy it is 
for superficial scholarship to have made the mistake of blending under the same name 
Arabian, two distinct races, to have failed to recognize the blending of two languages, to have 
failed to perceive the earlier ancient Cushite civilization. Even the Hebrews were introduced 
to the art of building cities and to a settled life by the Cushites and Canaanites. The Semitic 
race was always nomadic, never becoming settled traders, unless mixed with Hamitic blood. 
In the dispersion of the Hebrew family they scattered to Arabia, Africa, and to the east. Arabia 
is densely populated with a free black population. They have so intermixed with Semitic 
Arabians that a fair skin is the exception. In Arabia because of the old high Ethiopic culture 
no prejudice whatever exists against black and Arab alliances. There is no social or political 
bar between African and Arab. A Negro may become the highest official or ruler if his talents 
allow.
We must decide from these evidences, that out of the bare life of the Semitic Arabians could 
not
p. 151


--- PAGE 71 ---
have sprung the abundant roots and rich variety of the perfected Arabic tongue; but these 
additions were but budded growth from the rich ancient Cushite Arabian life. It seemed a 
language most perfect as "a vehicle for impassioned and sublime appeals, for artless 
simplicity and philosophic subtleties. The genius of the Arab constantly flowered in poetry of 
highly artistic form, delicate descriptive poems and novels in verse." This was the Arabian 
heritage of splendor from the magnificence of Cushite Arabian days which the prodigality of 
the later caliphs sought to imitate. The tales of genii, fairies, and enchantments passed into the 
poetry of the west. We might think this addition to western barbarism of little worth but the 
images and fancies of powerful imagination have given the world the fuel for the fires of art. 
The warlike Arabian, as the earlier cruel Assyrian, imbibing an older culture, by conquest 
scattered widely for later ages the precious cultural seeds of the ancient Cushite empire of 
Ethiopians.
The Arabian Nights Entertainments filled Europe in 1717 with wonder and delight. Few 
books have been translated and read among so many nationalities as these tales, which were 
the gateway into fairyland of our childhood. They were a collection of tales from the 
widespread colonies of the Cushite race. The richest of the tales came from India, the cradle 
of story and fable. Many were from Bagdad the royal city of the eastern caliphs. They are 
fanciful pictures of the decadence from a higher and more perfect civilization.
p. 152
[paragraph continues] The Arabian Nights will always be one of the most wonderful books of the 
world and is an addition to the world's imperishable literature. The Arabian writers were 
remarkable for their sublimity of conception, power to stir the heart, and the intensity of love 
and hate shown in their creations. This literature carried westward by the Saracens had a 
powerful influence in molding the forms of poetry and letters of Europe. Arabian ideals and 
philosophy rule all the ecclesiastical life of Persia, Turkey and all of the eastern lands that 
have come under Mohammedan sway.
The Arabians brought to Europe not only poetry but astronomy and mathematical science. 
They gave Europe the nine digits, the Arabian figures to ten, and algebra. The oldest 
mathematical book, 1700 B. C., contains some problems similar to algebra. The book was 
written by the Ethiopian Aahmes. We find a little of the study among the Greeks, but the 
Arabians brought it up to the importance of a science. In the tenth century they left the Greek 
masters behind and reached the limits of spherical trigonometry and solved quadratic and 
even cubic equations. What the later Phoenicians were in navigating the Mediterranean, the 
Sabaeans had been in the Indian Ocean. They created the knowledge of geography in the 
Middle Ages, which they had gained from the commercial activities that had nourished the 
ancient cities of Babylon, Tyre and Sidon. Lucian thought that the Arabian Cushites were. the 
first who invented astronomy, being led to the science by their cloudless skies and favorable 
climate
p. 153
and by their surprising intellectual sagacity, subtlety and force.
With the knowledge gained from the earlier civilization, the Saracens made their own 
scientific additions. In the earlier days no Greek poetry, orations or history were ever 
translated into Arabic. Arabian imagination and reason did not need such assistance. For a 
period the studies of the Mohammedans were confined to the interpretation of the Koran and


--- PAGE 72 ---
the eloquence and poetry of their native tongue, but the, later caliphs collected the knowledge 
of other seats of ancient culture. With comparatively rough musical instruments, they 
carefully elaborated a musical scale. Their book of songs contains a hundred airs, each 
esteemed a masterpiece by competent judges. As a people continually facing death in battle, 
the medical art became highly esteemed. They were the first to make medicine a true science. 
They invented the probang, a valuable surgical instrument. To them must be credited the 
lancet and the couching needle. Arabians were the first to develop chemistry and they first 
prepared prescriptions for the mixing of drugs. From them have come down to us most of the 
medical recipes of today. For whatever resources chemistry availed itself up to a recent date, 
we are indebted to Arabic research. The real scientific development of medicine must be 
credited to their genius.
In the great cities of Bagdad, Cairo and Cordova, centuries before Europe could boast of 
anything beyond cathedral or monastic schools, great
p. 154
[paragraph continues] Arabian universities were drawing together vast throngs of eager young 
Arabians; and creating an atmosphere of learning and refinement. Students from all parts of 
Europe in the Middle Ages, studied mathematics and medicine in the Arabian schools. The 
famous university of Cairo has at the present day an attendance of several thousand, a survival 
of the great days of Arabian Islam. Their libraries and schools were visited by many 
Christians, especially in Spain, who helped to introduce their learning into western Europe. In 
geography, history, philosophy, medicine physics and mathematics, the Arabians rendered 
important service to science. They are considered the founders of modern experimental 
science. They devised the duo-decimal system of notation and gave Europe this indispensable 
instrument of calculation. The Arabian architect developed a new striking style of edifice, 
which has been preserved at Cordova and Granada in Spain. This style has given modern 
builders some of their finest models. The temples of India, perhaps unsurpassed in beauty 
anywhere in the world, are the result of Arabian genius unfolding in Mohammedan art.
The rival schools of the Arabian empire, investigated in the eighth, ninth, and tenth centuries, 
every nicety of grammar. The grammatical treatise of the celebrated Ebn Malek is even now a 
standard work in the hands of our professors. The practice in the earlier days of suspending in 
gold letters the poems of the highest merit that won the premium, in the temple of Mecca, had
p. 155
brought to the highest point the passion for perfect results in literature. To Hereeree must be 
credited the absolute mastership of language, combined with exquisite taste in the use of the 
subtlest refinements of both rhetoric and grammar. His Makamat of the eleventh century, 
though it has many imitators has never yet had a rival. Great libraries existed at Bagdad, 
Alexandria and Cairo. In every city the productions of Arabic literature were copied and 
collected. The royal library of the Fatimite caliphs contained over one hundred thousand 
manuscripts, elegantly transcribed and splendidly bound. The Omayyads of Spain had formed 
a library of six hundred thousand volumes. Everywhere the Arabians of the tenth century 
conquered, they became the preservers and distributors of knowledge.
Romances and stories of a biographical character were very popular among the Arabians. 
Antar the Lion, 525 A. D. was the story of the life of one of the most renowned poets of those 
crowned at the contests at Okad, which in the earlier days were more greatly attended than


--- PAGE 73 ---
those of Thebes. Antar was a black poet who had killed a man who had failed in respect to a 
woman. He had a purely African face, his mother being a black slave. He married a princess 
of one of the noblest and purest tribes. By deeds of heroism he became protector of his people 
and the pattern of chivalry. His fame spread across the Arabian peninsula and throughout the 
Mohammedan world. Like the Homeric legends his deeds were recorded in poetic form. The 
romance
p. 156
of Antar was a source of wonder and admiration for hundreds of years to millions of 
Arabians. He was the father of knighthood, champion of the weak and oppressed, protector of 
women, impassioned love poet. It was from the tales of Antar that Europe received her 
inspirations for romantic chivalry, so common in the twelfth century in Italy and France. How 
Cushite ideals have colored all the life of the ages.
This national classic, Antar the Lion, the Arabian Iliad, is of great length in the original, being 
often thirty or forty manuscript volumes. Portions of it have been translated into English, 
German and French. The original book purports to have been the delight of all Arabians. 
Every wild Bedouin of the desert knew much of the tale by heart and listened to its periods 
and poems with quivering interest. Compare this with our poetical apathy today. Every coffee 
house in Aleppo, Bagdad, or Constantinople had a narrator who nightly recited it to rapt 
audiences. The united sentiment of the east has been that the romance of Antar, is a book that 
has reached the highest summit of literature. One Arabian author has said that the Arabian 
Nights, is for the amusement of women and children, but that Antar is a book for men. From 
it they learn eloquence, magnanimity, generosity, statecraft and bravery. Mohammed a foe to 
the ancient gatherings that fostered poetry, instructed his disciples to relate the traditions of 
Antar to their children. There is nothing surprising in this recognition
p. 157
and adoration of Antar when we understand that his race was the basic blood of Arabia.
The Saracens also carried westward knowledge of irrigation, rotation of crops, fertilizers and 
the art of grafting and producing new varieties of plants and fruits. This knowledge came 
directly from the Cushites of the southern and western coasts, who were peculiarly 
agricultural. From these came cotton, flax, hemp, buckwheat, rice, sugar cane and coffee. 
Others of our vegetables trace to the same source including asparagus, artichokes, beans and 
such fruits as melons, oranges, lemons, apricots and plums. To prove that these plants 
originated among Cushites, wild specimens which only grow where the plant originated, can 
be found across the Soudan. The Arabs excelled in manufactures. The industrious Arabs led 
the way by their inventions and skill to most of the complicated manufactures of our time. In 
metallurgy their art in tempering and enamelling became justly famous. No sword blades ever 
ranked higher than those of Damascus. It was also famous for its brocades, tapestries and the 
damask of our day which still preserves the name of the city. No coppersmiths excelled those 
of Bagdad.
Cordova was famous for leather, Toledo for armor, and Granada for rich silks. Specimens of 
their skill in porcelain yet remain in Spain and Syria. The smiths of Oman were unexcelled in 
gold and silver workmanship. Arabian craftsmen taught the Venetians how to make crystal 
and plate glass. The work of these potters and weavers was the admiration and' despair of the


--- PAGE 74 ---
p. 158
craftsmen of Europe. The words morocco, gauze from Gaza, and cordovan, still in use in our 
times attest their cleverness in preparing and dyeing leather. They seem to have introduced the 
pointed arch into Europe, swelling domes, vaulted roofs, arched porches and minarets were 
characteristic of Arabic architecture. The pendulum and semaphoric telegraph, if not invented, 
were introduced by them into Europe, as was the manufacture of silk and cotton, and an 
invention of the highest importance--the mariners compass. They knew the lost secrets of 
dyeing. As early as 706 A. D. writing paper was made at Mecca, whence it spread through the 
Arabian dominions to the western world. They claim the invention of gun-powder as far back 
as the eleventh century.
To sum up, the literature, art and science of the Arabs formed a connecting link between the 
civilizations of ancient and modern times. "To them," says Britannica, "we owe the revival of 
learning and philosophy in western Europe and the first awakenings of the critical and 
inquiring spirit, that rescued western Europe from the lethargy of monkish ignorance and 
from ecclesiastical bigotry. To them is due the credit for most of the useful arts and practical 
inventions laboriously perfected by later nations. Widespread was the empire of the Arabs' 
sword but wider and more durable was the empire of the Arabs' mind." (Britannica, V. 2, 
Arabia, p. 232.) Today among the Bedouins there are no schools. Utterly ignorant of writing 
and unacquainted with books they trust to memory or imagination.
p. 159
[paragraph continues] Their assertions as to the past cannot be trusted Yet many a modern history of 
Arabia is built upon no more solid foundation. It is doubtful it Mohammed could read or 
write. Their genealogies cannot be depended upon, by the real seeker after truth.
Let us glance at Arabians living today in fixed habitations, as their ancestors have done in 
Arabia from time immemorial. There is rivalry and enmity between these Cushite settlers of 
today and the Semitic division that under various forms has never ceased down to our times. 
Even in the desert the children of these settled Arabians are taught to read and write and 
calculate. In the towns education is general. The possession of written records, the habits of 
order and reflection, enable the settled Arabs to retain: a more accurate knowledge and nicer 
distinction of pedigree and race. It was their idols that Mohammed cast down in the Kaaba at 
Mecca, which had belonged to the kings of Yemen. To the Arabian of the old unsettled 
nomadic life we must give the credit of Saracen conquest. These tribes went forth at first 
unarmed comparatively, spurred on by religious zeal. They bore westward and eastward over 
the oft recrossed highways of the old Cushite empire the latest impulses of that race that in 
earlier ages had originated civilization for the world. On the crest of the conquering arms rode 
the princes of Yeman not one whit less in valor but carrying the genius that fully developed in 
the lifting of a headlong campaign to the status of a culturing conquest.
p. 160
CHAPTER XI.
THE STRANGE RACES OF CHALDEA.


--- PAGE 75 ---
The foundations of ancient Chaldea, were laid as early as those of Egypt. In fact they were the 
sister colonies of a parent state. The earliest civilized inhabitants were Sumerians. 5000 B. C. 
the land was full of city-states. The Sanskrit books of India, called Chaldea one of the 
divisions of Cusha-Dwipa, the first organized government of the world. These Sumerians 
were the inventors of the cuneiform system of writing, which was later adopted by their 
Semitic conquerors. In the later days their language was still cultivated in the ritualistic 
services until the time. of Alexander the Great. It is thought that this civilization originated 
from southern Susiana. The pictorial hieroglyphics which made the cuneiform characters were 
probably invented in Elam. In Babylonia however this culture underwent a rapid 
development. The northern division of Babylon was called Accad, comprehending Babylon, 
the southern Sumer, including Erech and Ur. North of Accad were the Semitic tribes which so 
largely made up the blood of Assyria in later days. The Babylonians were further mixed by 
Elamite and Cassite conquests.
What was the original race of these Sumerians, Cassites and Elamites? Recent explorations 
upon
p. 161
these sites is giving much light upon the subject. The finds prove that the records and 
traditions of antiquity were in perfect accord with these new discoveries. The history of 
Babylonia like that of most nations begins with a myth; but we are beginning to realize that a 
deep significance lies beneath old myths. Ten kings appear in the primitive annals, 
corresponding with the ten patriarchs of the Hebrew Scriptures and the ten rulers of Egyptian 
chronology. Enormous cycles of years accompany their reigns, so do they in the Scriptures 
and the findings of geology accord. These come down to the Xisuthros of Greek tradition, our 
Noah. At his death colonies under the leadership of Titan (Nimrod), arrived in the plain of 
Sumer and essayed to build a tower that would scale the, sky. On this spot at Babylon stood 
the temple of Anu. Then in these early Babylonian traditions follow the names of Gilgamesh, 
the Melcarth of Tyre and the, Hercules of Greece, identified with the name of Nimrod of the 
Hebrews. The epic of the adventures of Nimrod, was preserved in the library at Erech and is 
identical with the twelve labors of Hercules. What significance lies under this common hero 
under the names of the greatest of the, demi-gods of Egypt and Greece?
This overlapping of the genealogy of antiquity shows that these heroes, Bel, Gilgamesh, 
Melcarth, Hercules, belonged to a common race. Belus (Nimrod), king of Chaldea serves to 
unite the Chaldeans with the Old Race of the Upper Nile, as does their building the temple of 
Anu,
p. 162
another name of the original Cushite family. It was, for this reason that Greek and Armenian 
geographers applied the name of Ethiopia to Media, Persia, Susiana and Aria, or the entire 
region between the Indus and Tigris in ancient days. The records of the Hebrews connected 
the Chaldeans, Ethiopians and Egyptians in ties of kinship, and the findings of archaeological 
and philological research prove those records true. Rawlinson mentions a Cushite inscription 
found in Susiana, in which there is a date going back nearly to the year 3200 B. C. The 
language of later Babylon was Semitic but that of the earlier Chaldean monarchy was 
different, as can be proved by the inscriptions upon the ruins. They are distinctly Hamitic and 
like the Himyaritic of Southern Arabia.


--- PAGE 76 ---
All the earliest traditions of Chaldea center about Belus or Nimrod. We know that Nimrod 
was the son of Cush. Babylon had two elements in her population in the beginning. The 
northern Accadians and the southern Sumerians were both Cushites. The finds of recent 
explorations in the Mesopotamian valley reveal that these ancient inhabitants were black, with 
the cranial formation of Ethiopians. On linguistic grounds a relationship with Turanians 
proves untenable. The Turanian is one of the oldest races of the world. Some historians 
attempt to suggest that Noah might have had other sons after the deluge. We do not have to 
introduce other races to understand the Turanian family. They were an important branch of 
the Japhetic race just as Cush became
p. 163
the name of an important branch of the Hamitic family. Once Turan and Cush occupied the 
greater part of Asia and Europe. The Turanians lived east of Lake Ural from remote antiquity. 
They possessed a peculiar civilization characterized by a gross Sabaenism. In them was 
complete want of moral development, though they had extraordinary advancement in some 
branches of knowledge. They were materialistic and incapable of having created the pure 
spiritual culture of the primitive, Chaldeans. Turanians had absolute sovereignty over a great 
part of Asia and Europe for fifteen hundred years.
Moses of Chorene, the great Armenian historian, identifies Belus, king of Babylon, with 
Nimrod and makes Nimrod the son of Cush. Bochart and other authorities translate the 
passage of the Scriptures that deals with the beginning of Nineveh to read that it was also 
founded by Nimrod and that he was the god Ninus of early Assyria, which in its beginning 
was Cushite. Moses of Chorene connects Babylonia in the closest way with Ethiopia. From 
the Tigris eastward the names of the country and its formations in numerous cases were in 
honor of Belus and Cush. Some of these names have extended down to our times as 
Beluchistan and Hindu Cush. The precious document Toldoth Beni Noah, said that the 
primitive people of Babylonia were a subdivision of the Cushite race. There is no doubt that 
in later ages these Ethiopians became mixed with Turanians. The art, science and culture of 
the earlier unmixed Chaldeans was Cushite. The
p. 164
later religion became permeated with Turanian magic and the later Babylonian kingdom that 
was destroyed for its wickedness, was an admixture of Semitic, Arian, and Ethiopian blood.
The tendency of the modern book to make this commingling of the races extend back to 
earlier ages is unscientific, for all the kings whose monuments are found used the same 
language, professed the same religion and followed the same traditions, this proves continuity 
of race. It was universally attested by antiquity that from the Cushite element sprang the 
civilization of Chaldea. The Scriptures say that Cush begat Nimrod and that he began to be 
mighty upon the earth. The beginning of this kingdom was Babel, Erech, Accad and Calneh, 
in the land of Shinar. Thus. the Bible authenticates the Cushite claim. Rawlinson says that 
Nimrod set up a kingdom in lower Mesopotamia that attracted the attention of surrounding 
nations. The people that he led probably came from the sea. Their earliest settlements were 
upon the coast. Ur was the primitive capital. Nimrod was king of the city where the confusion 
of tongues took place. The people whom Nimrod found were probably Turanians or Semites. 
Babylonian traditions said that they were unlettered barbarians. Cushites pushed these people 
back and as the traditions of the fish-god reveal, taught them the arts of civilized life. Semitic


--- PAGE 77 ---
inhabitants crowded back to Nineveh, later became predominant and appeared as the fierce 
Assyrians.
Rawlinson decided that the ruins of Chaldea
p. 165
show Cushite origin. The names of Chaldea and Ethiopia are linked in a way to render any 
other interpretation impossible. The great city of the earlier period was Niffer a corruption of 
Nimrod. The language of the ruins is radically different from the Semitic tongue of the 
Assyrian empire. This is the report of all investigators who have studied the ruins. Long 
before the day of later Babylon, the land was full of all that would make a cultivated and 
flourishing nation. The strength of Nimrod's character and the greatness of his achievements 
are remarkably indicated by a variety of testimonies, which place him among the foremost 
characters of the ancient world. At least as early as the time of Moses, his name had passed 
into proverb. He was known as the mighty hunter before the lord. In his own nation he was 
deified and continued down to the latest times as the chief object of worship. In Arabian 
tradition Nimrod played a conspicuous part. Orion in the Arabian astronomy bears his title. 
His name lives in the tales of the people of Chaldea today. Wherever a mound is to be seen in 
Babylon or the adjoining countries, the local tradition attaches to it the name of Nimrod. The 
most striking ruins of the upper and lower Mesopotamian valley are thus made the 
monuments of his glory.
Indisputable proofs of the extreme antiquity of Chaldea have been unearthed. These evidences 
show that under the oldest cities lie the successive foundations of still older cities, seemingly 
stretching back into the antediluvian world. This
p. 166
substantiates the vast cycles of time included in the Babylonian chronology and the claims of 
the legend of the deluge upon the Babylonian tablets, which says that the survivors of the 
flood returned and rebuilt upon the old foundations of Babylon, which had gone down in the 
general destruction. Rawlinson says that the race of Nimrod passed from east Africa by way 
of Arabia to the valley of the Euphrates before the beginning of history. Loftus speaks of this 
powerful stream of colonization from the south. The emigrants were called Accadians, the 
Accad of Genesis. Delineations found among the ruins of Nineveh, on the walls of the 
palaces, prove that their were two Ethiopian types, one the ancient Cushite and another a 
heavy southern face having the protuberant lips, the receding forehead, broad thick nose and 
crisp hair of Africa. These were the native inhabitants of Susiana as well as Babylon. These 
were the lineaments of the inhabitants of the Upper Nile--the Old Race of Egypt. Berosus, the 
Manetho of Babylon, who flourished at the time of Alexander's conquests, a priest of Bel, 
translated the records and astronomy of his nation into Greek. His works have unfortunately 
perished; but we have quotations of his in other authentic writings. His history of the deluge is 
almost identical with the one of the cuneiform tablets. Berosus wrote a history of the 
Chaldeans in nine books. He gave the oldest traditions of The human race. We do not possess 
his works, only fragments remain in the writings of the Greek, Hebrew and Roman fathers.
p. 167
[paragraph continues] We can no longer claim that tradition does not stand for actual happenings in 
the life of a race. Men once claimed that ancient Troy was a myth and that the Labyrinth of


--- PAGE 78 ---
Minos was fiction; but archaeologists have unearthed the Troy of the Greek legends and the 
Labyrinth of Crete. Berosus mentioned Median and Arabian dynasties that ruled over 
Chaldea. The Medians were, Baldwin thinks, the Midianites of Arabia, for this was ages prior 
to the Medes of history. The Arabian dynasties were of the race of Southern Arabia for the 
language of the Chaldean inscriptions is the same as that of the South Arabian, called 
Himyaritic.
Berosus begins his story of Chaldean times with the primitive era, when a multitude of 
barbarous men of various tribes inhabited the Mesopotamian valley. These were very 
probably Turanian and Semites. The Japhethic people were not far from this first center of 
human life and we know that Abraham came from Ur of the Chaldeans. In the beginning 
Berosus said, that these men lived Eke animals without any order of government. Bel 
(Nimrod), god of the Chaldees and later Babylonians, saw the fruitfulness of the land. He sent 
to them from the sea, a fearful fish by the name of Onan. This was a ship which appeared to 
these barbarous people as a great fish. Its image half man and half fish is still preserved. It 
represents men who came to these untutored people by water. These primitive people of the 
Mesopotamian valley had not yet conquered the sea and this happening was
p. 168
perpetuated from generation to generation as they were first impressed. Then this vessel might 
have had a fish shape. The early Cushite navigators used the figures of animals upon the 
prows of their ships. The symbol of dolphins always accompanied Bacchus, whom the 
ancients identified with Nimrod, the word meaning son of Cush.
The tradition continues: this animal came up at morning out of the sea and passed the day 
with men; but it took no nourishment and at sunset went again into the sea; where it remained 
for the night. This was because they were civilized people who could not subsist upon such 
food as these savages ate, but were fed in their own ship. The fish taught men language, 
science, the harvesting of seeds and fruits and rules for the boundries of lands. They gave to 
them the mode of building temples and cities, arts, writing, and all that pertains to the 
civilization of men. We learn from the Babylonian inscriptions that Anu the Babylonian god, 
was also the fish-god Oannes. This Anu was king of the lower world. His worship was very 
ancient and the chief seat was at Erech. At Nipper we find the name Tel-Anu. This fish race 
by the same peaceful methods had carried its civilization to Egypt of which Chaldea was but a 
sister state. The Anu of Upper Egypt were the only race at this early stage of the world in 
possession of the arts of civilization. Turanians and Semites were barbaric nomads as late as 
Persia and the conquests of Assyria. Turanians were still uncivilized when Christ was born.
This early tradition and the image of the fish-god,
p. 169
the sea-god of the Babylonians, worshipped on down through the ages, stands for a historic 
happening in the life of an undeveloped and untutored people. It was an age when every 
unexplained wonder was seen as a god. It was the totemic emblem that is seen among so 
many of the African races. This ship bringing civilized people to the untaught Turanians and 
Semites, who introduced the arts to these aborigines, proves that civilization did not originate 
in Chaldea, that it did not spring from the Turanian or Semitic races, or from Egypt, but came 
from elsewhere. It shows that Chaldea was not the original Cushite country but that 
civilization must have sprung from a parent root where it had developed during the long ages.


--- PAGE 79 ---
In the Chaldean inscriptions the vernacular name of Ethiopia was Mirukh, and its maritime 
enterprise was very distinctly recognized. This civilization brought by Cushites to Chaldea 
must have developed in that first common cradle of mankind that the Greeks located upon the 
Upper Nile.
M. de Bohn tells us in Early Cushite Navigation, that the Cushite Ethiopians in primitive ages 
were a commercial people. It was due to their conquest of the sea that they so early covered 
three continents with colonies. With their ships they had in ancient days circumnavigated the 
globe, bequeathing maps, charts, and nautical instruments to their cousins and successors the 
Phoenicians, who called themselves Ethiopians. Cushite supremacy was everywhere marked 
by progress in the industries and science, with myths
p. 170
peculiar and original to the Cushite mind. These pushed back the original inhabitants of 
Chaldea everywhere except in the west, which afterwards became conquering Assyria. In the 
long course of ages these Cushites multiplied and built up the many cities of the 
Mesopotamian coast. One of these cities was named Kush. The Assyrians of historic times 
show how much their race was intermingled with Ethiopian blood for the sculptures represent 
them with wool hair waved.
The oldest cities of Chaldea were Ur, Eridu, Larsa, and Erech in the neighborhood of the 
Persian Gulf. These waters stretching out invited them to navigation and trade with distant 
states. Ur was built at the mouth of the Euphrates. It is now one hundred and fifty miles 
inland, the Persian Gulf having retired one foot in seventy years. Think to what remote 
antiquity this assigns Chaldea. The great temple of the moon-god was the oldest in the 
country. Ra-Zeus-Ammon was considered the sun god. An earlier worship was of the moon. 
It was of the Soudan. The moon god was considered father of the sun god. Moon worship 
took precedence over sun worship; but as the Cushite colonies grew stronger the worship of 
Ammon took precedence. Ammon-Ra was Cush. In the earliest ages the moon was considered 
king over the lesser rulers. Chaldea was filled with temples of vast size dedicated to Istar and 
Bel, the Isis and Osiris of Egypt. Ur rose to the leadership uniting the principalities of 
Chaldea. The hypothesis that Babylon was ruled by an Aryan dynasty was strictly 
contradicted by
p. 171
[paragraph continues] Berosus and the records disentombed from the ruins. "Aryans," says 
Lenormant, "at this stage of the world had not yet crossed the great Sargartean desert."
Chaldea could not have been Semitic for there was difference in race between Assyria and 
Babylonia. The northern country in later times must have been overrun and conquered by the 
restless tribes of Semitic Arabians that in still later days formed the Saracenic conquest. By 
the time of the latter Babylonian empire, Assyria had become predominantly Semitic. 
Diodorus Siculus spoke of Chaldea and Assyria as two separate and hostile nations distinct in 
every way in early times. Pliny draws a clear line between them. Classical traditions connect 
the primitive inhabitants of Assyria, Chaldea and Susiana, with Ethiopia. Æschylus and 
Herodotus regarded the Ethiopian king Memnon as the founder of Susa. At the same time he 
was claimed by the Ethiopians of the Upper Nile as their sovereign. Egypt claimed Pharaoh 
under the name of him as her ruling Pharaoh under the name of Amenhotep III, the 
Amenophis of the Greeks. His statute was known in Egypt as the Vocal Memnon. He perished


--- PAGE 80 ---
at the Siege of Troy, after greatly distinguishing himself. Sometimes the expedition, that he 
led to the defense of the Trojan city is thought to have proceeded by way of Egypt from 
Ethiopia in Africa. There were palaces called Memnon at Susa and in Egypt. There were 
tribes called Memnon at Meroe. This common name thus unites me eastern and western
p. 172
[paragraph continues] Ethiopians of Asia and Africa as but parts of a common empire.
The original name of Nippur was Belus, it was the capital of Chaldea during the most 
important part of its existence and perhaps the longest. As early as 4500 B. C. kings reigned 
there. Sargon of Agade flourished about 3800 B. C. He was the head of one of the Cushite-
Arabian waves of conquest. He was one of the greatest in the long line of Babylonian 
monarchs. More than once he attacked Elam successfully. His empire extended from the 
Persian Gulf to the Mediterranean. He founded the city of Babylon. His kingdom was but a 
portion of the ancient realm of the Cushites, now broken into segments of which the Ægean, 
Egyptian, Ethiopian, Babylonian and Hindu nations were the parts of what in earlier ages had 
been a common empire. The legends about Sargon told of his winning the favor of Isthar 
(Isis) common to the worship of all these nations. The next great name in the line of monarchs 
is Hammurabi, who reigned about 2500 B. C. and was contemporary with Abraham. He 
expelled the Elamites from Babylonian soil and in reward was acknowledged king of all 
Babylonia. Gibbon calls him more than conqueror. He was a consummate statesman as well. 
He organized his kingdom upon so sure a foundation that his work endured for nearly two 
thousand years.
Hammurabi showed all the traits of Cushite genius. He cleaned out and cut out new canals 
and brought the system of irrigation to a high degree of efficiency. He built great 
embankments
p. 173
to protect the land from devastating floods. Throughout Babylonia he built and adorned the 
temples of the gods. He codified the laws and established courts of justice everywhere. He 
gave personal attention to the administration of the law. Babylonians of later days looked 
back upon the reign of Hammurabi as the golden age of their history. About 1750 B. C. 
Babylon was overrun by swarms of invaders called Kasshu or Cassites, who poured down 
from the mountains to the north of Babylon between Elam and Media. They subdued the 
whole land and established a dynasty lasting, according to the chronology, for 576 years. For 
a long time the rulers of Babylonia bear Cassite names and a number of Cassite divinities 
found a place in the Babylonian pantheon. The unchanging type of the inscriptions in form of 
writing bear out the belief now growing that these Cassites were but a late emigration of 
Cushites from the western branch of the race, scattered around the Ægean Sea, who were the 
people of Greece in the prehistoric ages. The correspondence between these Cassite kings and 
the Pharaohs of the Eighteenth Dynasty about 1400 B. C. and the fact that the royal houses 
were united by marriage again shows the Cushite relationship.
Let us examine ancient testimony to see if we can find the real origin of these Cassites. It was 
a race name of the original Chaldeans. Ezra V., 12, links the name Chaldean with the name 
Casdim. Daniel IX, 1, says that when the Babylonian army besieged Jerusalem it was the 
army of the


--- PAGE 81 ---
p. 174
[paragraph continues] Chaldee or Casdim. Taylor thought the Babylonians and the Casdim the same 
people. The races moved eastward from Kedem. Bryant in his Ancient Mythology, Vol. III, p. 
226, fixes Kedem in the Caucasus. This more and more seems to he the center from which the 
three races emigrated, or near it. Let us look into the Caucasus and see if we can find the 
name Casdim. There today we find lingering remnants of the Iberians (ancient Cushites of 
Europe). Wilford in the Asiatic Researches, Vol. VI, p. 455, says that Ptolemy called the most 
ancient race of the Caucasus, Cassia or Chasas. They occupied this range from its eastern 
limits on the Euxine Sea to the confines of Persia. They are often mentioned in the sacred 
books of the Hindu and their descendants still inhabiting these regions are called Cassia to this 
day. One Cassite king of Babylon married an Assyrian princess. Their reign came to an end 
about 1207 B. C.
To what race did be Casdim belong? Sanchoniathon said that their great ancestor was Chasa 
or Chasya who lived before the Hood and gave his name to the mountains that he seized upon. 
Some of the Greek legends centered about the Caucasus. This name Caucasus or Coh-Cas 
extended from India to the Mediterranean. The borders of Persia were inhabited by the 
Cassaei, there was a Mount Cassius on the border of Egypt and another in Syria. The titles of 
Cassius and Cassiopaeus are nearly synonymous with Jupiter, the god of Rome. The Casdim 
are a people mentioned in the Institutes of Menu of
p. 175
[paragraph continues] India and their ancestor was Zeus-Cassius who lived before the flood. Jupiter of 
Rome was the Zeus of the Greeks and Zeus-Ammon or Amen-Ra of Egypt. One of the 
appellations of Zeus was Æthiops (Ethiopian), 1 the ancients also said that Zeus-Ammon was 
the Biblical Cush who ruled over the ancient Cushite Empire of Ethiopians, which in the 
earliest ages extended its colonies over three worlds. After he had seized the Caucasus, a 
considerable division of the people emigrated to Babylon, probably under Nimrod son of 
Cush. Thus we link the Cassites of the later emigrations with the earlier Chaldeans.
Let us look at the country directly north of Babylonia. Assyria until late ages was simply a 
province of Babylonia, and another proof that all these possessions were Cushite lay in the 
fact that all these northern towns had Accadian names. Accad was one of the primitive 
divisions under Nimrod. Many authorities translate Genesis X, 2, to read, "Out of that land, he 
(Nimrod) went forth into Assur or Assyria, and builded Nineveh." This is the proper 
translation of the passage and not that "Asher went forth and builded Ninevah," the 
connection is broken and destroyed by the latter mode of rendering. Asher a son of Shem 
being inserted among the descendants of Ham, and an event of his history narrated before his 
birth, first mentioned in verse 22. Mic. V, 6, calls Assyria, the land of Nimrod. Diod. Sic. II, 
1., calls the founder of the kingdom Ninus.
p. 176
In the unearthed remains we find the language of the records of the early kingdom the old 
Hamitic language of the Chaldeans. In later ages it became merely the language of the priests 
and scholars. The language of olden times changed to the Arabic of encroaching Semitic 
peoples. That on the ruins has the same origin as Hebrew; yet only in the time of 
Ashurbanipal were translations made in vernacular. These things prove that Assyria was 
colonized from Chaldea. The oldest bricks are stamped with Babylonian characters.


--- PAGE 82 ---
These inscriptions show that the northern country was only a province of Babylonia from 
which country she received her governors. Assyria had no chronology of her own until 1400 
B. C. and no certainly established date until 930 B. C. Her line of rulers intermarried with the 
ruling families of Babylon. We see the title Bel one of the gods of the lower kingdom added 
to the Assyrian line of kingly names. On the, Assyrian inscriptions we read "Bel-Lush" and 
very early "Bel-Kepi." This name was in the Chaldean titles. Some have thought Belus to 
have been Jupiter, others that Belus was Nimrod, or Hercules. In both countries the external 
forms of worship were alike. The special god Ashur was unknown in the south. He must have 
been a name of the Hamitic line or one of the Semitic line of conquerors. No temple was ever 
built in his honor. We find the worship of Anu and Vul coincident with the founding of the 
empire. The moon-god Sin stood at the head of the deities of
p. 177
[paragraph continues] Assyria. He was connected with the beginnings of life. As in Chaldea, this 
divinity outranked the sun-god Shames. These earlier inhabitants of Assyria had descended 
from the mountains north of Elam from whence the Casdim came. The chief Assyrian towns 
were built by them. These people were very different from the later Assyrian race.
The Assyrian monuments were full of the pride and conceit of half savage conquerors. They 
boasted of their deeds and belittled other nations. They were nothing in original culture. The 
Assyrians at the time of their conquests were great in invention of engines of war and in the 
organizing, equipping and training of armies. About 1300 B. C. we find Tig-lath-Adar signing 
himself as the conqueror of Babylon. Another king was Bel-Kudur, his line was unbroken 
until 1070.B. C. He carried on destructive wars against Babylon.
1000 B. C, they had extended themselves into Syria, this was in the time of David and 
Solomon. The armies of Tiglath Pileser I, 1130 B. C. had swept eastward and westward. He 
conquered many nations just emerging from barbarism. We find him restoring the temple of 
Anu out of the spoils of conquest. His relations with Babylon were at first friendly. Finally the 
southern country was invaded. He met feeble resistance but returning they were pursued by 
Merodach Iddin, the gods of Ashur were captured and carried to Babylon where they 
remained for four hundred years. Up to the year 889 B. C. there was a break in the records. 
883 there was a renewal
p. 178
of vigor. 770 B. C. Pul made his appearance on the borders of Israel. Under Shalmaneser they 
reached their most flourishing point. Israel allying herself to Egypt refused to pay tribute. 720 
B. C. the Assyrian king transported the inhabitants of Samaria to Mesopotamia, Assyria and 
Media.
Sargon the next king undertook the conquest of Egypt. These hosts were withdrawn from 
Egypt. Under his successor Media became independent, Babylon attempted to break away. 
Assyria was weakening and Nineveh fell under the combined armies of Media and Babylon. 
The ruins of Nineveh and three other distinct cities so near as to have been mistaken for one 
city, covered an oblong space 18 miles by 12 miles. This was ten times the area of London. 
Diodorus Siculus said that the suburbs of these places were so near that the whole region 
seemed one vast city. Xenophon said that the walls were 150 feet high and fifty feet thick so 
that three chariots could ride abreast on the top of the wall. The city was guarded by a moat 
which in one place was 200 feet broad and of great depth. Thirty miles from Nineveh was


--- PAGE 83 ---
Nimrud (Nimrod). It covered an area of 1000 acres one half the extent of Nineveh. Xenophon 
said that these walls were one hundred feet high and twenty-five feet thick. The prostration 
and final weakness of Assyria sprang from the Scythic scourge, the monstrous brood from the 
north that swept like a disastrous flood over the southern civilizations. Attracted by the 
accumulated treasures and luxury
p. 179
of Assyria they sucked her very life's blood, that was already infested by luxury and license. It 
was left to the hardier Persians to deliver civilization.
The later religious beliefs of the Assyrians seemed to have but little influence upon their 
conduct. They broke their treaties with impunity. The spirituality of the old religion had 
flown, they had become materialists, even in their prayers. They sought favor of the gods by 
costly gifts. They sacrificed and spent seasons in times of calamity in religious fasting in 
which they made the beasts take part. They looked upon religion as politic and businesslike, 
and seemed to be but imitators of the southern race from whom the foundations of their earlier 
life had been laid. In science and literature they but copied and edited the contents of the 
Chaldean libraries. Had the Semitic race with which in later days they seemed so much 
intermingled been the race that gave civilization to the Mesopotamian lands, they would have 
been above imitation. Assyria had stone in abundance but down to the end of her dominion 
she used brick in slavish pattern after her neighbor at the south who did not have stone. The 
Babylonians were innately religious. Rich temples were devoted to the gods. In Assyria the 
temples were but mere annexes to the palaces and not like the earlier ones to Anu and Bel. 
Babylonia gave extreme attention to burial. Assyria had no tombs. The vast necropolis: at 
Erech astonishes us with its
p. 180
innumerable graves. The potters of Babylon were largely employed in making clay coffins.
The Assyrians excelled as manufacturers; and foundationally had the blood of the old race. 
Conquest brought to them the skilled artisans of many nations. These were the producers of 
very much of her skilled wares. Ridpath (Vol. I, p. 199) names vases, jars, dishes and bottles 
of glass, bronzes, ornaments of ivory and pearl, engraved gems and broaches; rings and bells, 
musical instruments--cornets, flutes, harps--and implements of the house and field such were 
the products of Nineveh. Whatsoever the ancient soldier bore in beating down the enemy, in 
besieging his town, in leading him captive from the battle, or in warding off his thrusts and 
blows, were produced in inexhaustible stores. In their architectural skill and mechanical 
genius we see the old Cushite race, it was not from the Arab in these early ages of Semitic 
strain to whom we can look for any development. The Saracen of a thousand years later was 
still a rude wanderer, saving as here in the Mesopotamian lands he had intermingled with the 
original inhabitants of Assyria; and when the Saracen made his sweeping conquests westward 
it was only to carry the precious seeds of the civilization of India, Babylonia and Egypt. Their 
leaders and teachers were the Cushite Arabians of the Hamitic race. India has not perished, 
she has the records proving these things to be true.
We must decide that Semitic infusion helped Assyria to be a race of military pursuits. The
p. 181


--- PAGE 84 ---
blood of the Bedouin showed in their fierceness. The southern and all purely Cushite nations 
were ones of peaceful pursuits. The men of the north were hook-nosed, larger framed, and 
delighted in blood and gore. Like the later Saracens they were perfect fighting machines. The 
ancient historian tells us that they transported and dispersed conquered nations with 
unimaginable sufferings. Frightful tortures were their deliberate policy. They exulted in 
transcribing the details of their fiendish deeds of cruelty. In the Chaldean we see the statute of 
the Ægean races and their genius. The southern race was shrewd, earnest. industrious, creative 
and humane. The Assyrian and Babylonian empires at their zenith represented all the 
difference of distinctive races. The rule of Assyria though extended, was very short compared 
to the length of the Cushite empire. Her strength was wasted by constant wars. She had waged 
most of them to crush her commercial rivals. After twenty years of subjection Egypt broke 
away. Twenty more and Babylon followed. Assyrian conquests were but an orgy of 
frightfulness, where they flayed alive, buried alive in living pyramids, others they impaled on 
stakes. They utterly destroyed rich cities, depopulated vast districts, in contrast to the 
Babylonians who spread the arts of civilization to prosperous and widely extended colonies.
Footnotes
175:1 Eustathius, Schol. in Homerum.
p. 182
CHAPTER XXII.
BABYLONIA THE LAND OF MARVELS.
Across the Mesopotamian plain flows two great rivers the rise in the Armenian mountains. 
These two great streams flowing from different angles, finally unite and enter the Persian 
Gulf. Here we find a rich alluvial delta like that of the Nile. North of this flat area rises the 
Chaldean plain, on the Tigris side being called Assyria. It was in the rich lowlands near the 
confluence of the rivers that the civilization of Western Asia first developed. The 
Mesopotamian plain is about 250 miles in length. The numerous mounds show how thickly 
this region was once populated. Babylon like Egypt was a country of scarcity of rain and 
depended upon the floods from the snowcapped mountains of Armenia for moisture. The flat 
low country was subject to overflow and the Babylonians had to dyke their country. Like 
Egypt these landmarks swept away and the knowledge of geometry developed in replacing the 
ancient dividing lines. Engineering developed from the building of the large and small canals 
that covered the country like a network, furnishing means of communication and irrigation.
The dams of the country were very ancient and the canals that covered the plains of Shinar 
must have required incredible skill and labor. They
p. 183
excavated natural lakes more deeply and turned into them the surplus waters of the Euphrates. 
The earth from the canals diked the rivers. The lakes were faced with stone. These stupendous 
dikes and canals protected the country from overflow and watered it in seasons of drought. In


--- PAGE 85 ---
later days Nitrocris, princess of Egypt, assumed the direction of the great works at Babylon. 
Herodotus credits her with diverting the channels of the Euphrates to make a stone bridge 
connecting the two divisions of the city. If in no other way, we would recognize these people 
as Hamitic by their gigantic engineering achievements. Such works marked all their ancient 
sites. In India, in Arabia and in old Ethiopia, are to be found the ruins of similar indefatigable 
labors. We find lakes faced with heavy mortared stone, immense tanks as big as lakes, that 
stored water for irrigation. Under Turkish rule, the last vestiges of these ancient works have 
gone to ruin.
5000 B. C. Mesopotamia was filled with little city republics like those of Greece and Italy. So 
great was the fertility of the soil that according to Herodotus, grain commonly returned two 
hundred fold and occasionally three hundred fold. Pliny said that wheat was cut twice from 
one sowing and afterwards was good keep for sheep. Quintius Curtius declared that the 
country between the Tigris and the Euphrates was so rich that the cattle were driven from 
these pastures lest they be destroyed by satiety. Berosus spoke of wheat, barley, sesame, 
ochrys, palms and many kinds of shelled fruits that grew wild, for here
p. 184
some of them originated. The soil needed only moderate labor to produce all that man 
required. It was natural that here should grow up one of the first populations of the ancient 
world. Everywhere we see the ancient remains of cities long gone to decay. In our day we 
have uncovered memorials that prove that the city of Niffer was the center of religious life for 
more than four thousand years. A period more than twice as long as Rome was the religious 
center of Catholic Christendom.
Delitzsch in describing Syria says, "As far as the eye can reach mounds may be seen of 
varying heights. They increase in size and number as we approach Susa. They are the remains 
of those ancient nations, the Hittites, the Assyrians, the Babylonians and the Elamites. Their 
palaces, temples, walls and gates, terraces and towers, lie buried beneath them." This had 
been a wide battle field of the armies of Egypt and western Asia, also it was the territory 
across which the trading caravans of these nations found their way to India or the 
Mediterranean. In the earliest ages the inhabitants of these regions were Ethiopians. Even in 
historical times the nations of Persia, Assyria, Mesopotamia, and Syria were largely 
permeated with this Cushite blood. This race was entirely responsible for the architectural 
wonders, of these plains. The temples of Elam, Belbec and Babylon were reared by the same 
race that built the mighty structures of India and Egypt. At this age the Turanian race had 
produced no engineers and builders. The inscriptions of
p. 185
[paragraph continues] Persepolis are of a race and age preceeding the nomadic Persians. The people of 
the sculptures of Nineveh are of a different lineage from the later Semitic conquerors of 
Nineveh. The sculptures of the Hittites and Philistines reveal the Ethiopian physiognomy.
The temples and palaces of Babylon were built upon enormous platforms high above the 
water soaked land. These structures were many acres in extent. They were cemented with 
bitumen in place of mortar made from lime. This cement has withstood the elements for ages 
and is superior to anything of the sort in modern masonry. The use of buttresses, drains, and 
of external ornamentation shows that architectural knowledge was already advanced. The 
temple with its huge masses of brick work, rising stage upon stage, each brilliantly painted


--- PAGE 86 ---
and surmounted by a chamber, which was at once a shrine and an observatory; while the 
palace stood upon a heap of rubble, with open courts and imposing entrances; but never more 
than two or three stories high. These structures were made of sun-dried bricks. The outside 
was of burnt brick. These edifices have sunk down into great heaps mistaken for many 
centuries as hills. In the middle of the nineteenth century many were excavated. Magnificent 
statutes, ruins of great buildings and extensive writings, were revealed. These Sumerian 
libraries written upon clay tablets were composed of mythologies, religious knowledge, legal 
forms, astronomical, mathematical and geographical works, revealing all developed 
civilization.
p. 186
The material used in the body of the Babylonian structures was burnt brick of the finest and 
most durable quality. The mortar was so lasting that after the lapse of ages, the bricks can 
only be separated by heavy blows. In early structures of Babylonia we can trace the origin of 
the Doric and Ionic pillars of Greece. Here Gibbon tells us the columns branched out into 
fantastic forms. These columns were rather an ornament than a support. Like the walls 
overlaid with plaster and painted with bright colors or overlaid with plates of shining metal. 
The rain was carried off by elaborately constructed drains, some of which afford us the 
earliest examples of the arch, and which occasionally consisted of leaden pipes. In Assyria 
sculpture was adopted instead of painting because they had not attained to the brilliancy of the 
colors used in Babylon. The Greeks probably derived this art of painting sculpture from the 
cultivated populations of the Euphrates. The walls of their cities were of enormous thickness. 
Herodotus said that the walls of Babylon were fifty-six miles in circumference, which would 
include an area of two hundred square miles.
The conservative estimate of Ctesias would make Babylon cover five times the area of 
London. These authorities said the walls were over three hundred feet high With a width of 
eighty-five feet. These writers were eye witnesses. Astonishing as is their reports we know 
that the walls of Nineveh were one hundred and fifty feet high at the time of Xenophon. 
Quintius Curtius said that four horse chariots could pass each other
p. 187
on them without danger. The city was entered on each side by twenty-five gates of brass and 
strengthened by two hundred and fifty towers. Two of the gates were so massive that they 
were opened and shut with a machine. From all the gates proceeded streets, each 15 miles in 
length. A river ran through the city from north to south. On each side was a quay as broad as 
the walls of the city. In these quays they had constructed brass gates and steps leading down 
to the river. A bridge of great beauty and ingenious contrivances was thrown across the river. 
On the western side of the city they had excavated an immense, lake forty miles square. 
Herodotus said it was thirty-five feet deep. Into this lake the river was turned until the bridge 
was completed. At the end of the bridge on each side was built a palace and these had 
subterranean connections. Babylon in those days might have been considered an enclosed 
district rather than a compact city. In time of siege food could be produced from within for the 
population. Perhaps the most remarkable structure in Babylon was the great temple of Belus. 
Its height was four hundred and eighty feet, being a few feet less than the Great Pyramid of 
Egypt. Its summit overtopped the city. From this height the whole scene of the beautiful city 
lay spread below as a picture. The shrine on the summit of the temple had contained 
originally, Ridpath tells us, three colossal statutes of Bel, of Beltis and of Isthar. Here were 
two great censers and three golden bowls. In front of Beltis were two lions of gold


--- PAGE 87 ---
p. 188
and three silver serpents. These were accompanied by two huge bowls of silver. These 
splendid treasures were carried away at the time of the Persian conquest. When Herodotus 
visited the temple they were gone. In their place was a golden table and couch. A second and 
less pretentious shrine at the base of the temple was also despoiled by the Persians. Here had 
stood a colossal human figure wrought of solid gold, which was twelve cubits high.
Not as high but greater in ground dimensions was the royal palace. It was a quadrangular 
building with threefold ramparts of masonry. The outermost being nearly seven miles in 
extent. The inner wall measured more than two miles around. The basement of the palace was 
of almost incredible size. There were three bronze gates so heavy, as to require machinery to 
open and close them. Within the enclosure were constructed the famous hanging gardens of 
Babylon one of the seven wonders of the ancient world. Nebuchadnezzar had constructed 
them for his Median wife Amyitis, who pined for the mountains of her native land. Babylon 
was flat. A rectangle was selected four hundred feet on one side. Around this space was built 
a series of open arches, and upon these serving as piers, other arches were erected. This vast 
structure was built to the height of seventy-five feet. Terraces rose until they over-topped the 
walls of me city. Earth was heaped to such depth that large trees could grow. Seeds were 
sown, flowers and shrubs were then set out and the largest trees
p. 189
transplanted from distant provinces and set up in all their beauty. A huge hydraulic machine 
was built on the banks of the Euphrates and by this means water was raised in pipes to the 
summit and distributed about the garden. From a distance the hanging gardens gave the 
appearance of woods overhanging mountains. From the highest terrace of his gardens the king 
had a perfect view of his magnificently constructed city.
The remains of the palace and gardens formed the vast mound called by the natives Kasr. 
Continued digging takes place in its inexhaustible quarries for brick of the finest and strongest 
quality. An endless succession of curious relics have been taken from this mound. Babylon in 
her treasury of antiquities became the rich prey of all the nations that were her conquerors. 
From the fallen towers and ruins of Babylon have been built all the cities of the vicinity, 
besides others which have gone to dust. Since the days of Alexander the Great, four capitals 
have been built out of the remains. The palaces of the Babylonians were splendidly decorated 
with the statutes of men and animals, with vessels of gold and silver and furnished with 
luxuries of all kinds. In the Assyrian temples everything was secular but the Chaldeans 
lavished their treasures upon the gods, showing the depth of their religious nature. The riches 
that this city possessed and her merchandise easily made her the emporium of the east and the 
true mistress of the ancient world. The Bible called Babylon the golden city, the glory of 
kingdoms and the beauty of the Chaldeans.
p. 190
"Through her magnificent streets swept the chariots of princes and monarchs. Out of her gates 
of splendor, poured the bronzed cohorts of well nigh invincible soldiers going forth to 
conquer. Into these same gates were driven the captives of a hundred vanquished provinces. 
In the might of her power she saw her rivals one by one expire and in her triumph she 
arrogated to herself the rank and title of mistress of the world. In the slow process of destiny 
her own time came to suffer humiliation and downfall. No other city reared by the genius and


--- PAGE 88 ---
pride of man has suffered a more complete extinction. Babylon is literally in the dust. Only 
scattered mounds which the rolling years have covered with grass and shrubs, remain of the 
once mighty metropolis of the Babylonians. Birs Nimrud is the ruin of the great temple of 
Nebo, that the blasts of twenty-five centuries have not sufficed to level. The great temple was 
the symbolization of Babylonian mythology. The seven platforms were dedicated to the seven 
planets. To each a color was assigned. The base was black. The second platform dedicated to 
Jupiter was painted orange, the third for Mars was red, the fourth a golden square was for the 
sun, the fifth yellow, for Venus, the sixth a blue platform for Mercury, and the last assigned to 
the moon was silver." (Ridpath's History of the World.)
These colors were laid on in various ways, some being burnt into the surface of the bricks, 
some painted and the fourth and seventh squares faced with thin layers of gold and silver and 
probably
p. 191
the shrine itself. This temple like that of the Medes in Ecbatana seen in successive bands of 
brilliant color, viewed from a distance, as the sun flashed its splendors upon the brilliant hues 
of the great pyramids or when the full orbed moon in milder radiance diffused tier light 
around the gigantic pile, the awe-struck worshiper may have well imagined that Nebo himself 
was enshrined on the summit. (Ridpath's History of the World, Vol. 1, pp. 263, 264.) In these 
temples the Babylonians offered at stated seasons human sacrifice. In the lowest strata of the 
excavated temples were found vessels of copper and bronze. Some of clay were lacquered in 
red and black in designs seemingly of Greek origin. This peculiar ware was coeval with the 
products of Minoan culture which preceeded the historic Greek culture, in Hellas and was of 
itself Ethiopian.
To sum up, Rawlinson supposed these Chaldeans to have resembled the other Ethiopians. He 
concludes that the Cushites that occupied the country south of Egypt sent their colonies along 
the shores of Arabia, whence they crept into the Persian Gulf occupying Chaldea, Susiana and 
the Indus. Baldwin continuing his argument says, "The Bible points toward Africa for the 
central seat of the Ethiopians. It derives Nimrod from Cush not Cush from Nimrod. The., 
monuments and traditions of Chaldea present some curious indications of East African origin. 
Much stress has been placed upon the theory that the Chaldeans were a mixed people but 
Berosus spoke of -no influx of a foreign people. He identifies the
p. 192
[paragraph continues] Chaldeans of the time of Nebuchadnezzar also with the primitive people of the 
country. The joint testimony of Berosus and the Scriptures should be sufficient. Babylonian 
tablets tell of an original race of black men called Admi, the Adites of the Cushite Arabian 
traditions. Scientists often make the statement that the original inhabitants of the earth were 
dark. The blond types that we see today may have developed by emigration to northern 
latitudes and the change was thus made from dark types to the fair-hued races of today. We 
will deal with the details of this argument later.
The earliest civilization of Babylonia was coeval with the earlier civilization of the Upper 
Nile. Ross says that Babylonian script goes back to 6000 B. C. Rawlinson mentions a Cushite 
inscription of 3200 B. C. Bochart points out Genesis X, 7, as showing that Havelah son of 
Cush peopled the region where the Tigris and Euphrates unite. We know that the Hebrews 
while in captivity in Babylon secured the authentic genealogies of the first children of men.


--- PAGE 89 ---
We would believe that the Babylonians could not have given them incorrect information as to 
their own origin. Diodorus Siculus said that the Chaldeans were a body of learned men 
resembling the priests of Egypt (both of the same race). Their whole time was spent in 
philosophic meditation. The learning of the Chaldeans was a family tradition. The Scriptures 
speak of them as the "Wise Men of the East." The son was taught by the father. Almanacs 
were to be found all over Babylon
p. 193
which was noted for its schools, libraries and temples, "The Cushite Ethiopians were the 
absolutely governing class in politics. They commanded the armies and held the offices of 
state. From them came the royal families of Babylon." (Diodorus Siculus, Bk. II, Ch. 21.)
These Chaldeans were the same as the priestly race that ruled Egypt for many ages as priests 
and kings. As Chayas or Casdim they were the superior ruling caste of all Ethiopian colonies. 
Diodorus continues to speak of their great reputation in astronomy. They foretold the future 
and thought themselves able to ward off evil and procure benefits by their sacrifices and 
enchantments. They considered matter as eternal and that the arrangement and order of the 
world were the result of divine intelligence. Being of superior caste they inherited the stations 
of priests, governors and kings. Their positions of trust and dignity gave to the Babylonian 
kingdom the name of Chasyas or Chaldeans. Bryant in his Ancient Mythology (Vol. III, p. 
226) quotes from Dionysus "The Chaldeans were the most ancient inhabitants of the country 
called by their name. They seemed to be the most early constituted and settled of any people 
on the earth. They seem to have been the only people who did not migrate at the general 
dispersion. They extended to Egypt westward and eastward to the Ganges. These were the 
Accadians of Chaldea, who looked to the southwest of the Caspian for the cradle of their 
race."
p. 194
CHAPTER XIII.
THE CIVILIZATION OF BABYLONIA.
There was much disposition to underrate ancient civilization, until the recent finds of Egypt, 
which prove the height of the splendor of the ages that ancient tradition and records spoke of 
as the Golden Ages of antiquity. Rawlinson speaking in his Ancient Monarchies, concerning 
the Babylonians said, "Though not possessed of many natural advantages, the Chaldean 
people exhibited a fertility of invention, a genius of energy which places them high in the 
scale of nations and most especially those descended from Hamitic stock." Aristotle declares 
that be commencement is more than half the whole. Rawlinson continues, "The people who 
gave us our foundation in law, art and science are due more, than half the credit because they 
were the creators, we the promulgators. The human race lies under infinite obligation to the 
genius and industry of the early ages." That international egotism sweeping the continents, 
that would arrogate to our times the credit for the sum total of progress will only urge us to 
swifter retrogression. Nothing will so redeem us as study of the civilization of other races. Let 
us examine Babylonian culture minutely and compare it with the culture of today.
p. 195


--- PAGE 90 ---
It is certain that we must credit Babylonians with possessing recorded knowledge of the 
creation and remembrance of epochs in the antediluvian world. The archaic account of 
Berosus bears the stamp of being genuine in origin. It runs a singular parallel with the Bible 
narrative. They both describe the beginning of the world as being one of chaos. The Bible 
makes but little more than the mere statement but the account of Berosus goes into the details. 
In the Babylonian story there was sad mixture of animal forms as well as of land and 
atmosphere until divine wisdom incarnated in God brought order out of confusion. There 
were monstrous animals and reptiles as the rocks of geology reveal. Nature from age and 
experience does not today so cross the germs of life. The primitive nations went to infinite 
pains in sculpture to reproduce these diabolical forms. A woman deity, as appears in 
Revelations, seemed to have presided at the beginning. All the unearthed sculptured idols of 
the primitive ages were feminine. Ancient art again supporting tradition. All Cushite colonies 
sculptured many animal forms.
There were revolting and seemingly impossible monstrosities in Greek and Babylonian 
cosmogony. They were but primitive conceptions of chaos and cannot be ignored because 
they are incomprehensible to us, from their vast distance in time and our evolution from such 
conditions. The real meaning of these pagan mysteries have at times focused the mental 
ability of an age; but most of them still remain incomprehensible
p. 196
mysteries. They are traditions about conditions more accurately related by the Bible. In no 
essential points do they differ. All men were destroyed because of wickedness. The, survivors 
of the flood had been warned of God. An ark of immense proportions was prepared. 
Archaeology has proved that the men of this age understood ship building. The Chaldean 
Noah entered the ark with his wife and children. Upon the recession of the waters he sent out 
three birds three times. He built an altar and offered sacrifice.
The life of the Semitic and Hamitic races must have been closely associated after the deluge. 
So close is the apparent relationship, that some authorities have looked upon Abraham as 
Hamitic. Abraham came from Ur of the Chaldees. But he descended by direct line front a 
Semitic father. His mother may have been Hamitic for Abraham was spoken of as a Chaldean. 
All down the line of the after years we find Hebrews taking wives out of the Ethiopian race. 
The Babylonian account of the deluge is older than the Biblical story. It does not take away 
from it but rather corroborates its truth. There is the same close relationship between the code 
of Hammurabi and the Mosaic law. Both were inspired by a common Creator. The Chaldean 
law was perhaps the Ethiopian remembrance of the best of the jurisprudence of the 
antediluvian world. Read the statutes of Hammurabi and you will be astounded at the likeness 
of these and the lesser laws of Israel. It was written long before the giving of the Mosaic law. 
The "Wisemen of the East," seeking
p. 197
the young child prove that they held the wires of revelation. The hope of the coming of a 
Messiah was written upon Babylonian tablets more than 2000 B. C.
The Babylonians were planet worshippers. This form was distinctly Hamitic. Abraham was 
called out of Chaldea because they had descended to the worship of idols. In their religious 
literature are penitential hymns that compare favorably with the Hebrew psalms. Though the 
seven planets and the sun were adored yet in early Chaldea the unity of God was distinctly


--- PAGE 91 ---
taught. The cuneiform tablets in the British museum address him as God-one. The famous 
Epic of Gilgamesh has been identified with the biblical Nimrod. The Seven Labors of 
Hercules were simply a Greek appropriation of the deeds of the Babylonian hero. The 
fragments of the tablets that tell the story of the creation and the deluge date back to 1900 B. 
C. and seem to be copies of still more ancient documents. With the later infusions from other 
races came the gross incantations and beliefs in evil spirits of later days. They sought to cope 
with them by magic. All the popular superstitions of the Middle Ages regarding demons, 
witchcraft and magic came from Babylon and to great extent were the cause of her downfall.
The study of the future through the stars became a popular false science. They sought to fix 
man's destiny through the good and evil influence of comets, planets and eclipses. These 
beliefs had great influence upon later Greece and Rome.
p. 198
[paragraph continues] Those who seek to read their-fate in the stars are following a Babylonian 
invention. Like the Etruscans they were very skillful in foretelling the future. By human 
sacrifice they sought to ward off evil and procure blessings for themselves. Africa is full of 
such superstitions. They divined from the flights of birds and were versed in the meaning of 
dreams and portents. Their philosophy passed down from father to son and constantly 
remained in the possession of one family. They believed that all that appears in heaven and 
earth is not the result of accident or fatal necessity but is the result of the wisdom of God. 
They believed that twelve superior stars ruled over the affairs of a man's life, and that he 
would be influenced by the peculiar attributes of the star of the month that gave him birth. 
(Diodorus Siculus Bk. II, ch. 21.)
The astronomy of the early Chaldeans was without the astrological features of later times. It 
was built upon scientific principles. Diodorus Siculus said that the Chaldeans could attribute 
comets to their natural causes and could foretell their reappearance. Seneca estimated that 
their theory of comets was as exact and intelligent as that of moderns. Ideler of Berlin, has 
shown that in their ancient calculations of the eclipse of the moon, quoted by Ptolemy, they 
differed from modern calculations only in minute degree. Observatories were set up in all the 
chief towns and royal astronomers sent regular reports to the king. In the British Museum are 
the fragments of a planisphere which marked the appearance
p. 199
of the sky at the vernal equinox. The astronomical discoveries of the Chaldeans must have 
required long ages of patient observation. Alexander the Great, when he took possession of 
Babylon 331. B. C., found a series of astronomical observations taken by the Chaldeans 
stretching for an unbroken period of 1903 years. These recorded observations dated from 
2234 B. C. From this foundation of indefatigable labors we have built up the astronomical 
science of modern times.
The Chaldeans must have understood the manufacture of the telescope, for Layard reported 
the discovery of a lens of power in the ruins of Babylon. Nero the emperor of Rome had 
optical glasses from the east. The most important work of the Accadians, or the early 
Babylonians was the invention and perfection of the calendar, which with trifling changes we 
use today. At this early day they had numbered and had also named the stars. The equator was 
divided into three hundred and sixty degrees. 2200 B. C. they had named the twelve months 
of thirty days each after the zodiacal signs. 2234 B. C. they had discovered the solar circuit.


--- PAGE 92 ---
Their standard work on astronomy was in seventy-two books and was called the illumination 
of Bel and is now preserved in the British Museum. The duo-decimal system was invented by 
the Babylonians. A tablet from the library at Larsa gives a table of squares and cubes correctly 
calculated from one to sixty. A series of geometrical figures used for augural purposes implies 
a Babylonian Euclid. They were the inventors of the dial for measuring
p. 200
time. All the peoples of antiquity derived their systems of weights, measures and capacities 
from them. Those mathematical tables stand unchanged in our text books today, still used by 
our boasted civilization.
Myers says that aside from letters, the tables of weights, measures and capacity are the most 
indispensable agents in the life of a people. All the transactions of commercial life are 
dependent upon them. This race from its parent stock gave writing to the world. At a very 
early period the art was extensively practiced. In the early inscriptions there is no evidence of 
the wedge writing of the cuneiform inscriptions. The wedge shape was caused by the later use 
of stylus to form the letters and, the soft clay, which in drying produced the wedge shape. 
Semites borrowed this Sumerian system of writing. After Semitic conquest it continued the 
sacred ritual language of the Babylonian temples until the time of Alexander the Great. The 
modern man but little realizes how much the ancients contributed to our modes of thought, to 
our comforts and the accurate transaction of our business. At the dawn of history this 
ingenious people was in full possession of the principles of the wheel. When the Chaldeans 
first appear they were driving horses hitched to vehicles. Our method and the style of wheel 
are identical. There is so much in modern life that we are sure is our own invention, that has 
been appropriated out of that old life. Solomon truly said that there is no new thing under the 
sun.
p. 201
Babylon was the seat of the costliest manufactures of the ancient world. Modern nations have 
developed more complicated machinery but the products that we weave are inferior. We are 
unable to produce linen as fine in texture as that wound around the mummies in the tombs of 
Egypt. The oldest Babylonian gems furnish us with pictures of richly embroidered dresses. 
She excelled all others in the manufacture of durably dyed and variegated goods. The carpets 
of Babylon were prized above those of every nation. Because of their greater elegance such 
products from the Orient are more costly than ours today. Their dyes were imperishable, the 
designs were artistic and beautiful, here also cotton goods were produced of the finest quality. 
Many of the carvings were so minute as to suggest the use of magnifying glasses, and modern 
ingenuity is taxed to know how their gem cutting was done. The minuteness of some of their 
engravings seem impossible. They were inventors of the art of inlaying metals. Modern artists 
learned from them the method of covering iron with bronze. Goldsmiths' work had attained a 
high perfection at a very early period. The elegance of their engravings excites the envy of the 
modern lapidary. The beauty of their furniture was worthy of imitation.
The ancient Babylonians were a legal-minded people. Law was highly developed. The mother 
occupied a prominent place in the community in early times. The Code of Hammurabi was in 
force 2250 B. C. It shows a high sense of justice.
p. 202


--- PAGE 93 ---
[paragraph continues] It embodied the needs of a settled community whose chief occupations were 
agriculture and commerce. Gibbon tells us that the rights of persons and of property were 
clearly set forth and carefully guarded. Crimes were severely punished. Marriage and family 
were the subject of wise provisions. Inheritance was regulated and the interests of widow and 
orphans duly protected. Commerce was highly developed and Babylonian merchants had 
extensive connections with other lands. Judges were forbidden to accept bribes and prisons 
were to be found in every town. A son was fined who denied his father and banished if he 
disowned his mother. In contrast do not such wise provisions tower high beside tardy 
legislation of today? The expedition of the University of Pennsylvania unearthed documents 
at Thebes, which prove that Mesopotamian cities five thousand years ago had systems of 
municipal government similar in fundamental principles to those of modern cities. They had a 
postal system with a parcel post branch and a banking system with a reserve bank not unlike 
what we have today.
Babylonian bankers loaned money at high rate, the persons and families of the borrowers 
being the security. They were sold as slaves if the payment was not made. This was their 
method of settling the debtor, which question of the dishonest debtor we have not yet settled. 
Not violence but order was the rule. In those days public and private crooks were given but 
brief trial; if guilty they were summarily dumped into the
p. 203
river. All deeds were drawn with that carefulness that denotes a wide-spread understanding of 
the law. They were duly witnessed, sealed and registered in the principal temple. Some of the 
taxes were paid to support public brick-yards and roads. No family was complete without 
children. Bachelors were in ill repute. It was common to adopt sons by law. Among the tablets 
unearthed were religious texts, tax lists, real estate contracts. Houses were let on lease and the 
deeds contained a careful inventory of their contents. These revelations set us wondering as to 
the manifold forms and usages of modern life that are not original as we have thought but that 
have passed down to us from the hoary Babylonians. Out of the ruined temples we have 
unearthed images of divinities, terra cotta toys, weapons, and instruments of stone and metals, 
ornaments of gold, silver, copper, bronze and precious stones, proving these people to have 
been far advanced in the arts of civilization.
Agriculture occupied a prominent place. The canals were of special importance and their 
management was superintended by the state. The country was covered by gardens. This 
people were skilled in pottery of unusual beauty and finish. Some of the dead were buried 
under huge inverted dishes and in large earthenware jars. They were skilled in terra cotta 
works. The images of King Gudea are quite astonishing when we consider their antiquity. We 
may be sure the best specimens have not come to us when we remember the vandal 
destruction of the art of the
p. 204
past. Some of their potteries were rude like those of Mexico and Peru. Others excelled the 
beauty of Greek vases. As other Cushite nations they sculptured the forms of animals. In 
Assyria no tombs appear, but the tombs of Chaldea are so plentiful the large spaces are 
literally filled with bones and relies of the dead. Sometimes the coffins were piled one upon 
another to the depth of from thirty to sixty feet, and for miles out into the desert the very soil 
under foot seems to be nothing but the accumulated dust of dead races.


--- PAGE 94 ---
We must conclude that the early Babylonians were skilled mechanics and engineers. They 
understood the use of the pulley, the lever, and the roller. Explorers found on the site of 
Babylon the remains of hydraulic machinery used for watering the hanging gardens. They 
were in possession of the microscope and telescope. Babylonian tablets contained zoological, 
botanical and geological writings in scientific classification. The capital had great libraries 
with the books grouped by subject and catalogued. The deftness and regularity with which the 
cuneiform inscriptions were made are the amazement of modern scholars. The old Sumerian 
texts were accompanied by interlinear translations sometimes arranged in parallel lines. Great 
attention was paid to the ancient Sumerian speech by the Babylonian priestly scholars, as 
proved by the large number of texts of that kind that have been found. The tablets were 
hardened by a process which rendered them practically imperishable.
p. 205
This race had taught writing and had established the institutions of city, home and state when 
other races were wandering barbarians. They gave the constellations of the heavens the names 
of the old kings of the ancient Cushite empire of Ethiopians and we in adopting them have not 
realized that the ancestors of the despised Ethiopians among us reached that height in ability 
to dare to name the stars. As the language of Babylonia changed there was a corresponding 
intermixture of blood with alien races. The habits and nature of the people changed. Amidst 
the luxuries and wealth that came from her conquests and commerce the people became 
effeminate and voluptuous. Curtiss said that at the last nothing could be more corrupt than 
their morals. Money dissolved every tie whether of kindred or esteem. They became 
immoderate in their use of wine. The women at the last threw away all sense of decency. On 
the grounds of this awful wickedness Babylon was threatened with destruction at the hands of 
the prophets. The prophecy was fulfilled. "Babylon is fallen, that great city, because she made 
all the nations to drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication." The earlier Cushite life 
had been pure.
539 B. C. Babylon was invaded by the Persians. From behind the massive walls they were 
regarded with derision. Nabonadius in his profound contempt risked a battle in which his 
troops were defeated. The larger portion of the army retreated into the city but the by and the 
remainder sought to divide the forces of the enemy. In
p. 206
[paragraph continues] Babylon there was little fear for they considered their city impregnable. For a 
season the forces of Cyrus beat against the city in vain. Leaving a portion of his army to 
engage the attention of the Babylonians, Cyrus departed from the city and going back up the 
course of the river he sought means to divert its channel. He cut canals for this purpose. He 
waited for the great pagan feast when the young prince and the court would give themselves 
up to a night of dissipation. A thousand nobles had been invited to the banquet at the palace. 
At a given signal, when the revelry was at its height, the sluices were opened by the Persians 
into their canals and the river began to fall. Land enough appeared for the Persians to make 
the passage along the edge of the channel. The river gates were seized and opened and the 
massacre began. Cyrus only dismantled the walls. 500 B. C. upon a revolt, Darius threw down 
the walls and expelled them from their homes. In the time of Strabo and Diodorus Siculus the 
place lay in ruins.
Recent investigations of Oxford University at Kish in Mesopotamia reveal that the Sumerians 
were a black people and the founders of the earliest civilization in the world. The value and


--- PAGE 95 ---
variety of the unearthed art works have exceeded all expectation and reveal also that they 
were artizans possessing skill and knowledge unprecedented among other ancients. The report 
from the Field Museum says, "Jewels of exquisite ancient workmanship, finely engraved 
cylinder seals of inestimable historical value, glazed pottery
p. 207
of unique and rare design and artistic inlay work of silver and lapis lazuli are included in these 
discoveries according to D. C. Davies, director of the museum, and Professor S. Langdon, 
Assyriologist, who is heading the expedition. Most of the articles, all from 5000 to 7000 years 
old and of pre-Babylonian times, were found in a necropolis on the eastern side of the city and 
comprise personal property placed in the tombs and graves of the dead.
The various stages of craftsmanship in cruder designs disclose that the Sumerians, a non-
Semitic race, in addition to organizing the art of writing also developed metallurgy, glazing, 
glass making and various other arts. Excavations of the tombs and graves, which consist of 
brick lined chambers of uneven depth large enough to accommodate the body and the 
personal belongings is proceeding slowly owing to the fact that many objects once uncovered, 
crumble before they can be removed. The burial places and buildings are now completely 
covered with sand and soil and have the appearance of mounds linked together. Hairpins with 
ornamental heads of precious stones and worked metal were found in nearly all of the fifty or 
more graves already opened. Slender daggers of copper and silver, with handles, of wood or 
bone inlaid with silver, were found in others. Silver medallions, engraved to represent the 
rising sun, silver fillets for elaborate coiffures, various sorts of delicately engraved cylindrical 
seals of silver, glass, copper and stone used in legal transactions, clay and metal pottery
p. 208
and urns, battle axes of metal and stone and various kinds of precious stones have been 
removed.
"One unusual type of pottery was figured and possessed handles moulded to depict the bust of 
Nintud, the Sumerian mother goddess of child birth. Of the metal implements and ornaments 
uncovered, the copper because of its purity was in the best state of preservation, the other 
metals were corroded by the salts of the soil. Spindles and wheels, exemplifying the art of 
spinning wool were found in the tombs of several women. The whorls especially were 
artistically made of a porous white substance or shells and inlaid with lapis lazuli. Pills, finger 
rings, bracelets and other personal ornaments of copper and silver were also mounted with 
carnelian, haemtite, jasper, rock crystal and calcite. A gorgeous white pin setting that 
resembled a pearl, dissolved before the eyes of the excavators as the air came in contact with 
it. Despite the large variety of rare jewelry excavated, no gold was found in the tombs. The 
care and skill with which the silver was worked indicated it was probably the most precious 
metal of that day. The golden era of Kish in the later Babylonian period was, however, 
exemplified in the discovery of a solid gold earring, in the form of an opening pomegranate 
bud, an unparalleled work of art in a clay coffin of the fifth century B. C.
p. 209


--- PAGE 96 ---
AMENEHAT I. (TWELFTH DYNASTY.)
Colossal head in red granite, from the ruins of the Great Temple of Tanis.
Photographed by Mr. W. M. F. Petrie.
 
p. 210
CHAPTER XV.
THE CIVILIZATION OF INDIA.
Asia is a continent in which republics were unusual in early ages. Here history reveals 
monarchies under despotic rulers, who were worshipped as though the subjects were mere 
slaves. India until late ages was under a very different form of government. In early Buddhist 
times we find the land full of aristocratic republics. This was the same form of government to 
be found on other Cushite sites. Here in a more isolated clime, remote from outside 
influences, the old Cushite communal form of government has come on down to our times. 
Much can be gained from a study of this unique system. Out of it came the gentleness of the 
Hindu and it was the environment that nourished his exalted mental attainments. Again it is 
too lightly considered, when we remember that this form of life produced artists and


--- PAGE 97 ---
craftsmen who brought into existence lost arts and a skill and originality that we do not today 
attain. It is a common error to suppose that the tribes that the Aryan invaders found were 
savages. Ancient annals represented the Cushite Indi as wise and skillful. Heeren said that 
these writings represented the early Hindu as a commercial people, that their merchants could 
travel from one
p. 211
of the Nile flowing through Barabra (Ethiopia) and the mountains of the Moon.
Even the name Hindu is Ethiopian. Ancient records of authority made Hind and Sind sons of 
Cush. Philostratus. in Vit. Apollon (Lib. II), says, "The Indi are the wisest of mankind. The 
Ethiopians are a colony of them, and they inherit the wisdom of their fathers." The separation 
of India from the parent Cushite stock was in ages long before the rise of the so-called Aryans 
in India. The older Greeks always associated the sacred waves of the Indian Sea with the 
wonderful Ethiopians. Ephorus stated that they occupied all the southern coasts of Asia and 
Africa. As in Chaldea they brought to the aboriginal tribes of India the knowledge of metals to 
take the place of stone implements, they brought the knowledge of the arts. Their funeral 
remains all over India reveal the stone circles and upright massive menhirs of North Africa. 
They understood in those far distant ages how to make hard earthenware, iron weapons and 
ornaments of gold. Today in a state of degenerated art, Sind is the only province where the 
potters craft is artistic. Before Megathenes, a Greek ambassador to the court of the non-Aryan 
Chandra Gupta, about 300 B. C., the Greeks mentioned as Indi only the Cushites of the areas 
between the Hindu Kush and Persia.
The name India means black, and Condor thinks that it was employed only to designate the 
home of the Asiatic Ethiopians. Let us look for a brief space at the land. India has often been 
described
p. 212
as almost a continent of itself, surrounded as it is by high mountain ranges to the north with 
the spurs stretching out to east and west, leaving only two natural passages down into the 
peninsula. India has a rich and varied climate and landscape. First come the Himalayas with 
their colder atmosphere, then the vast, fertile, densely populated plains of northern India 
watered by the Indus, the great Ganges and the Bramaputra. These have the greatest volume 
of any rivers of the world. South of the great northern plain is the elevated plateau of Decan. 
The Ganges has meant so much to the life and development of the country that it is a sacred 
river to the Hindu. Almost all the traffic of the country passes up and down this river. 
Southern India has a tropical climate. The Indian plains are sultry but Decan and the slopes of 
the Himalayas enjoy a temperate climate. There are two annual seasons the rainy and the dry.
Modern books deal with forest destruction in India and the wearing out of the land. These are 
the result of conquest and the crowding back of tribes upon the more waste areas. The great 
Indian rivers cause terrible disasters through floods that sweep off cattle, grain, stores and 
houses. The mighty currents undermine and carry away soil to build up monstrous deltas. Still 
with all these disasters India has an age old system of agriculture and we see everywhere the 
evidences of a people long skilled in agriculture. Northern India produces the plants of the 
temperate zone in profusion. Southern India abounds
p. 213


--- PAGE 98 ---
in tropical verdure. Two harvests are sometimes reaped in one year. Rice grows in the 
irrigated districts. Many think that cotton was first developed in India and that many other 
important plants found there their origin. We find indigo, jute, tobacco, sugar cane, cocoa, the 
date and other palms. Among the tropical fruits are the orange, lime, citron, melon, pineapple, 
fig and other fruits. The dense growth of tropical woods affords some of the world's most 
important plants. Here we find resins, gums, perfumes and varnishes with hundreds of other 
articles of commerce or luxury.
These wonderful and useful plains and fruits of India are not the result of accident, but are the 
fruit of the genius of some continuously agricultural race. These products were the foundation 
of the age old art and commerce of the Indies, that in the days of Columbus made the route to 
India the world sought quest of western nations. Nearly every article that produces commerce 
abounds in India. All the shrubs and herbs needed for the healing of the nations may be found 
there and are used as native medicines. Rice and millet are the staple foods, though sweet 
potatoes, onions, barley and garlic are much used. The vast forests are densely populated with 
wild animals and birds. The leopard, wolf, tiger, hyena, fox and jackal abound, the lion is 
extinct. Snakes and reptiles cause innumerable death. The tiger is in every part of the country. 
One tiger in the course of three years killed one hundred and eight persons and another caused 
thirteen
p. 214
villages to be abandoned. There is a government price on the tiger's head. The tamer animals 
are deer, sheep, goats, antelope, oxen, camels, mules, horses and many birds. With this rich 
flora and fauna a distinctive ancient life developed and flowered as gorgeously in religion and 
art.
A glance at India today reveals a great difference from the old condition of opulence. The 
country has grown overpopulated. Many districts are so overcrowded that the natives can 
hardly secure land to cultivate. Life in the British Isles is very congested, the population being 
about 213 to a square mile, but in India we find 271 to the square mile. In England the people 
support themselves by working in the industries. India has very few large towns. Millions are 
struggling to live and support themselves on half an acre. If the rains fall short by only a few 
inches, there is terrible scarcity of food and thousands die. This condition is due to the fact 
also that the old industrial system of the Hindu has been destroyed. Once they manufactured 
in their homes and thus kept themselves from want. During the centuries of misrule after the 
various conquests of India, the land became full of robbers and armed bands. Since 
introduction of railroads by the English, the natives are slowly moving from the congested 
districts to the few remaining spare lands. In ancient days each rural family was rooted to the 
spot of its ancestry.
The first glimpses that we catch of the Hindu in historical times we find a people of varied
p. 215
ethnology. The popular theory emphasizes an Aryan invasion that took place in late ages, 
compared to the primitive times when the deeds of the Indian epics were, enacted. As late as 
the authoritative records of history, the most powerful kingdoms of India were ruled over by 
non-Aryan princes. These were the Indi of the ancient records. This ruling race had produced 
the culture that passed down, and just as across all the wide belt of the equator the civilization 
of the ancient Cushite was appropriated--here it was not destroyed. So intermixed are all the


--- PAGE 99 ---
classes of the Hindu today that all Brahmin, and Soudra have identically the same formation 
of skull, the old formation of Ethiopia. This later Brahmic type which has only ruled India in 
the Christian Era is Turanian in the same sense that the races of western Europe may be so 
called. These Turanians entering India were inferior in culture to the Indi. Today after 
continued conquest, we find great peoples using literary languages among the Dravidians who 
represent the primitive Cushite stock. Such are the Tamils, Telugu, Malayalam and Kanarese. 
Authorities dispute the claim that the black Rajputs were the same race as the invading 
Turanians. The ancient books read without prejudice reveal a deadly contest between 
Brahmins and the Kshattriyas, the original royal stock.
The literature reveals that this hostility did not come to an end until the Brahmins gave up the 
hope of holding the sovereignty and took over the custody of the ancient books and the
p. 216
priesthood. We read in Buddhist India, p. 44, that it is a common error to suppose that the 
tribes with whom the so-called Aryans came in contact were savages. Some were, but there 
were also settled communities with a highly developed social organization, wealthy enough to 
excite the cupidity of invaders. These people were too much addicted to peace to be able to 
offer prolonged resistance, but they were strong enough to impose many of their ideas and 
institutions upon their conquerors. On page 59 we read, "It is now generally admitted that 
there are no pure Aryans in India, in spite of the theoretical restrictions on intermarriage. 
Aryan, Kolarin and Dravidian could not at the time of the rise of Buddah be recognized. Long 
before the theory of caste had been brought into working order a fusion sufficient at least to 
obliterate completely the old landmarks had been accomplished." In the ancient books of 
India there is, no mention of caste. Long before the time of Alexander all the Hindu were a 
dark race.
Baldwin declares that Indo-Aryans were but a small proportion of the whole population of 
India. All over the country are masses, whose dialects reveal that they did not belong to the 
Indo-European group. Cushites entering India in primitive ages perhaps found aboriginal 
Malays. They did not exterminate them but conciliated, civilized and to some extent absorbed 
them. This was the Ethiopian custom over their wide domains. In the central provinces an 
aboriginal Malay race forms a large proportion of the
p. 217
population, showing that the Cushites may have refused to intermix. The struggle represented 
as taking place between these Cushites and their conquerors might have been but a later 
emigration of their race as the Cassite invaders of Chaldea. We would think this from the 
identity of skull formation of all the racial divisions of India. The hill people of the Himalayas 
have always been fair, as we find Cushite people on all the continents where they were not 
exposed to the torrid rays of the sun. The Casdim or Cassites of ancient days occupied the 
highlands of southwestern Asia from Caucasus to the highlands of India. Does it not seem 
more reasonable that this learned race as proved by the Chaldeans and Elamites sent the type 
into India that made her ruling class.
5000 years ago we have shown there was no branch of the Aryan race that could have 
produced the Rig-Veda. 5000 years ago no Japhethic nation possessed blacksmiths, chariots, 
and the civilization that the Rig-Veda reveals. It seems to be the story of the passage to the 
southwest of Hindu colonists from the mountains of Hindu-Kush (Cush) down into the plains


--- PAGE 100 ---
of India. Note the name of the region from which they came. In the beginning these invaders 
took Dravidian wives because most probably they, were primarily of the same stock. 3000 to 
4500 B. C. the father is represented with the ancient Cushite traits in all their glory. He was 
priest of the family. He conducted human sacrifice, for which the horse sacrifice was 
substituted in later
p. 218
ages. There was no burning of widows and woman enjoyed a high position. The Rig-Veda 
represents these people at this far distant age as blacksmiths, barbers, coppersmiths, 
goldsmiths, carpenters and husbandmen. They fought from chariots as did all Cushite nations. 
They settled down as husbandmen to till the fields. Unlike the modern Hindu they ate beef. 
They adored gods identical with those of Egypt, Chaldea and Ethiopia. Who were these 
people who 4500 B. C. possessed towns and built ships? Semites and Turanians had no such 
arts.
When the Hebrews left Egypt they did not understand the art of welding iron. Persians in late 
ages used Egyptians as their carpenters. The historic Greek and Roman at this early age had 
not emerged from caves and use of rude stone tools. Let us glance at the Goths as they 
appeared on the plains of western Europe as late as the Christian Era and see if we find the 
race traits that the Rig-Veda reveals. They possessed no knowledge of metals. They scorned 
images and temples, therefore they had no priests. The name of not a single Gothic deity has 
come down to us. They showed not the faintest glimmer of the mentality and austerity of life 
of the Buddhist. They were coarse and gluttonous. They loved strong drink and would lay for 
days in drunken stupor in the ashes of their hearths. They appropriated the gods of the long 
headed race of western Europe, Odin and Thor. They knew nothing of agriculture being a 
nomadic race fitted for conquest. They had no communal interests
p. 219
as the people of India, they were extreme individualists. They battered down the grand 
structures of antiquity, they did not create them and smashed the art treasures of ages. Even in 
the Middle Ages they had developed none of the traits of the gentle Hindu and regarded not 
the rights of others unless compelled to do so by the sword.
Beside this picture let us line the Hindu priest. His is a type that early was devoted to 
ceremony. His whole life was mapped out for stages of discipline. When he had reared a 
family and gained a practical knowledge of the world, he retired into the forest as a recluse, 
using nature's wild foods. Here he practiced religious duties with increased devotion. Next he 
entered upon an ascetic and rigorous self-denial, wandering as a religious mendicant, wholly 
withdrawn from joy or pain, wholly absorbed in final absorption into the deity. He ate nothing 
but what was given him unasked, remained not more than one day in a village. Throughout 
his life he took no wine, curbed desire, shut out tumults of war, his duty was to pray and not 
to fight, to study-and practice self restraint. The Brahmin represents a race in India that holds 
supremacy not by force of arms but by vigor of hereditary culture and temperence. Dynasties 
have fallen, religions have spread themselves over the land and disappeared, but since the 
dawn of history the Brahmin has calmly ruled.
As late as the Græco-Bactrian and Scythian inroads 327 B. C. to 544 A. D. we find the fairest
p. 220


--- PAGE 101 ---
districts of northern India still in possession of Cushites. In almost every part of Oudh and the 
northwestern provinces are to be found ruins ascribed to this race, which reigned at different 
periods from the fifth to the eleventh centuries A. D. The early invaders found as the Vedas 
describe, these people in possession of wealth, having cattle, cities and forts. The literature 
represents them as making alliances with the native Cushite princes, this would have been 
impossible if they had not been of the same race. The Nubians (Cushites) of old Ethiopia will 
not intermarry with Arabs or Egyptians. Some superficial interpretations of the Vedas attempt 
to make out the Dravidian Cushites as disturbers of sacrifices, lawless, without gods, and 
without rites. This would not describe Cushites anywhere in the world. For at no stage of their 
development do they seem to be without sacrifice, law and religion, which rites they gave to 
the ancient world. That section of the Vedas describes Cushites finding the aborigines of the 
country without these rites, which they naturally at first opposed.
To those who read the Rig-Veda intelligently and without the confusing glasses of prejudice, 
these mutilated and interpolated writings are but a description of the familiar traits and 
customs of Cushite Ethiopians. The Brahmins were probably a much later and intermixed 
branch of the inhabitants of Hindu-Kush. That they were intermixed we can tell by their 
cruelty. Full blooded Cushites are very gentle. The fact that the Brahmins altered the Sanskrit 
writings to such great
p. 221
extent is proof itself that they were not the original authors of these works. They took over 
and appropriated much from Buddhism that would appeal to the masses when they found it 
otherwise impossible for them to sit in the saddle of the priesthood. An ancient treatise tells us 
of the early Cushite element, that they adorned their dead with gifts, with raiment, and 
ornaments, imagining thereby that they shall attain the world to come. Their ornaments were 
bronze, copper and gold. One non-Aryan chief described this race as of fearful swiftness, 
unyielding in battle, in color like a dark blue cloud. This old type is represented today by the 
compact masses at the south. These Dravidians constitute forty-six millions of southern 
Indians today. They represent the unmixed Cushite type. All the rest of the blood of India is 
heavily mixed with this strain.
These Dravidians that the untruthful book seeks to represent today as despised outcasts when 
they are still a very important division of the Hindu population, entered India in primitive 
times by the northwest passage. They were a part of that advancing wave of the Old Race that 
swept eastward and westward, peopling primitive Arabia, Egypt and Chaldea. The rich 
merchants of the ancient Indian commerce had been Dravidians. One of their greatest 
kingdoms was Pandya so noted in the Sanskrit writings. The Nandas in Behar of whom the 
great Chandra Gupta sprang and his greater grandson Asoka, were non-Aryan. These were of 
the supposed-to-be degraded Sudra. The Takshak and Naga nations
p. 222
who figure so largely in Sanskrit traditions are words purely African. Koch or Kush (Cush) 
form the masses of Bengal and Behar. By virtue of their descent from the old dominant race 
they retain their name of Kshattriya and call themselves Rajbansis a term exactly 
corresponding to Rajput. The rajas of Kuch Behar claim a divine descent. The name Rajput 
means of royal descent. It was the title of the old conquering class of the ancient Cushites. 
There was alliance between them and the Brahmins. We find distinguished bodies of the


--- PAGE 102 ---
Kshattriyan so-called caste received into the Brahmin caste and for the same reason sections 
of aboriginal races manufactured into Brahmins.
In the Hindu Puranas the Dravidian kingdom of Pandya was given two dynasties. The first 
had seventy-three kings, the second forty-three kings. The last king of the second dynasty was 
overthrown 1324 A. D. by the Mohammedans. No other Dravidian kingdom can boast so 
continuous a succession as the kings of Madura. The chronicles enumerate fifty Chara kings 
and fifty-six Chola kings as well as many minor dynasties. Dr. Deiche and Isaac Taylor 
thought the Hindu alphabet derived from the south Arabian and adopted a thousand years later 
by the Brahmins. The early history of the Dravidians is yet to be deciphered from mouldering 
palm leaves and more trustworthy inscriptions on copper and stone. Like the Minoan script of 
Crete and the Merotic of Ethiopia this is a third of the Ethiopic stem the has not been 
interpreted. In the
p. 223
territory of the Dravidians, we find extensive ruins of ancient temples, fortifications, tanks, 
bridges and vast remains.
The Dravidians in ethnic type are Ethiopian and are the race of India from which her 
civilization originated. Megathenes said that the natives of India and Ethiopia were not much 
different in complexion or feature. Dravidians are short like the race of the Mediterranean 
called Iberians and the Chaldeans. Their complexions are black or very dark. Their hair is 
plentiful and crispy. Their heads are elongated with the nose very broad. They occupy the 
oldest geological formation of India. They are descendants of that race of black men with 
short woolly hair that were the primitive inhabitants of ancient Media, Susiana and Persia, 
mentioned repeatedly in the Iranian legends, and whose faces look out at us from the 
sculptures of Babylon and Nineveh Dravidian is spoken by forty-six millions of India, not 
including the numerous uncultivated hill tribes and retired communities. A form of speech 
similar to it is spoken in Beluchistan, which originally was Cushite. In all the political 
changes that come to India, the communal type of life to which these natives cling never 
changes.
In ancient times India was ruled by Rajas, who were assisted by a council of elders. 
Sometimes the Raja was influenced by a queen mother or dowager. In Cushite races lineage 
was traced through the mother. The succession of the Rajah was traced in the same way. This 
was changed upon the ascendency of the Brahmins. Turanians
p. 224
trace lineage from the father's side. Some authors have sought to prove that the metronymic 
system or inheritance through the female line is evidence of promiscuity in the beginning of 
human life. In savage life men and women pair in mating, also among anthropoid apes 
proving that this instinct is as old as the human species. The spirit of the Cushite was to honor 
and exalt woman, therefore lineage was thus traced. Nephews when born of sisters were 
treated as sons and inherited the property to the exclusion of sons. Devalle described the 
queen of Ilaza as a black Ethiopian. He said she ruled like a woman of judgment. Marco Polo 
described the inhabitants of India as black and adorned with massive gold bracelets and 
strings of rare and precious gems. They had temples and priests. Vasco de Gama while 
circumnavigating the globe found the inhabitants black.


--- PAGE 103 ---
p. 225
CHAPTER XIV.
ANCIENT INDIA THE LAND OF MYSTERY.
India has always been a land of mystery. The facts of her beginning and the origin of her 
culture have been the subject of much contradiction. Some would pronounce her a land of late 
development and that her rock hewn temples and hoary monuments were built after the 
beginning of the Christian era. Rawlinson says of the early founders of Indian civilization, 
"Recent linguistic discoveries show that a Cushite race did in the earliest times extend itself 
along the southern shores of the continents from Abyssinia to India. The whole peninsula of 
India, the sea coast of Beluchistan and Kerman by the inscriptions belonged to this race." 
Wilford who had an extended and thorough knowledge of Hindu mythology points out that 
the Sanskrit writings describe the extended domains of the ancient Cushite empire. In these 
books are relations about early Egyptian history. It mentioned one of the emigrations going 
out from the Upper Nile as having peopled India. The Puranas divided the world into seven 
dwipas or divisions. Sancha Dwipa was Africa in general. Cusha Dwipa was the land of Cush, 
India and the Mediterranean. These books speak
p. 226
place to another with perfect security to themselves and their merchandise.
Alexander the Great found the natives of India not living under a monarchial system, but in 
republics. From very ancient times there had been indirect trade between India and the 
Mediterranean but it was with the Ægean civilization that had preceeded the historic Greek 
and of which Greece had no record. Alexander found that Nysa had a senate of three hundred 
members. Many of these republics were very powerful and warlike, opposing Alexander as he 
had scarcely been resisted anywhere else. His victories were purchased at vast price of blood. 
Walls and ramparts encircled their cities. Their encampments were protected by triple lines of 
military wagons and cars. They had boats and vessels. One of the temple reliefs represents the 
fore part of a vessel filled with strangers. In Multan, in Malle and Oxydracae, nearer the 
Ganges, there were still more powerful nations. (Ibid. V, 23-24.) At Sangola thousands 
perished. Many tribes deserted their cities preferring exile to subjugation. The reports of the 
mighty armies of the native Parsii, the modern Bengal, and Oude, so terrified the hitherto 
unconquered Macedonians that they retreated. (Historical Researches in the Nations of 
Antiquity, Heeren, Vol. I, p. 319.) How different is this report by a careful student of the 
records of the past, to what we read in the hastily written volumes of today.
Buddhist India, by Rhys-Davids gives a clear and interesting picture of the communal system
p. 227
of India. The villages consist of houses all built together, separated by narrow lanes. 
Immediately adjoining is the sacred grove or primeval forest, left standing when the first 
clearing was made. Beyond is the wide expanse of cultivated fields. There are grazing 
grounds for cattle and jungle where every villager has the equal right of wood and waste. The 
cattle belonged severally to the householders of the village. After crops they roam the fields 
under the charge of herdsmen hired collectively and a man skilled in cattle care. The fields are


--- PAGE 104 ---
all cultivated at the same time. Irrigation channels are laid out by the community. The supply 
of water is regulated by rule under the supervision of head men. There is a common fence. 
The great fields are divided into plots corresponding to the heads of the families in each 
village. Each family takes the produce of its share." Compare our system of monster bonds to 
make community improvements, that after multitudinous shavings bring us back meager 
results, with this communal system of co-operation which brought almost perfect results with 
little expenditure.
In India it is impossible for a shareholder to mortgage his part of the village field without the 
consent of the village council. No individual hat the right of bequest. All such matters were 
settled by the general sense of the community as to what was right and proper. The 
superintendence of the estate fell to the elder son. Women had personal property and 
daughters could inherit from their mothers. They had no need of a
p. 228
separate share of the land for they were supported from the produce falling to husbands or 
brothers. The villagers united of their own accord to build motes, halls and rest houses. They 
followed the same plan in building reservoirs, in road mending and park building. There were 
no landlords and no paupers. There was little if any crime. The people dwelt with open doors. 
These people occupied a social grade quite above our village folk. They held it degradation to 
hire. These traits are quite contrary to the nature of the races called Indo-European that 
peopled western Europe. They were quite contrary to Turanian or Semitic nature as it 
developed in Asia, but was the nature of Ethiopians and from this foundation of communal 
life that they laid in southern Europe, in early Chaldea and elsewhere, evolved the foundation 
and ideals from which the democracies of our times were developed.
It was by this simple system, as revealed in the communal districts of India--which cannot 
function perfectly, because of the spirit of exploitation and foreign rule--this system of 
cooperation, of the Cushite race that built the wonderful temples, palaces and giant 
engineering works of the past that today bewilder the beholder. The basis of the wonderful 
achievements of Babylonia, Egypt and Ethiopia was this communal system. It is for the 
results they gained that we should weigh this system, seemingly impossible to us, for its 
value. It was by their combined strength that they gained and held world sovereignty for so 
many thousands of years.
p. 229
[paragraph continues] There are things in Cushite forms that would relieve some of the insufferable 
miseries of today that are a reproach to our civilization. The placing of every man upon an 
actual basis of equality seems a thing impossible to our natures, though it is written in our 
civil confessions of faith. Metcalf says, "These little village communities are little republics, 
having everything they want within themselves and almost independent of any foreign 
relations. They seem to last when nothing else lasts. Dynasty after dynasty tumbles in India, 
revolution succeeds revolution, the Mogul, Sikh, and English, all have been master but the 
village communities remain the same."
Megathenes, the Greek ambassador to the court of a non-Aryan king about 300 B. C., gives us 
another picture of Indian Cushite life. He observed with admiration the absence of slavery in 
India, the chastity of the women and the courage of the men. In valor they excelled all other 
Asiatics. They required no locks to their doors, above all no Indian was ever known to tell a


--- PAGE 105 ---
lie. They were sober and industrious, good farmers and skillful artisans. They scarcely ever 
had recourse to a law suit and lived peaceably under their native chiefs. The kingly 
government was portrayed almost as described in Mann, with its hereditary caste of 
councilors and soldiers. Husbandmen were exempt from war and public service. These were 
worthy descendants of the "Blameless Ethiopians," of old traditions. Though we are told that 
the Greeks and Hindu are kindred the Hellenes were vary ignorant of
p. 230
[paragraph continues] India prior to the expedition of Alexander. The prehistoric Greek and the Hindu 
were both branches of the Old Race. The native tribes which Megathenes found esteemed 
their constitution as an inheritance from Dionysus, an ancient Cushite king. The names Nysa, 
Malli, Nanda, and many other names of cities and nations are purely African words, alive 
today in the Soudan.
Missionaries to India have, given further pictures of the working of the communal system in 
the home. When a man and wife have reared a family, the sons bring their wives to the 
paternal home to live together and raise families in the common home of their father. The 
supreme authority rests with this parent. The whole income goes into a common treasury. 
There is no individual property. So loyal is the Hindu to paternal authority that no question is 
ever raised by anyone as to obedience to his commands. (We may scoff at such a system as 
impossible to individualism and freedom but where is there any family of any civilization that 
has succeeded by any other plan. Families that learn to pull together soon rise to position or 
wealth. The tendency of our civilization is toward a dangerous freedom that weakens and 
enslaves us.) In India the weak, the sick and the feebleminded have the same claim on the 
family resources as the others. His claim is universally recognized by the race. No poorhouses 
are needed. The Hindu considers this as his most cherished and ancient institution. He should 
be proud of it, for it indeed
p. 231
proves his humanity. They have a sublime conception of reverence for parental authority and 
obligation to the ties of blood.
Jones tells us, that Buddhism has produced in India, a higher type of womanhood than 
Brahminism; yet the women of no other land wield a greater power than the much abused 
women of India. We are made to feel by superficial observers of Hindu life, that the women 
of this race are undervalued. This is misrepresentation. No woman on earth today reveals a 
greater attachment for her husband. She allowed herself to be burned upon the funeral pyre as 
a sublime exhibition of wifely devotion. So the African wife for ages desired to pass on into 
the unknown with the mate. In the narrow home sphere, in religion and the training of 
children, her influence is supreme. The conversion of the husband to another faith will not be 
permanent if the wife persists in the ancestral faith. Millions of money is expended in the 
manufacture of female ornaments. The Hindu expresses his love in this way to his bride. 
There are four hundred thousand goldsmiths constantly employed. The wealth of the family in 
the Middle Ages was largely measured by the amount of jewels possessed by the women of 
the family. Hindu clothing is beautiful and suited to the climate. The one-cloth of the Hindu 
women bright with colors and deftly wound around her body is the most exquisitely beautiful 
garment in the world.
Did the Indian race create anything in architecture? The ancient ruins and remarkable


--- PAGE 106 ---
p. 232
structural remains were built in ages remote from ours. A period long before any Aryan, 
Scythian or Mohammedan invasion. They are the work of the native races that inhabited 
India. The Brahmins only reached power and overthrew Buddhism in the year 700 A. D. They 
took over the ancient records and they themselves say that the ancient ruins were constructed 
7000 years ago. This was coeval with the pyramids. They were both built by the same race. 
Everything in these grottoes is of Indian character, they belong to the time when India was 
under no foreign yoke. In Ellora, Hindu mythology is shown in perfect development. In the 
rock in the excavations of Elephante, we find a stone so hard that ordinary steel cannot work 
it. The same hand that carved the rock of Egypt worked here. The temple grotto, at Salsette, 
has inscriptions but the alphabet no one has been able to decipher. This would all prove that 
these forms of architecture had their origin from the primitive Cushite race of India.
All the scenes of the mythology on the walls of these ancient temples are southern and do not 
represent any phase of the life of Aryans or Turanians. Heeren, in Asiatic Nations, The 
Indians (Vol. III, p. 43), tells us that in the carvings may be seen armies on elephants, never 
on horses, which would disprove the 1000 A. D. theory of their building. Their plan is simple 
yet grand. Ponderous roofs rest on seemingly slender and inadequate supports. There are halls 
with roofs of solid rock supported on massive piers, which
p. 233
are richly carved with pictures and friezes. Painted reliefs and numerous colossal animals 
enliven the temples. The inscriptions are in Sanskrit. If this be true, then Sanskrit must have 
been the language of the primitive race. Langles says, "If these structures were reared nine 
hundred years ago, then Ethiopia alone could have furnished the architects, for at that late 
date, the world had lost the art of carving in granite." The plains around the Indian temples 
were once highly cultivated but now are impenetrable jungle and the lair of wild beasts. The 
topes of India prove the Hindu to have been acquainted with both the pointed and circular 
arch, which were unknown to both the Egyptians and Greeks.
Heeren describes Mavalipurian, a royal city, hewn out of the living rock. A large part of this 
city had been engulfed by the sea. Immense blocks of stone in Cyclopean style show that 
these ruins must have been very ancient. They were built by the same race that at that age in 
other parts of the world, in Phoenicia, in Arabia, in Nubia, and in Egypt, left similar massive 
ruins. These Indian works were built so long ago that the very recollection of their origin is 
lost. The pagodas are pyramidal temples of Cyclopean construction. The Brahmins must be 
right in their estimate of the age of these ruins. Heeren thinks that nine hundred years ago, 
there were no powerful princes that could have erected such stupendous monuments. 
Bardesanes reported, that at the beginning of the Christian Era almost two thousand years ago, 
Indian messengers said
p. 234
that in a large grotto under a lofty hill is an image of Siva, half man and half woman twelve 
ells high. At that day Elephante was completely deserted, unused and as mysterious as now. 
Mohammedans destroyed all of the ancient monuments of India and Heeren thinks we may be 
sure that they borrowed from Indian architectural ideals. The Hindu far surpassed Egypt and 
Greece in the richness of their ornamentation.


--- PAGE 107 ---
Maurice, that eminent authority on Indian antiquities, says, "One would suppose that such 
astonishing works would have been called the eight wonder of the world and would have a 
fixed place in any country as an era never to be forgotten."
The presence of the image of Siva would give us the impression that these temples might have 
come from beyond the deluge, for Siva worship and its abominable rites were a part of the 
idolatrous religion for which God destroyed the antediluvian world. The Tartar nations north 
of India are addicted to the worship of this god and may justly be credited with bringing it 
into India; for two streams of emigration have swept into the peninsula, one from the 
northeast and the other from the northwest. The rite polyandry, a wife having a number of 
husbands, exists among these Tartars and we find this custom in India even among Brahmins. 
The early Cushite worship was pure and included no part of Siva worship that has prostituted 
the morals of a once pure race. Siva worship must have been introduced by the Brahmins as it 
is one of the chief deities of Brahminism. Nowhere in these ancient
p. 235
ruins is there a temple dedicated to Brahma or Vishnu showing that Turanians had nothing to 
do with the erection of the structures. The rock temples of India were built at the same age as 
the building of the Great Sphinx.
From 100 B. C. to 700 A. D. Indian civilization suffered from the inroads of Tartars or 
Scythians. For five hundred years the native dynasties waged war against them. The Greeks 
called these invaders Huns. They were shepherds or herdsmen who roamed across the plains 
of central Asia. It was from this element that the caste of Brahmins may have sprung or from 
earlier invasions, for about 700 A. D. the Brahmins began to gain the upper hand in India. The 
old religion of Buddhism was falling to decay from age. Brahma's apostles having caught the 
central gist of the life of Buddha began to invent varying philosophies upon the central 
thought of Buddha's-self denial and restraint. A mass of impossible miracles and divine 
incantations were fostered upon the people. Siva worship was adopted in the national religion. 
With the introduction of cremation came the burning of the widow on the funeral pyre. 
Human sacrifice was incorporated. Krishna which means black was taken out of the old cult 
and incorporated in Brahminism, anything to insure the strengthening of the claim of the 
Brahmin to the priesthood. Some sought to teach the equality of caste, others sought to 
establish a religion of pleasure.
The Scythic invasions were followed by the Mohammedan conquest. In which the idols of 
India
p. 236
were broken and her treasures carried away. Mohammed died 632 A. D. One hundred years 
after his death his followers had invaded Asia as far as Hindu Kush. It took three hundred 
years more for them to be strong enough to grasp at India. The first invaders were struck with 
wonder at the despairing valor of the Hindus. One Rajput garrison preferred extermination to 
submission. They raised a huge funeral pyre upon which the women and children first threw 
themselves. The men having bathed, took a solemn farewell of each other, and throwing open 
the gates, rushed upon the weapons of the besiegers and perished as a man. The difficulty of 
the Mohammedan entrance into India lay in the daring of the Hindu tribes, for they did not 
enter easily as is commonly supposed. Not only the Sind Rajputs but the kingdoms of the 
lower Ganges from Bahar downward of non-Aryan extraction represented by the Chers, Chola


--- PAGE 108 ---
and Pandya dynasties made the conquest of India a very tedious progress. The Hindu power in 
southern India was not fully broken until 1565 A. D. At no time was Islam triumphant 
throughout all India. Hindu dynasties always ruled over a large area. The Mogul empire was 
fast falling into the hands of the Hindu when the English power fastened itself upon this 
afflicted people.
The three ancient kingdoms of Chers, Chola and Pandya were of Dravidians. They were 
Tamil speaking races. No European kingdom can boast a continuous succession such as that 
of Pandya or Madura, traced back by the piety of genealogists
p. 237
for more than two thousand years. In the sections of India that were conquered it was because 
these were essentially a creative and not a naturally ferocious people. The Mohammedans 
stripped the temples of gold and the idols of precious stones. The Tartar invasion of 1316 was 
indescribable in its atrocities. From 1350 to 1550 A. D. the Dekan was a theatre of war 
between the Hindu and the Mohammedans. Then began the intermingling of Arabian and 
Indian blood, both of which were foundationally Cushite. From this union of genius has risen 
the richest architecture in the world. The Taj Mahal, the Indian Mohammedan temple is 
perhaps the most beautiful edifice in the universe. It is described as though it was conceived 
by Titans and finished by jewelers. Its grandeur of conception and wonderful delicacy of 
workmanship enthralls all. The visitor exclaims, "The half has never been told." The Taj is the 
highest expression of art human affection has ever attained.
Akbar the Great was the founder of the Mogul dynasty. Mogul is the Arabic word for 
Mongol. This empire lasted for one hundred and fifty years. His grandfather had married a 
Rajput princess. His favorite wife was of the old race. The tomb of Akbar the Great almost 
equals the Taj. In this great mausoleum, the famous Kohinor diamond was exhibited for years 
in the open air. Would this have been possible in our civilization? The Shah of Persia in 1739 
sacked the palace of the Moguls and carried this diamond and other fabulous wealth back to 
Persia. These vast treasures
p. 238
seemed to convey a curse. This famous diamond passed into the hand of Queen Victoria. The 
imperial grandeur of the Moguls arose from the sacking of Hindu cities of the accumulated 
wealth of the ages. Their display has probably never been surpassed. The temple of the Sikhs 
is only fifty three feet square but it is largely covered with gold plate, it is a beautiful object to 
behold. The Mohammedans though they left wonderful architectural beauty did not seriously 
change the undercurrents of the life of the people. The Hindu charge the Mohammedans with 
compelling them to the necessity of secluding their women, who before their invasion were 
free and independent. The licentiousness of the Arab caused them to withdraw their women 
into the home.
Modern literature places great emphasis upon the caste system of India. Some books represent 
the seeming four castes as subdividing into as many as 3000 castes. These cannot intermarry 
and most cannot eat together. Each caste is supposed to keep to the same occupation. Though 
we read this, in reality, the castes often change employment and lower ones rise in the social 
scale. Vaisyas were once tillers of the soil, now they are great merchants and bankers of India. 
The system of castes helped to bring the crafts up to perfection. The famous manufacturers of 
medieval India, its muslins, silk, cloth of gold, inlaid weapons, and exquisite work in precious


--- PAGE 109 ---
stones, were brought to perfection under the system of casts or trade guilds. Such guilds may 
still be found in full force in India today. These
p. 239
in their organization prevent undue competition among the members and each upholds the 
interest of its own body in any dispute arising among craftsmen. Their trade disputes are 
settled and a stamped agreement fixes the rate for the future. The trade guild charges a fee and 
acts as an insurance society. (History of the Nations, India-Persia, p. 78.)
We may pass over to the west coast of Africa and we will find these same trade guilds and 
clans that eat only with their caste and only certain kinds of food. In India some are 
vegetarians, others eat beef. All of this grew out of that African custom where a tribe is 
forbidden to eat the animal that is its totem. Caste difference in India has no existence because 
of color. Caste keeps Aryans in Hindustan outside the pale as well as other aliens. Europeans 
delight in calling themselves of the same race as the Persians, but Jones tells us that the 
Parsee, driven from Persia twelve hundred years ago into India, declined the other day to 
receive into their fold, the English bride of one of their number. Caste delights in calling all 
foreigners unclean wretches and teaches that contact with other races brings ceremonial 
pollution and sin. Some of the native rulers have set the time of audience with Englishmen at 
impossible hours, that the visit might not take place. They look upon the Hindu who has 
crossed the ocean into foreign lands and who has associated with us, as engulfed in pollution. 
In early Cushite days there were no child marriages, prohibition of widow marriages and rite 
of suttee. These
p. 240
abominations have been added in later ages by the Brahmins.
The Hindu of today lives in ages that have long gone by. The present to him is an age of 
corruption with ones more deeply degraded to ensue. He looks with contempt upon our 
modern scientific investigations and modern haste. He feels that they do not add to real 
progress or to our happiness. His life is introspective, dealing with the mystic. He renounces 
outer attractions to seek communion with God. In early ages he had evolved a subtle system 
of philosophy. He has developed a sixth sense, which we of modern civilization cannot 
comprehend, 350 B. C. or 2350 years ago he had attained the same degree of civilization that 
is his today. Jones declares, "the people of India are the most religious upon the face of the 
earth. The Chinese and Japanese beside them are worldly and prosaic." The Hindu are deeply 
spiritual. They are not materialistic like the people of western nations. In India religion enters 
every detail of life as it did in Egypt and old Ethiopia. In remote ages, when our ancestors 
were in the depth of savagery, the Hindu were indulging in metaphysical disquisitions, which 
even today are admired by western sages. Many Hindu writings express aspirations and 
yearnings so beautiful as to excite our highest admiration.
p. 241
CHAPTER XVI.
HINDU RELIGION AND LITERATURE.


--- PAGE 110 ---
India with its deeply religious people has given two great religions to the world. Buddhism 
and Brahminism are typical of the intermingled races from which they have come. Buddhism 
arose from the more ancient civilization. The older temples, of India are to Buddha. His 
worship was anterior to that of Brahma. In the Ramayana they are spoken of as opponents. 
Buddhism was older than Buddha-Gautema, who was only one of the incarnations of the old 
faith. In India, China, Thibet and Nepal six mortal predecessors of Buddha are recognized. 
The Jains celebrated one of his forerunners. Because of this the various sects differed and 
disputed about his coming. The dates of the incarnations of Buddha ranged from 2450 B. C. 
to 453 B. C. Buddhism was the evolution of many centuries. It sprang from some earlier form 
of Cushite faith. Buddhists when they pray call: upon "Ad." The early Cushites were Adites. 
This religion preached equality and held the primitive inhabitants. The Cushites of western 
Europe possessed the worship of Buddha in primitive ages. There had been religious 
pilgrimages between them and the people of India in those old days. Woden father of the gods 
of northern Europe was the Indian
p. 242
[paragraph continues] Buddha. (See Ancient Races of Western Europe, Chapter XX.)
Buddha Gautema a prince of a Sakya clan, was an Indian sage of the fifth century before 
Christ. He was a prince filled with compassion for the human race and works of charity. He 
left the courts of royalty and lived in hermitage striving to read the mysterious riddle of life. 
He became the incarnation of Buddha. His teaching was that there is no escape from pain, that 
to attain perfection our appetites and emotions must be kept in subjection. He practiced 
extreme renunciation, giving up his princely rights, wife and infant son. He sought to forget 
self in a life of service for others. The principles of his faith were abstinence from lying, 
stealing, adultery, drunkenness, indulgence in extravagant entertainment, feasting and 
theatrical performances. He idealized and made beautiful by his life and teachings the primal 
virtues--purity, charity, patience, courage, introspection and understanding. His ethics warned 
his disciples against coarse language and indulgence in vain and frivolous talk. This faith was 
accepted by the later Scythian hoards, though they made changes in it. Thus it became a great 
Lord of union between the races of India and the fiercer Mongolian peoples.
Gautema did not leave his doctrines in writing. He taught and talked to the people. His words 
were carefully treasured and reduced to writing after his death. There is an almost identical 
likeness between his teachings and those of the Saviour but Gautema preceeded Him by five 
hundred
p. 243
years. Buddha carried his message not to caste but to the common men. He brought a spiritual 
deliverance to the people not through imaginary deities but by conduct. The Buddhist books 
we now possess are the work of several canons and were completed two full centuries before 
the birth of Christ. Buddhism was a protest against caste distinctions. It permeates and softens 
even today the Brahminism that thrust it out of India. Buddha forbade the worship of images. 
The religion was pure in its beginning, but has become confounded with the worship of the 
sage. Though now banished from India by the persecutions of the Brahmins, Buddhism 
prevails in Ceylon, Burmah, Siam, Thibet, Mongolia, Java and Japan. Buddhism became 
established in China 65 A. D. The Græco-Bactrians accepted it with the Scythian dynasty that 
succeeded them. It was carried to Thibet, Afghanistan and to the Caspian.


--- PAGE 111 ---
247 B. C. Asoka of the non-Aryan race, the grandson of Chandra Gupta, supported many 
Buddhist priests, 64,000 in number. He founded many religious houses. He did for Buddhism 
what Constantine did for Christianity. He corrected the heresies of evil men who had taken 
upon themselves the yellow robe of Buddha, without the life. Britannica says that Buddhism 
has won greater triumphs in its exile than it could have achieved in the land of its birth. It has 
created a religion and literature for more than one-third of the human race, and has profoundly 
affected the beliefs of the rest. Five hundred million men still follow the teachings of Buddha.
p. 244
[paragraph continues] His shrines and monasteries stretch in a continuous line from the Caspian to the 
Pacific and still extend from the confines of the Russian empire to the equatorial archipelago. 
The most reliable of the books of Buddha are written in Pali, a dialect direct from the Old 
Race. It is not surprising that teachings so high and earnest should have met with eager 
acceptance by a people as intensely religious as the Hindu. 400 A. D. Buddhism was still 
flourishing over a large. area in India. In the ninth and tenth centuries a great persecution 
arose and Buddhists were utterly exterminated. For two centuries Brahmins had been gaining 
the upper hand.
Brahminism and Buddhism had lived side by side from 250 B. C. till about 900 A. D. Modern 
Hinduism is but the product of both. 400 A. D. temples of the two faiths could be found side 
by side. Fah Hian, traveling in India saw many Brahmins in their idol temples. He found 
Buddhist monks maintained at public expense. He carried back revised copies of the Buddhist 
scriptures to his brethren in China. He saw Buddhist hospitals where the crippled, destitute, 
and diseased were attended by physicians and supplied with medicines and food until 
relieved. There was a huge monastery of Buddhists at Nalanda, the ruins of which are still to 
be seen. It was a vast university where a thousand Buddhist monks and novices were lodged 
and supplied with every necessity. Towers and domes rose and pavilions were to be seen 
amidst a paradise of trees, gardens and fountains. There were six large ranges
p. 245
of buildings, four stories high, as well as a hundred lecture rooms. Food, bed, and vestments 
were furnished free. They were thus enabled to devote their whole lives to the acquisition of 
learning. They studied the sacred books of all religions and all sciences especially arithmetic 
and medicine. The people of India became gentle, honest and just. There was no capital 
punishment.
Many miraculous stories grew up around the life and death of Buddha. Great festivals were 
held in which the monarch stripped off his jewels and royal raiment and handed them to 
bystanders in imitation of the great renunciation of Buddha. In the architecture of India, the 
Pagoda is the symbol of Buddhism. It is one massive solid structure of an elongated bell 
shape. The highest part is usually covered with precious metal. The Schway Dagon is 370 feet 
high on an artificial mound of 170 feet. Its top is mostly of solid gold incrusted with precious 
stones. It is surrounded with numberless shrines or temples every one of which holds an 
image of the Great Buddha. The shrines are built of marble, richly carved teak, or glass 
mosaics, every one trying to excel the other in delicate charm. In each are sweet little bells 
which upon the winds blowing, ring gentle peals of sacred music to the great founder of the 
faith. In Mandelay, Burmah is an immense brazen statute of Buddha. The devout among his 
believers gild the image with leaf gold. At least a dozen men and women can be seen at any 
time thus expressing their devotion. Here


--- PAGE 112 ---
p. 246
[paragraph continues] Brahma holds no sway. Here the women, modest and self-respecting possess 
equality with men.
Brahminism claims to be founded upon the Vedas, the sacred books of India, taken over by 
the Brahmins. They were not the creators of the writings, though today they are the 
custodians, interpretors and priests. They only attained this place after a bloody struggle with 
the native races. Upon the suppression of Buddhism a line of apostles of Brahminism 
appeared, with a philosophy built upon the peculiar mystic, ascetic, teachings of Buddha. A 
mass of Hindu legends sprang up around them. Some were born of virgins, others overcame 
lions, others raised the dead. When hands and feet were cut off they sprouted again; while the 
earth opened up and swallowed their slanderers. In Brahminism, Brahma was the first person 
of the trinity. He was the creator. Vishnu was the preserver and the abominable Siva, the 
destroyer. Brahma who was at first the most exalted sunk into the background and today 
Vishnu and Siva form the two worshipped deities of India. Though Siva was revered in a 
philosophical way by the Brahmins, he is worshipped with the most degrading rites by the 
masses of India. In the image of Siva of the Grotto of Elephante obscenity is displayed that 
surpasses anything that depravity can imagine.
Buddha and Siva were two hostile sects, Heeren tells us emphatically that in the Phallic 
emblems and the female counterpart, there are no evidences of grossness. In one place Vishnu 
is represented as a servant of Buddha. The Brahmins
p. 247
attempted to incorporate the pure worship of Buddha into their religion by making him an 
incarnation of Vishnu. As time went on Brahmins added to and corrupted the Vedas to 
confirm their excessive pretensions. Brahmanism is full of elements foreign to the Aryas. It 
worships gods that they did not bring into India and the traditions are borrowed from the 
darker race. Brahminism as a power came in by political changes about 700 A. D. Dr. 
Stevenson declares that wherever Brahmins found a god whom it was politic to reverence 
they made him one of their own. Later Brahmins tried to conciliate and absorb everything. 
Their religion was not pure or attractive enough to supplant Buddhism fairly, so they 
destroyed, revised and interpolated the historical books of India, suppressing its real religious 
history. "Thus we find two strains running through the Vedas, one pure and devotional in the 
other," Barnett says, are bursts of filthy obscenity, a mass of vulgar superstitions and magic 
rites enwrapping almost every function of life."
High in the Himalayas in an eastern direction from Bramaputra of Thibet the original seat of 
the Brahmins was found in 1807. There were seven hundred cities. Here the predominant sect 
is Siva, showing that this abominable god had a Mongol origin. This is the birthplace of a 
people who came down into the India plains to bring their faith, which in the seven hundredth 
year of the Christian Era gained the upper hand. The cruel nature or Brahmic law reveals their 
Tartar origin. By torture they forced Brahminism upon
p. 248
the Indian Cushites. They punished theft by the cutting off of hands and feet. One who 
defamed the Brahmins or the caste spirit they sought to force upon the people had his tongue 
torn out, red hot irons thrust into his mouth, or the lips cut off. (Antiquities of India, Barnett,


--- PAGE 113 ---
p. 116, 122.) Under their law the husband could whip or kill his wife and confiscate her 
property. The polyandry of the Malay tribes of Thibet was among them where brothers had a 
common wife. The burning of the widow on the funeral pyre persisted down to modern times. 
Time has treated the Brahmin roughly. He had a better start than any other Hindu, he 
appropriated learning ready made, but he made but little of the great chance. He has been too 
proud and self centered. The Brahmin has the proud conviction of superiority depicted in 
every muscle of his face. His is not the nature that could have created the wonderful literature 
of India. Pride is manifested in every movement of his body. Though he is in possession of 
the richest literature and the deepest philosophy of the ages, he adds nothing to the solution of 
India's bitter problems today. We must look to Ghandi and the masses for that. Brahmins 
added fictions to the great Indian epic poem Maha Bharata to satisfy their hatred of the 
Buddhists. Some modern books claim that Buddha belonged to the Aryas but history proves 
the Brahmins to have been the hostile sect that drove Buddhism from India. Buddha could not 
have been Turanian. Heeren says, "This god is easily known by his
p. 249
woolly hair and long ears as he sits cross-legged." So we see him in the great temple 
dedicated to him at Kinnery. Brahmins in the altered literature represented the heads of 
Buddhist monasteries as monsters and the charioteer, whom the priests envied were 
represented as lowborn carters and wagoneers.
Barnett speaking of the Aryas or Brahmins in their beginning says of them that, whatever was 
their inception, their race was very quarrelsome. They brought no women with them to India 
but took Dravidian wives. They established themselves in the midlands and here amidst Aryas 
mixed with Cushite blood the Vedas developed their classic culture. Sanskrit was the 
language in which it was written because it was the tongue of the predominent race. In the 
Vedas we find but a very rudimentary knowledge of astronomy. Their enlightenment on 
medicine is very obscure and mixed with sorcery. History and geography, says Barnett, were 
left solely to the imagination. Vedic society was patriarchal or masculine, the Cushite life 
matriarchal. In the Vedas were tales of endless blood-feuds, capital punishment, roasting 
alive, drowning, trampling by elephants, devouring by dogs, tearing in pieces, impalement 
and other horrors that sound more like the Assyrian cruelties of a later age or Hunnish 
atrocities, rather than the deeds and customs of the noble Indo-European race in its beginning. 
The Rig-Veda written not later than 1000 B. C. represents a civilization similar to the Iliad. 
Both represent a society moulded by foreign invasion, a race of
p. 250
stalwart strangers, strong in culture and armour, of the late bronze and early iron ages, 
descending upon a darker, weaker people, subjecting them and mixing blood and culture.
Leaving the enigma of the origin and meaning of the Rig-Veda, we come to the two 
allegorical poems, the Ramayana and the Maha Bharata, which eclipse anything in Sanskrit. 
The Ramayana is very ancient. It represents a culture and ideals very different from the early 
Vedas. It is an allegory in which good triumphs over evil. It begins with the description of a 
city founded by Manu (Menes), first sovereign of mankind. The streets are full of merchants, 
elephants, horses and chariots, beautiful temples and palaces decorated with precious stones, 
incense and flowers. No covetous person was there, no liar, deceiver, or evil disposition. This 
poem is uncontaminated with foreign alloy. It is a picture of Hindu life prior to 1000 B. C. It 
is also a picture of Cushite civilization at that age. It is the story of the deeds of primitive


--- PAGE 114 ---
heroes. The poem contains 24,000 verses and is divided into seven books. It was written about 
500 B. C. Another Hindu book is the Code of Manu, dating 1000 B. C. It regulated the moral 
and social life. The Maha Bharata is 240,000 lines, the, longest epic poem ever written, being 
eight times as long as the Iliad and Odyssey put together. The sacred books of Buddha contain 
five times as much matter as the Old and New Testaments combined.
The Rig-Veda is composed of songs of praise, prayers and commandments. They sprang from
p. 251
an imaginative and creative, as well as serious and thoughtful people. Much of the grossness 
found in these writings cannot be attributed to the creators but to the interpolations of the 
Brahmins. The Puranas, the Fifth Veda, consists of prehistoric legends. With the voluminous 
additions of the Brahmins, they have become a kind of encyclopedia of general knowledge. 
They are based upon older books of less extended scope. None of them are older than 1000 B. 
C. The Jains, wealthy southern Dravidians, an offshoot from Buddhism, accuse the Brahmins 
of destroying the real historical books of India, wherever they gained ascendency. They assert 
that the Puranas were formerly historical books-and that some of the divine heroes were 
merely kings of Oude. As Buddhism declined Jainism grew in southern India. Heeren tells us 
that the mythology of the Indian Bacchus (Dionysus), son of Cush, seems to have been 
transformed by the Brahmins into Brahma. Siva one of the great gods of the religion does not 
appear in the Veda as a god but is simply an invention of the Brahmins. Buddha-Gautema 
denied the claims of the Brahmins that they were the divinely appointed teachers or sacred 
knowledge.
The literature of India is vast beyond all comprehension. The library of one of its kings was so 
huge that it required a hundred Brahmins to carry it front place to place. Sanskrit is supposed 
to bear the closest resemblance to the primitive language. Its writings have furnished a 
storehouse for the rest of the world. The Vedas,
p. 252
as the Homeric poems, and the folk lore of western Europe, were probably sung and recited 
for hundreds of years before they were committed to writing. Sanskrit has not been a living 
language since 200 B. C. The rising supremacy of the Brahmins must have hastened its decay. 
Had it been their language it would have come over into the Christian Era. It is a carefully 
constructed tongue and very symmetrical. Great masses of the literature are in meter. Indian 
jurisprudence is a standing proof of the ancient moral and intellectual refinement of the 
people. It has striking similarity to German and Jewish law. All of these nations were in close 
contact with ancient Cushite law. The poetry of India reveals the high moral status of the 
female sex. A deep feeling of tenderness and regard for woman is invariably represented.
The Epic narrative of the Hindu poems, bears great resemblance to the Homeric stories, yet in 
subject and prevailing tone, they are more gigantic. They are full of tenderness and female 
charm, like the mass element of India that was once Buddhist. The poems describe their 
character and relations with women as pure and noble. The great poems are pervaded by a 
most subtle philosophy and their history of metaphysics extends back into the mythical ages 
and cannot be attributed to the creation of the Brahmitical mind, which dominated and 
appropriated far down to our era. The first system of philosophy is founded upon nature, the 
second upon the psychic self, the third upon the revelations of the Vedas. Of


--- PAGE 115 ---
p. 253
the different systems of philosophy, the Vedanta was founded by the author of the Maha 
Bharata, which is from the Cushite element. The Sanchya philosophy gave the highest place 
to nature and seems atheistic. It reveals absorption of thought in the deity as necessary to the 
gaining of miraculous power. The Yoga system of philosophy teaches complete union of 
thought and faculty with God. It leads to hermitage. Buddha was the author of the Nyaya 
system of philosophy. It was logical, dialectic or the metaphysics of logical science. He taught 
that this vain world was but an illusion and that our personality must be absorbed in the god-
head
In grammatical structure the language of India is absolutely similar to Greek and Latin in the 
minutest particulars, only Sanskrit is far richer and more varied. The sacred books of Buddha 
were written in Palli, the language of native India. If we examine the language of Persia, we 
find no relation between it and Sanskrit, yet we are led to believe by linguists that Sanskrit 
with its roots common to the nations of western Europe, passed across Asia with succeeding 
emigrations of Aryans. "It is impossible to acknowledge the indebtedness of western literature 
to the literary thought of India. We have borrowed from every department, but nowhere have 
we found richer treasures than in its romances and fairy tales. Stories written in far away India 
have been the favorites of the story tellers of the world. Many of the fairy tales like Cinderella 
were written to delight some Hindu child. India
p. 254
is rich in literary as well as material treasures and we are far richer for having borrowed from 
them." 1 Grammar seems to have had a special fascination for the Hindu. The oldest extant 
grammar dates from 300 B. C. In mathematics and astronomy they have greatly distinguished 
themselves.
Footnotes
254:1 Standard Dictionary of Facts, p. 278.
p. 255
CHAPTER XVIII.
ANCIENT MEDIA AND PERSIA WERE CUSHITE.
In the mythology of the Greeks we find the most probable origin of the Modes and the records 
of the Hindu give us the source of the Persians. Yet this may or may not have meant that they 
were of the same race. The Persians so famous under Cyrus were anciently called Elamites. 
The Code of Manu of India said that the Persians were originally one of the divisions of their 
race. The Iranian legends said that the whole region of ancient Persia to India was inhabited 
by a race of black men with short wooly hair. They were undoubtedly closely akin to the 
Cossaei of Strabo XI, 5-6. From them all Elam was called Cissia (Her. III, 91; V. 49) they had 
come from Elwend where the ark rested. The father of Cyrus was a king of Anzan. Southern 
Susiana was called Anzan in the cunieform inscriptions. The ancient Zend writings said that


--- PAGE 116 ---
anciently the Medes, Persians and Bactrians were the same, having one common language, 
the Zend, and one religion. Cyrus belonged to this old division. Later Persians were utterly 
ignorant of the history of their country before Alexander. The incoming northern Scythians 
had the same effect
p. 256
of obliterating the real historical remembrances just as happened in Greece.
The traditions of the Greeks said that the Medes were descended from Medus son of Jason 
and Media. His brother Armenus was the ancestor of the Armenians. The legends of Lydia 
said that the founders of Babylon and Nineveh were Lydian princes. Colonies from these 
centers had been planted in the remotest parts of the world. Such an origin the Lydians 
claimed for the Etruscans and the primitive states of western Europe. The interior of Media 
and Armenia were full of memorials of Jason, the Greek hero of the Old Race, and Media the 
enchantress, daughter of the king of Colchis. The Magi certainly must have been descended 
from her, for they filled the ancient world in the days of Babylonian supremacy with their 
enchantments. The belief in charms and omens spread to India, Egypt and the western world. 
Their legends told of the first home of their race as having been in a land of perpetual spring, 
of sunshine and peace. Geology teaches us that this once was the climate of Europe and 
western Asia. Then winter came with bitter frosts. Their people emigrated to a land more 
delightful than the first, where there was neither poverty, violence or deceit. This was the 
golden epoch and the most glorious state of the human race.
Media is today the northern portion of the Persian empire. The ancient area is in dispute. This 
region is in a direct southeastern direction from ancient Colchis and Armenia, in the line
p. 257
of the Accadian race that peopled Assyria and Elam. Media had not the plentiful water supply 
of old Mesopotamia or India and because of this deficiency her civilization was tardy. The 
capital Ecbatana is more favorably situated, surrounded by verdure and mountain streams. 
Because of the freshness of the air it became the summer residence of the king of Persia. 
Diodorus Siculus said that the ancient city had an area of fifty square miles. Herodotus (Bk. I, 
98) tells us the walls were 178 furlongs. Thucydides said they were nearly eight leagues long. 
The inhabitants, however, did not depend upon their walls but rather looked to valor. But for 
its lack of rainfall, Media had a delightful climate. In these regions appears the mirage, that 
wonder of travelers and the puzzle of science. Mountains appear where there are none, 
villages arise in the waste, and springs in the desert. In the distance appear the domes and 
minarets of phantom cities.
In the river valleys and the parts of Media protected from the chilly winds of the north, almost 
every fruit grows to perfection. These regions seem the native home of apples, pears and 
peaches. Here also the vine flourishes. The olive, apricot and the almond can be found 
growing wild. Western Media has more rainfall and we may find all the vegetables and 
cereals that are to be found on other Cushite sites, pumpkins, melons, cucumbers, wheat, 
barley, millet, sesame, corn and rice. There were flourishing cotton and tobacco fields. Media 
was rich iv minerals and stone. Her quarries were the equal of those of
p. 258


--- PAGE 117 ---
[paragraph continues] Assyria and more widely distributed. There was a famous yellow marble that 
could be cut in thin strips and used for glass. The fauna was represented by the lion, tiger, 
leopard and bear. The most important domestic animal was the camel of both the Arabian and 
Bactrian breeds. The celebrated Nisaean horses were praised by the ancients. The Macedonian 
greyhound was strong and swift. The great bird of the upper air was the eagle. The lakes being 
salt were without fish. There were many reptiles and plague pests of locusts.
The old religion of the Medes and Persians can be found in the Zend Avesta, which is written 
in a language older than the Median. Among the later inhabitants, outside of political papers 
and messages, there remains little evidence of any native literature or the expression of 
idealism in art. The Zend Avesta is in eight books. It is from the old foundational race of 
ancient Bactrina, the earlier name of Media and Persia. The utterances of these religious 
books reveal the deep reverence and the awe of nature that shows in all forms of Cushite faith. 
The Zend Avesta represents their praises and supplications to the invisible spirit world. The 
gods of the ancient Bactrians were Indra (Cushite) the storm god, Agni, fire, and Soma, god 
of intoxication. These religious books portray the unceasing conflict between good and evil. 
Intermixed with this faith as the ages rolled on were the rites of Siva, from the tribes of the 
north that began to pour as a flood over the Iranian plains. In this way Siva
p. 259
worship was added to the Hindu pantheon by the Brahmins. In their sacrifices the horse was 
generally offered. These northern races did not as the old race believe in the resurrection of 
the body. They taught that the body could not be buried or burned lest it pollute the earth or 
air.
Let us scrutinize the Zend Avesta closely and the religion it represented, for the false 
conspiracy of literature claims it to have found its source and its best features from the 
Japhethic Turanians, of the north. The original Avesta contained twenty-one books. Most of it 
has been lost. There are numerous indications that show that these books once existed. 
Pausanius (V. 27, 3), said that the Magi read from a book. Hermippus affirmed in the third 
century that Zoroaster, the founder of the religion, was the author of twenty books. The 
Arabian historian testified that they had been written on hides, 1200 in number. West Africans 
told Frobenius that their ancient annals had been written on cow-hides. Masudi wrote, 
"Zartusht gave to the Persians the book called Avesta. It contained twenty-one parts, each 
containing 200 leaves. This book in the writing which Zarthusht invented and which the Magi 
called the writing of religion was written on 1200 cow-hides, bound together by golden bands. 
Its language was the old Persian, which no one now understands." The Parsee testify that the 
Avesta was burned by Alexander, that it was written on leather in golden ink and preserved in 
the archives of Persepolis. Alexander did permit Persepolis to he burned (Diodorus, XVII, 
72). After
p. 260
his death, the Zoroastrian priests met and gathered the scattered fragments which had escaped 
the ravages of war, which were but a small portion of the original. More of the Avesta 
disappeared with the wave of religious persecution after the Mohammedan invasion. Later it 
was translated into its present form.
Everything concerning Persian history and literature is contradictory. In the ancient testimony 
Zoroaster was called a Persian. By others a king of the Bactrians, also an Arian. We can


--- PAGE 118 ---
reconcile all of these statements when we remember that Bactria, Aria and Persia were 
anciently Cushite. Zoroaster is represented as having had intercourse with the deity. Dio 
Chrysostem declared that neither Homer or Hesoid sang so worthily of Zeus and his chariots 
and horses. There is the same conflict about his birth. Hermipphus placed him 5000 years 
before the Trojan war. Xanthus made his 6000 years before Xerxes. Aristotle gave him 
similar antiquity. All ancient testimony spoke of him as a historical character. He must have 
belonged to the earliest ages of the Cushite empire. His name is nowhere on the cuneiform 
inscriptions though Darius and his successors were firm adherents of his doctrines. The later 
books of the Avesta made him a supernatural being but the earlier refer to him as a personage 
of remote antiquity (Yasma, 57, 8). In these hymns he is a mere man trusting in his God. He 
had had to face all forms of outward opposition as the lukewarmness and unbelief of his 
adherents and the inward misgivings of his
p. 261
own heart as to the truth and final victory of his cause.
The Avesta names a seemingly mythical country, which we cannot identify with Bactrina. He 
taught under the patronage of Vishtaspa, who was not the later Hystaspes of the Greeks. There 
were ties of kinship between them. One striking peculiarity of the Avesta is that the evil 
spirits are called daeva. The people of India, the Italians, the Celts and Lets gave the name 
deva to their good spirits, the spirits of light. In India evil spirits were the asuras, while in Iran 
ahura meant god. No solution has yet been found to explain the peculiar difference. In the 
Rig-Veda there is rivalry between Varuna and Indra. Varuna the old king of the gods was 
asura and Indra was the type of Deva. The distinction in the Iranian countries represents the 
struggle between two hostile and different sects. The contest most probably between an old 
and an incoming race. In the Shah-Nama, Zoroaster was said to have been murdered at the 
altar by Turanians. He is usually spoken of as a reformer of the old Iranian faith. The meaning 
of the names deva and asura may have been perverted in the Avesta from the original text of 
Zoroaster, just as the Brahmins changed the books of India. It was this opposition that 
Zoroaster reveals in the hymns. The Magi altered but claimed to be the representatives of the 
great teacher. It was these interpolations that Darius sought to purify.
Examining this religion, Ormund resembles no Japhethic type, but in the mutilated books is 
like
p. 262
an oriental king surrounded by Magi. In the world are two opposing forces, the creatures of 
good and evil. They wage war with man's soul as the stake. No religion of the world shows 
more clearly that the goods deeds we perform strengthen the powers for right and evil deeds 
render service for Satan. Wicked deeds cannot be undone but can be counterbalanced by good 
works. Of remission of sins Zoroaster knew nothing. He speaks of dreams, visions and 
conversations with God. He has firm conviction of the final triumph of good over evil and the 
final reward of the just and upright. He believed that the fullness of time was near, when the 
faithful would gain power over their enemies. The good would be assigned to the hoped for 
reward and Satan confined in the abyss in which from henceforth he shall lie powerless. He 
speaks of the one undivided kingdom of God in heaven and upon earth. To this pure faith 
were added other divinities and prohibitions. 3000 years after Zoroaster a new leader would 
be born of his seed. The dead were to come to life and a new incorruptible world to begin. 
This was an early forerunner of our Saviour, who promised a new heaven and a new earth.


--- PAGE 119 ---
Whether the Magi were a division of the old race directly descended from the Medea of the 
Greek myths or were a ruling class of the Scythic invasions that early began to shift into the 
northern country we do not know, but we might judge from the innovations so different from 
the rites of the old race of Persia that they were from the
p. 263
new race. These priests seemed to deal wholly in magic, to which the Scythic tribes were 
addicted. They claimed the gift of divination and prophecy. Exposure of dead bodies was an 
innovation of the Magi, for in Persia proper as late as the time of Herodotus they refused to 
expose and buried their dead (Her. I, 140). The actual annals of the Medes begin about 950 B. 
C., when Assyria devastated a portion of her territory. Whole colonies of Medes were carried 
to Assyria and their places, filled by Assyrians or Samaritans. Cyaxares leading a horde of 
untrained soldiers, sought vengeance on the Assyrians for the death of his father. In his 
onslaught against the decaying power of Assyria he was routed. Training his soldiers, he 
returned and drove the Assyrians within their ramparts. He received the intelligence that the 
Scythians were overrunning Media. He retreated and for twenty-six years struggled against 
these rude, fierce enemies.
Uniting with the Babylonians, after three onslaughts Nineveh was taken. The Medes and 
Babylonians seemed able easily to make an amicable division of the empire. Media taking the 
north countries and Babylon the south. Cyaxares turned his attention to Lydia. War continued 
six years until an eclipse of the sun caused these superstitious nations to sign a truce. After the 
fall of Nineveh, the three great kingdoms of Asia were Babylonia, Media and Lydia. The 
princes and princesses of these three kingdoms intermarried because of the common Cushite
p. 264
blood. Aryenis, the sister of Croesus, was married to Astyages, the crown prince of Media. 
Amyitis, the sister of Astyages, was wedded to Nebuchadnezzar, the heir to the throne of 
Babylonia. Herodotus reported that the founder of the Lydian Herakleid dynasty was the son 
of Ninus and the grandson of Belus (Nimrod). Assyria we must not forget, except for six or 
seven centuries was but a province of Babylonia. At the death of Cyaxares, Media passed to 
Astyages and 556 B. C. to his grandson Cyrus, king of the Persians. Her. I, 95, calls Cyrus, 
the son of Cambyses, a Persian prince and the daughter of king Astyages. Because of a dream 
he was delivered to a herdsman to be put to death.
Xenophon agrees in making him the grandson of Astyages. Other accounts say that he was 
given the hardy Persian training until twelve. Then he was placed with his grandfather at the 
luxurious Median court. Ktesias connected Cyrus with the old race. He called him an 
Amardian. At the fall of Babylon when he entered the capital, the priests and scribes 
welcomed him as though he had been a native king. Cyrus was a zealous worshipper of the 
Babylonian deities. They were restored to their places in great state. These were the same 
gods as those of the Sumerian race to which he belonged. He was one of the last. of the 
Cushite kings trying to restore the old widespread empire. Cyrus gave his son the title "King 
of the World." At the death of Cyrus, acceptable to the old race, the Sumerians threw off the 
yoke (Her. I, 95).
p. 265


--- PAGE 120 ---
The name Cyrus in the nominative is Kurush (Kush). The capital and chief residence of 
Darius was at Susa the city which had been capital of ancient Elam. The tomb at Murghab 
that reads, "I am Cyrus the Achaemenian," cannot be Cyrus the Great. It is of a period 
subsequent to Darius. The figure on the tomb is Cushite.
The young Cyrus sent from the hardy virtues of Persian training to the luxuries of the Median 
court, looked with contempt upon the perversions there from the old life. Persia tolerated not 
the gross and unspiritual practices of the Magi. When his grandfather's kingdom was invaded 
by the Assyrians he accompanied him in the campaign. Cyrus pled to return to his father's 
court but was refused. On the night of a feast he made his escape. Astyages pursued him and 
invaded Persia. Cyrus and his father with their war chariots waited the onslaught. Cambyses 
was killed and the Persian army put to route Cyrus with remarkable heroism reorganized the 
army but the Medes succeeded in driving the Persians, though they made valorous resistance, 
to the very summit of their hills. There the beseeching cries of their women and the challenge 
to their valor and patriotism caused Persia to turn with ferocity and thrust back the foe. 
Astyages fell back to the vicinity of the Persian capital and there in the watches of the night 
Cyrus surprised them. The victory was on the side of the Persians. Astyages was overtaken 
and captured. The Medes welcomed Cyrus as a deliverer from the rising domination of 
incoming usurping Turanian
p. 266
[paragraph continues] Scyths. Zoroastrianism was reestablished and Magism for the time overthrown.
Cyrus subdued Cappadocia, marched against Croesus and defeated him. He took Sardis. 
Having reduced almost all Asia, he turned and repassed the, Euphrates and attacked Assyria. 
Josephus (Antiquity, Bk. II, Ch. 2) speaks of how the prophets of Israel had foretold the 
coming of Cyrus. After the times of Cyrus, we find Darius and his nobles seeking to put a 
check upon the wild strains of northern barbarism. Darius was of the old race as we shall 
proceed to prove. Under the fierceness and cruelty of the intermingled Median people noble 
families of both Media and Persia of the old race had been banished, but Darius and his 
notables overthrew the tyrants and restored the exiled. He republished the Avesta, the sacred 
books of the old Bactrian race, which had become polluted with Turanian magic. The 
language of the books was different from that of Media today. The language and the religion 
were undoubtedly that of ancient Susiana and Elam as well as of Bactrina. Darius sought to 
change the book back to the old faith of his fathers. Darmesteter supposes Magism not to have 
gained power until 600 B. C. Zoroastrianism was a thousand years older. In contrast to the 
Cushite race, the Magi had no respect for human corpses, but abandoned them to beasts of 
prey, there were no sacrifices of bloodshed, no images of the gods, no temples. Their rites 
were resisted by true Persians and Medes. Finally the new forms Aught their way and 
prevailed.
p. 267
Ancient testimony revealed that the doctrines of Zoroaster met determined resistance among 
the mixed Arians with the fierce struggle ending in religious wars. Lenormant calls his most 
persistent enemies the Indo-Aryan priests called Brahmins. It seems rather queer does it not to 
attribute the creation of Zoroastrianism to that race of opposite concepts, that pours 
maledictions upon the head of Zoroaster in the Rig-Veda. (Ancient History of the East, Vol. 
II, p. 37, 38.) By Strabo's time the name of Magi was applied indiscriminately to all priests of 
Persia. Darius tells us positively on the engraved rock of Behistan, that the Magi usurpation


--- PAGE 121 ---
had destroyed the temples of his gods and the sacred hymns of the primitive Zoroastrian faith. 
He says: "I restored the ancient book in all the countries and the people followed it." Thus in 
the inscriptions he allies himself with the old race, that was fundamentally Cushite. The 
inscription at Behistan also allies Zoroaster with the old race. In the restoration we see the 
burying again of the dead, the Cushite gods Indra, Mithra and Krishna, ancient kings, 
reappear. The deva had been turned from gods to devils.
Persian art was like that of Susiana and Babylon because all were Cushites. The palaces were 
reared upon lofty platforms. The columns and sculptured figures of animals were like 
Nineveh and Babylon. The subjects of the sculptures were the figures of the old Cushite 
mythology. The art of the Sumerian was written strongly on the walls. Persian architecture 
can best be studied
p. 268
in the remains of the palace near Persepolis burned by Alexander. The buildings on the 
different terraces are not connected with each other. Of the five largest, one was dedicated to 
Darius, another to Xerxes, another is known as Chehl Minar or the Hall of a Hundred 
Columns. To attribute the construction to the later Persian race would be erroneous. Heeren 
says that mystery surrounds the construction of the ruins of Persepolis. The pillars belong to 
no known order of architecture. The inscriptions are an enigma. Fabulous animals are on 
guard at the entrance. Allegorical figures decorate the walls. It is the art of remote antiquity. It 
is doubtful Heeren thinks that the historical Persians used Persepolis as a capital. No 
contemporary author mentions it by name. The stones of its buildings are laid without mortar. 
They were fastened with iron clamps that were stolen or destroyed by rust at an age when 
Japhethic people did not understand working in iron or the construction of temples.
Heeren thinks Persepolis might have come from the ancient Median race because the later 
inhabitants were incapable of erecting palaces. Cambyses imported Egyptian builders to rear 
the buildings of Susa. At Persepolis are no traces of Egyptian art. At Ecbatana we find forms 
and inscriptions like those at Chehl Minar. There are the double columns of the colossal 
Cushite proportions. Winged monsters guard the portals having Be bodies of lions, the feet of 
horses and human heads. These were mythological Cushite
p. 269
forms. The pillars were unrelated to Greece or Egypt. The figures have the dress of ancient 
Medes. The reliefs on the walls show the people to have been commercial. Various nations 
are depicted, one wrapped in furs, another naked except for an apron, numbers wearing loose 
flowing robes, others wearing close fitting clothes like the Minoans. These came bearing the 
products of the widely scattered colonies of the old empire. Some presented spices, dress 
ornaments, implements, fruits and animals. (Ancient Commerce, Heeren, Vol. I, p. 167.) The 
inscriptions in these ruins are of unknown language, showing their antiquity. Bactrians had 
preceeded the Medes at Ecbatana. Heeren says that Chehl Minar did not arise by enchantment 
but sprang from the same source.
Persian kings by repeated invasions into Scythic countries saved civilization. They evolved a 
more centralized government, yet in no way essentially different from ancient Cushite rule. 
The power of each province was divided between the satrap and the commander-in-chief. So 
in Greece and Carthage two beads had been a check upon each other, whether they were 
consuls or kings. In each province their was the king's ear, a secretary who kept him informed


--- PAGE 122 ---
as to the fulfillment of his commands and the loyalty of his subjects. There was the king's eye, 
troopers who appeared at intervals to arrest those who proved disloyal. This system was very 
effective but back behind it we cannot fail to see the break up of the old trade and commerce 
that had covered the Orient.
p. 270
[paragraph continues] Heeren points to the anarchy and confusion produced by the rule of Assyria and 
the destruction wrought by the headlong conquests of Persia, which destroyed and ruined the 
royal cities of the Euphrates and the Indus. The commerce of Asia of which the Scythians had 
once been the trusted carriers had disappeared. The rule of Persia compared to the old empire 
was wry short She was supreme two hundred years.
Persian literature has perished. References in ancient books reveal that once there was much 
of it. The later race was not commercial. The language in which the Avesta now exists is 
Pahlavi, a mixture of old Persian and Semitic speech, the tongue of a conqueror grafted on the 
language of the old race. The oldest book is very archaic and written in meter. Some of the 
books are of Sasanian origin. The oldest portion must have come from Zoroaster himself. 
Some of the Yashts are of Iranian gods and heroes that had their origin in the Orient. Another 
treats of the blessings of agriculture, in poetical form. The interpretation of this literature is a 
difficult problem. Old Persian is impossible to have been Semitic and is unlike Sanskrit. A 
multitude of contradictions occur in Persian history. The ancient records must have been 
falsified as the religion of Zoroaster was altered. Heeren says, that contemporary historians 
and Persian chronicles give completely different accounts. When the Medes and Persians 
attacked Lydia they appeared as fierce barbarians because the old civilization was changing, 
when the old monarchy became again
p. 271
predominant the genius of the Cushite blood sprang forth. They checked the onrush of the 
Scythians, who were a real menace to the culture of the world.
In mediaeval times Persia became the mistress of the civilization of Islam. Bagdad was an 
intellectual center, a paradise of poetry and the literary light of the east. After the marvels 
described in the Arabian Nights she sank rapidly to decay. The spirit of worship toward the 
monarch was as abject as in Egypt. The harem of the monarch was guarded by eunuchs, a 
type quite common among ancients. The couch of the king had golden feet. In the mixed race 
drunkenness was as prominent a feature as the proverbial truthfulness which had been the 
virtue of the Indi. Criminals were put to death for slight offenses in peculiarly cruel ways as 
among the Brahmins. Distinctions of caste came to prevail as in India. It was the method by 
which Turanians could show their hatred to the more civilized, darker race. In the mixed race 
polygamy grew apace, and education was neglected. As of old the queen mother exercised a 
preponderant influence over the king, court and empire. Greek legends said that the 
expeditions of Cyrus and Alexander were but the surging backward and forward of divisions 
of the old race of Greece and that the Persian invasion was retaliatory upon Europe for the fall 
of Troy, when Europe first resisted the growing power of the east.
In ages as late as 652 A. D. we note the late flowering of the ancient Persian genius.; The.
p. 272


--- PAGE 123 ---
sculptures of this time show remarkable skill and vigor. Sir William Hunter, late Director 
General of Statistics of India, tells us that the decorations were a bewildering mass of vines 
and foliage combined with birds and animals. For richness and delicacy this sculpture is 
unsurpassed by any age or clime. When S’ad leading the hosts of Islam, captured the 
magnificent capital of the Persians, among the treasures seized was a great carpet of white 
brocade 450 feet long and 90 feet broad with a border worked in precious stones to represent a 
garden of flowers, the leaves formed of emeralds, the blossoms of rubies, sapphires and 
pearls. Centuries of ravage and decay have left few remains of these splendors. (History of the 
Nations, Lodge, India, p. 322.) The native Persians of today are sadly degenerated from 
constant mixture with foreign races. The bulk of the population are merchants and 
agriculturalists. From these come the wonderful tapestries and shawls hardly equalled by any 
other descendants of the old race today. The finest of the natives still cling despite persecution 
to the old faith of Iran.
p. 273
FINAL WORD.
The story of India, Persia, Arabia, Chaldea, Egypt and Ethiopia has been astonishing, but 
more amazing and fascinating is the recital describing the life and deeds of the Cushite 
nations of western Europe. The beautiful, world renowned mythology of the Greeks throws 
upon the screen of literature the mystic figures of the Cushites who played a mighty drama in 
western Europe and the circle of magic cities around the Mediterranean in ages long 
preceeding the life of the Grecian period of history.
The prints of Cushite footsteps are found all over the three regions, as proved by the facts of 
accepted sciences today. We learn that the strange surge of races backward and forward 
across the plains of western Europe at the dawn of recorded history was but the reaction of 
earlier age old conflicts between Cush and Turan, the most western of the sons of Japheth.
The story solves the baffling problem of who were the Celts and the origin of the so-called 
Aryan race of modern times. Reliable authorities confess that Aryans do not know their own 
origin. Careful mining into the authentic testimony of the ancients and a study of the relies 
and remains of western Europe proves that the greatest names of the Ad traditions, the heroic 
figures of the Greek mythology and the subjects of classic culture
p. 274
were the sons of Cush, the founder of the ancient Cushite empire of Ethiopians. Hercules 
Bacchus, Apollo, Hermes and other heroes were his descendants.
The world just now is witnessing a revival of interest in the myths of ancient: races. Reason 
has always told man that myth was but confused pictures of literal truth. The scholarship of 
entire ages has wrestled with the enigma of the meaning of the beautiful legends of the 
Weeks. The most beautiful and intensely interesting of these now have scientific proofs that 
they but pictured the figures and told the heroic deeds of ancient Cushites and their cousins, 
the descendants of the African brothers of Cush, the Zeus of the Greeks, the Jupiter of Rome 
and the Amen-Ra of Egypt.


--- PAGE 124 ---
So fascinating and vital has the world considered these classic stories that they are still the 
commanding literature of Aryan college life everywhere; for strange as it may seem the most 
powerful branches of the so-called Aryan race, as can be indisputably proven, are as well as 
the African Ethiopians, descendants of Cushite Ethiopian blood. Another volume of this work 
(Book II) gives more authentic information upon this subject than any other book extant, in it 
has been interwoven the undeniable proofs of the Cushite origin of western Europe, linked 
with the intense drama that was the foundation of the Greek legends.

