=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Yoruba Proverbs.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 515
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:12:54.360771
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
Yoruba Proverbs


--- PAGE 3 ---



--- PAGE 4 ---
Y oruba Proverbs
oyekan owomoyela
University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln and London


--- PAGE 5 ---
The publication of this volume
was made possible by a generous
gift from Nancy Sack Stevens.
© 2005 by the Board of Regents
of the University of Nebraska
All rights reserved
Manufactured in the United
States of America
/archival
Set in Minion by Tseng.
Designed by Dika Eckersley.
Printed by Thomson-Shore, Inc.
Library of Congress Cataloging-
in-Publication Data
Owomoyela, Oyekan.
Yoruba proverbs / Oyekan
Owomoyela.
p. cm.
Parallel English and Yoruba.
Includes bibliographical
references.
isbn 0-8032-3576-3 (cloth: alk.
paper) — isbn 0-8032-0495-7
(electronic: alk. paper)
1. Proverbs, Yoruba. 2. Proverbs,
Yoruba—Translations into
English. I. Title.
pn6519.y6o97 2005
398'.996333—dc22
2004065911


--- PAGE 6 ---
To William and Berta Bascom, in memoriam,
and to the Yoruba sages


--- PAGE 7 ---



--- PAGE 8 ---
Contents
Acknowledgments ix
Introduction 1
Part One
the good person
On humility, self-control, self-knowledge, self-respect, and self-restraint 41
On perspicaciousness (good judgment, perceptiveness), reasonableness,
sagacity, savoir faire, wisdom, and worldly wisdom 89
On caginess, caution, moderation, patience, and prudence 146
On perseverance, industry, resilience, self-conﬁdence, self-reliance,
resourcefulness, daring, fortitude, and invulnerability 198
On consistency, honesty, openness, plain speaking, and reliability 237
On consideration, kindness, and thoughtfulness 255
Part Two
the fortunate person (or the good life)
On good name (good repute) 267
On health 273
On happiness and success 275
On children and elders 281
On material wealth 284
On longevity 289
On wealth in people (popularity) 290
Part Three
relationships
On relationships with the divine and the supernatural 297
On relationships with the family 300


--- PAGE 9 ---
On relationships within the community 312
On relationships with elders 321
On relationships with friends and acquaintances 324
On relationships with strangers 339
On relationships with the less fortunate 341
Part Four
human nature
On fate (and reciprocity) 345
On human vulnerability and limitations 357
On mortality 388
On inscrutability 393
On inequality 400
Part Five
rights and responsibilities
On the right to life 423
On freedom to be oneself 424
On the right to human dignity 428
On the right to one’s patrimony and to property 432
On subservience to authority 437
On just deserts 439
Part Six
truisms
Miscellany 453
References 501


--- PAGE 10 ---
Acknowledgments
I
t has been forty years since I embarked on the work whose fruition is this vol-
ume, and I have incurred substantial debts of gratitude to several people along
the way, which I can only partially acknowledge here. I had collected only
slightly more than two hundred proverbs when Bernth Lindfors, a fellow graduate
student at ucla, suggested that we collaborate on publishing some of them. The
successful outcome of our joint eﬀort was a major inﬂuence on my decision to per-
sist with the project and aim for as comprehensive a treasury as I could assemble.
At various times I turned for help to knowledgeable scholars in the ﬁeld, who
were unstinting with their advice and comments; for these I thank Isidore Ok-
pewho, Rowland Abiodun, and Toyin Falola, the last of whom became so taken
with the project that he periodically sent me some gems of which I had been un-
aware. In an earlier publication I acknowledged the large contribution I received
from the collection of William and Berta Bascom. I reiterate my gratitude here,
both for their service to Yoruba studies and especially for the encouragement I re-
ceived from Berta, and for her generous help and hospitality when I visited her
in Berkeley in connection with my work on this project. I wish she had lived
to see the publication she promoted so enthusiastically. I also acknowledge Alan
Dundes’s incisive input, even if I frustrated him with some of my methodological
choices.
I cannot adequatelyexpress my gratitude for the help and encouragement I have
consistently received from my friend and colleague in the English Department
at the University of Nebraska–Lincoln, Linda Ray Pratt; the instances and forms
they took are numerous and various and best left unspeciﬁed. John Turner of our
Classics Department is another friend and colleague who applied his computer
expertise to creating a Yoruba font for me at a time when none was commercially
available. The task was time-consuming, but he embraced it without complaint,
and I thank him.
I am also grateful for the funding I received from the Research Council of the
university to purchase computer hardware, and from the College of Arts and Sci-
ences in the form of faculty development fellowships. The ﬁnancial help and the
released time that went with the fellowship were a great help. The University of
Nebraska Press has acknowledged the generous assistance of Nancy Stevens in
making this publication possible; I wish to join the press in the acknowledgment,
and to add the name of Susan Norby of the University of Nebraska Foundation,
who interested Ms. Stevens in the project. Finally, and by no means least, I thank
my wife and chief motivator, Joan, for her constant support and for keeping me
focused on the ﬁnish line.


--- PAGE 11 ---
I am certain that in spite of the help, advice, and comments from the people I
have listed and others, some errors will be found in the following pages, whether
in translation, in explication, or in typing. They are entirely my responsibility, and
I hope that they do not detract signiﬁcantly from the value of the collection.
x acknowledgments


--- PAGE 12 ---
Yoruba Proverbs


--- PAGE 13 ---



--- PAGE 14 ---
Introduction
I
ti sc u s t o m a r yt ot r a n s l a t et h eY o r u b aòweinto English as ‘‘proverb,’’ a choice
that is justiﬁed by the close correspondence of the verbal formulations the
words designate in their respective cultures. Not surprisingly, therefore, schol-
ars familiar with the English genre expect to ﬁnd its features (or properties) and
variations replicated in the Yoruba; in other words, they expect that a study ofòwe
will disclose a form in all essential particulars like the proverb. Accordingly, they
expect discussion of Yorubaòweto account for such subgenres of the English prov-
erb as aphorisms, apothegms, Wellerisms, and so forth. Examples of such forms
do occur in the huge corpus of Yoruba òwe—if not exactly as in the English, at
least close enough to pass. But ferreting out Yoruba correspondences to the English
subgenres, although a useful comparative exercise, has little relevance to under-
standing the Yoruba concept and usage ofòwe,which do not exactly coincide with
those of the English proverb.
english proverbs, true and false
Representative of the Western conception of the proverb is the view that it is an
ancient and popularly accepted encapsulation of wisdom. Citing the Greek origin
of the word and its literal meaning, ‘‘wayside saying,’’ Edward Hulme comments
that the word is roughly equivalent to ‘‘adage,’’ and his use of the biblical passage
‘‘Israel shall be a proverb and a byword among all people’’ as an example suggests
that a proverb may also be amaterialmodel (4). In addition, he invokes both Aris-
totle’s deﬁnition as quoted by Synesius—‘‘A proverb is a remnant of the ancient
philosophy preserved amid many destructions on account of its brevity and ﬁt-
ness for use—and also Agricola’s description of the form as ‘‘short sentences into
which, as in rules, the ancients have compressed life’’ (5–6).
Jan Brunvand introduces a signiﬁcant criterion for determining what is a prov-
erb and what is not when he writes that ‘‘the true proverb is always a complete sen-
tence,’’ thus distinguishing it from other (or false) proverbs, and further that the
true proverb ‘‘never varies more than slightly in form, and usually expresses some
general truth or wisdom’’ (52). Moreover, ‘‘the majority of true proverbs are meta-
phorical descriptions of an act or event applied as a general truth,’’ whereas false
proverbs, in addition to not being complete sentences, are not ﬁxed and ‘‘seldom
express any general wisdom’’ (53). The latter include proverbial phrases; prover-
bial comparisons such as ‘‘greedy as a pig’’ and ‘‘clear as mud’’; Wellerisms; mis-
cellaneous proverbial insults, retorts, and wisecracks such as ‘‘Is the Pope Catho-
lic?’’; and euphemisms such as ‘‘It’s snowing down south’’ for ‘‘Your slip is show-
ing’’ (54).
1


--- PAGE 15 ---
The customary inclusion of assorted metaphorical verbal formulations in col-
lections and discussions of the proverb elicited the following complaint from Roger
Abrahams: ‘‘The study of proverbs has been severely complicated by the grouping
of conventional conversational devices that share almost nothing but their brevity
and their traditional currency. Almost certainly this complication is due to the fact
that proverb dictionaries were written not for the purpose of deﬁning this genre
but for storing any device useful in developing oratory techniques. Thus these
compendia contained not only true proverbs but hyperbolizing devices, such as
traditional exaggerations, that were useful in ornamenting extemporized formal
speech’’ (123). The rhetorical devices that are mistaken for proverbs, according to
Abrahams, are ‘‘formulaic intensiﬁers [which] exist for no other reason than to
decorate speech. These are devices of hyperbole; they take an ongoing argument
and lend it wit and color’’ (123–24).
The existence of several words in the English language that often substitute
for ‘‘proverb’’ would seem to suggest that each one signiﬁes a subtle or signiﬁcant
variation. In fact, though, that does not appear to be the case. Although Hulme, as
we have seen, says that ‘‘adage’’ is ‘‘fairly equivalent’’ to ‘‘proverb,’’ he makes hardly
any distinction when he uses the term ‘‘apothegm,’’ the word which, as he notes,
Lord Bacon favored for his 1625 collectionApothegmsNewandOld. An example
of the apothegms in that collection comes from Psalm 27:14, ‘‘He that blesseth his
friend with a loud voice, rising in the morning, it shall be counted a curse to him,’’
whose import is, in eﬀect, ‘‘Excessive and ostentatious praise amounts to denun-
ciation’’ (Hulme 44). Dictionary deﬁnitions of the various designations support
Hulme’s practice in this regard.
2
The Wellerism, however, is a bona ﬁde subgenre of the proverb with a distin-
guishing structural peculiarity: it comprises a direct quotation that is attributed
to a person, plus a facetious tag specifying the context (or occasion) of the quo-
tation. Abrahams describes it variously as a cliché, a ‘‘dialogue-proverb,’’ and a
joking device (122), and Brunvand as a ‘‘quotation proverb’’ (53). According to
Archer Taylor, the form is more ancient than the Charles Dickens character for
which it is named, and its more recent examples tend to incorporate puns. Taylor
cites among others: ‘‘‘It won’t be long now’ (or ‘That’s the end of my tail’), said
the monkey when he backed into the lawn mower’’ (‘‘Wisdom’’ 8). Another often
cited example is ‘‘‘I see,’ said the blind man, as he picked up his hammer and saw.’’
One consensus requirement for a proverb seems to be that it must be short and
to the point, in other words, that it be pithy, succinct, terse, or brief. Thus Hulme
(6–7) quotes Chambers to the eﬀect that ‘‘proverbs are pithy, practical, popular
sayings’’; Annandale, that it is ‘‘a short and pithy sentence’’; and the dictionary
compiler Worcester, that it is ‘‘a common or pithy expression which embodies
some moral precept.’’
the yorubaòwe
Yoruba language and speech practices do feature forms that are practically, if not
exactly, identical with the English proverb, but not all of them will qualify asòwe
2 introduction


--- PAGE 16 ---
for the Yoruba speaker. On the other hand, some verbal forms that come under
the general rubric ofòwein Yoruba do not have equivalents in the English proverb
corpus. Perhaps the best approach to understanding the Yoruba concept ofòwe,
therefore, is to begin with an etymology of the word.
Òweseems to be formed from the contraction of ò-wée, literally ‘‘something
that wraps it.’’ The root is theverbwé(wrap [something] around [something else]).
The initialòis the vowel preﬁx that in Yoruba lexicology converts a verb to a noun,
the particular vowel depending on the particular verb; it functions like the English
suﬃxes ‘‘-ist,’’ ‘‘-er,’’ and ‘‘-or.’’ The phrasewée (wrap it) becomeswein the con-
traction characteristic of everyday speech. I am suggesting that the word is òwe
rather than òwé,a combination of ò(an agent that...)a n d wé(wraps), because
the object pronoun ‘‘it,’’ in this case the midtoned ‘‘e’’ is appended to the combina-
tion. (Yoruba is a tone—or tonal—language with high, mid, and low tones. These
are indicated on the vowels and the nasalsnand mby acute and grave marks for
the high and low tones respectively, the midtone carrying no mark.)
To say in Yoruba that one thing may be compared with or to another, one says
‘‘ﬁ(noun 1) wé(noun 2),’’ literally ‘‘use (n1) to wrap (n2),’’ or, more idiomatically,
‘‘wrap (n1) around (n2).’’ The formulation reveals an important Yoruba view of
what happens when one likens something to someting else: one brings the two
items into as close proximity as possible in order to make their qualities observable
side by side or in (virtually) the same space; one intertwines them, in other words.
Corroboration for this suggestion comes from the term for another verbal genre
that has close aﬃnities withòwe:namely, àl/oacutedotbelow,the riddle. The root ofàl/oacutedotbelowis l/oacutedotbelow,which
also means ‘‘wrap [something] around [something else],’’ and in this case the ini-
tial nominalizing vowel isà.What the riddle does, of course, is to describe some
essential feature of an object or situation (the answer to the riddle) in terms of a dif-
ferent thing or situation that shares that feature (the clue). For example, for a per-
son’s two eyes a Yoruba riddle oﬀers as its clue a set of twins that inhabit the same
house without ever seeing each other. (Folktales are also sometimes termed àl/oacutedotbelow
because they are parables for occurrences other than those they literally narrate.)
Reduced to its essence, therefore,òweis a speech form that likens, or compares,
one thing or situation to another, highlighting the essential similarities that the
two share. In Yoruba usage it is always at least onecompletesentence. Although
the language is rich in phrases, descriptions, and idioms that resemble some of
the false English proverbs cited above, the Yoruba do not recognize these asòwe.
For example, the epithetṢámúgà,eléyínọk/oacutedotbelow(Ṣámúgà,with hoes for teeth), often
used with the elaborationkòróunfálejòówayínsáwo (lacking the wherewithal to
e n t e r t a i nav i s i t o r ,h es c o o p st e e t hi n t oad i s h ) ,w h i c hr e f e r st oap e r s o nw i t hp r o -
truding teeth, is called notòwebut eébú,insult. The same is true of this chant (in
Ifon dialect):
Máàgbéd/ogravedotbelownyúnóko,
àíkéorí/egravedotbelowótóólagi
[Don’t carry an axe to the farm,
the axe on his head will do for splitting wood.]
Introduction 3


--- PAGE 17 ---
Other ﬁgurative idioms that parallel the English pseudoproverb but would not
qualify asòwe(true orfalse) in Yoruba include such sayings askóyánláìdúrógbọb/egravedotbelow
([to] take some pounded yam but not tarry to receive some stew) andbáẹs/egravedotbelows/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow
([to] engage in conversation with one’s legs), both of which mean ‘‘to make a hasty
exit from a threatening scene’’; andﬁàákék/oacutedotbelowrí([to] hang an axe on one’s head),
meaning ‘‘to assume a rigid and unyielding position in a discussion.’’ The Yoruba
speaker would also distinguish betweenòweand both àﬁwé(comparison, such as
Ógat/oacutedotbelowpẹ:he, she, or it is as tall as a palm tree) andàpèjúwe(description). I have,
however, included formulations that, even though they seem at ﬁrst glance to lack
the requisite qualities of one, actually make proverbial statements. An example is
entry 5235, which makes a statement about maidens.
Among Yorubaòwethere are formulations that, like Wellerisms, combine di-
rect quotations and contexts, albeit not always in exactly the same manner as in
the English versions. Two examples:‘‘Ọl/oacutedotbelowrunmápèéogb/oacutedotbelowkan,’’àdúràolè(‘‘‘God,
don’t let on that you heard a thing,’ the thief ’s prayer’’); and the colonial-era‘‘Háó
f/ogravedotbelowduù?’’lòyìnbóﬁńj/egravedotbelowbàlÓrígo(‘‘‘How for do?’ is the white man’s resigning ratio-
nalization for eating/egravedotbelowbàat Orígo’’). /Egravedotbelowbà,a starchy food made from cassava grains,
is a plebeian staple among the Yoruba, much less favored than such elites among
foods as iyán(pounded yam) and ìrẹsì(rice). And Orígo is a station on the Yor-
uba stretch of the Lagos-Kano railway line; being an inconsequential stop, it did
not rate a government guesthouse like the ones dispersed strategically around the
colonies, provided with some basic necessities for the comfort of touring colonial
oﬃcials, and maintained by cook-stewards competent to oﬀer close imitations of
European culinary fare.The expressionHáòf/ogravedotbelowduù?is a Yoruba rendering of ‘‘How
for do?’’ itself a pidgin version of ‘‘What to do?’’ or ‘‘What is one to do?’’ or ‘‘What
option does one have?’’
Here are ﬁve other possible candidates for the designation of ‘‘Welleristic’’òwe:
• ‘‘Mom/Ogravedotbelowbàrà,mom/Ogravedotbelowfún,’’tíkòj/eacutedotbelowkíẹyẹlék/oacutedotbelowàparònÍfá.‘‘I know /Ogravedotbelowbàrà, I know
/Ogravedotbelowfún,’’ which discouraged the pigeon from teaching Ifá to the partridge. (Be-
cause the partridge claims, falsely, to know it all, he blocked his own opportu-
nity to learn Ifá from the pigeon.)
• ‘‘Súnm/oacutedotbelowhùn-ún,aóṣoròi lé-ewa,’’tíkòj/eacutedotbelowkíàlejòdionílé.‘ ‘ M a k er o o m ,w ea r e
about to perform our lineage ritual,’’ which keeps the sojourner from becoming
a permanent resident. (As long as citizens exclude immigrants from full par-
ticipation in civic activities, the latter will not become fully integrated into the
population.)
• ‘‘Ònílóḿmọ,’’ìjà/ogravedotbelowlẹ.‘‘It will all end today,’’ the lazy person’s ﬁghting motto.
(The lazy person enters into a ﬁght with the consoling knowledge that it will
end sometime.)
• Òní‘‘Mòńlọ,’’/ogravedotbelowla‘‘Mòńlọ,’’tíkòj/eacutedotbelowkíàlejògbinawùsá.Today, ‘‘I am leaving’’;
tomorrow, ‘‘I am leaving,’’ which keeps the sojourner from planting awùsá.
4 introduction


--- PAGE 18 ---
(Awùsá,usually translated as ‘‘wallnut’’ (wall-nut), is the fruit of a tree that takes
years to mature and bear fruit.)
• ‘‘Kòdùnmí,kòdùnmí,’’àgbàlagbàḿbúọpal/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowmẹfànítoríiyánal/eacutedotbelowàná.‘‘It does
not bother me, it does not bother me,’’ yet a grown man curses by invokingọpa
on account of last night’s pounded yam. (The person concerned was obviously
excluded from the meal the previous night, and his injured behavior belies his
protestation of nonchalance.)
In proverbs of this sort the phrase tíkò (meaning ‘‘that prevents’’ or ‘‘that keeps
...f r o m ’ ’ )i ss o m e t i m e sr e p l a c e dw i t hkò(prevents) alone.
The use of the English term ‘‘Wellerism,’’ although it certainly serves a useful
purpose in comparative discussions, may give pause to African and Africanist
scholars leery of possible charges that they are subscribing to the representation of
African forms in Western terms. Alan Dundes’s essay on the subject is of particu-
lar interest in this regard. His primary intention is to demonstrate, with Yoruba
examples, the widespread (perhaps worldwide) incidence of this type of proverb.
With the aid of the Yoruba informant Ayodele Ogundipe, he lists ten examples
that qualify as Wellerisms by virtue of their containing direct quotations. Most
of them do incorporate direct quotations in the original Yoruba, and some are
close enough in form to English Wellerisms to pose no diﬃculties. For example,
in his number 7—‘‘Ṣékínfìdíhẹ?’’làfòm/oacutedotbelowﬁńdionílé(my transcription), which
he translates, ‘‘‘Shall I sit awhile?’ says the parasite before becoming a perma-
nent dweller’’ (116)—the translation is adequate, although it would be better ren-
d e r e d‘ ‘ ‘ M a yIperchawhile?’ is the ruse that eventually makes the parasite the
homeowner.’’ In other instances, however, the proverbs are forced into the cate-
gory, inasmuch as the direct quotations the author and informant attribute to
them are absent in the original Yoruba. For example, for the Yoruba originalAdìẹ
ńjọkà,óńmuomi,óńgbéòkútap/eacutedotbelow-p/egravedotbelow-p/eacutedotbelowmì,síb/egravedotbelow-síb/egravedotbelowóníòunòléhín(again, my
transcription), they provide the following translation: ‘‘‘I have no teeth,’ com-
plains the chicken which eats corn, drinks water, and swallows pebbles’’ (114),
whereas the correct translation is, ‘‘The chicken eats corn, it drinks water, it swal-
lows small pebbles, and yet it claims that it has no teeth.’’ Obviously, the Yoruba
original has undergone some radical manipulation in order to make a Wellerism
out of it.
In addition to what we might describe as ‘‘true’’òwe,the Yoruba have a popu-
lar verbal form whose title includes the wordòweas a modiﬁer: the allusive songs
known as orinòwe, literally ‘‘proverb songs,’’ which make indirect and usually
disparaging references to unstated targets. They are normally expressions of an-
tagonism, as the meta-proverbÌjàlódéloríndòwe (‘‘It is the commencement of a
quarrel that turns a song into a proverb’’) makes clear. Although such songs most
often characterize domestic quarrels, especially among women, they also feature
prominently in popular entertainment songs—for example, in the lyrics of jùjú
music. Professional rivalry amongàgídìgbom u s i c i a n si nt h e1 9 6 0 sg a v er i s et ot h e
following lyrics:
Introduction 5


--- PAGE 19 ---
K/eacutedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowgb/eacutedotbelowmẹgb/eacutedotbelow
K/eacutedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowgb/eacutedotbelowmẹgb/eacutedotbelow
Ajùm/ogravedotbelowgbálùmáyàp/ogravedotbelow
K/eacutedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowgb/eacutedotbelowmẹgb/eacutedotbelow
[Let cohorts know their equal
Let cohorts know their equal
We may all, alike, wrap our bosoms around drums
Yet, let cohorts know their equal]
The target of the song, though not named, would have realized that he was in-
tended, as would those privy to the quarrel. The following was an interlude in a
high-life dance number a few years later:
Òfófóiléyìíáyẹra
Òfófóiléyìíáyẹra
Kámágbọd/ogravedotbelows/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow
Kámágbọd/ogravedotbelowjẹnuwúy/eacutedotbelow
Òfófóiléyìíáyẹra
[The tale bearer in this household must make way
The tale bearer in this household must make way
One dares not talk
One dares not whisper
The tale bearer in this household must make way]
Also akin to Hulme’s usage of the term ‘‘proverb’’ to designate a material model
is the Yoruba usage ofòweas in the sayingIkútópaojúgbàẹni-ípòwem/oacutedotbelowni(‘‘The
death that kills one’s age mate speaks to one proverbially’’). Theòwein this case is
not a verbal statement but a visible phenomenon or an event from which an ob-
server can draw a lesson.
Another diﬀerence: the constant in the deﬁnitions of the English proverb that
it is pithy, concise, succinct, brief, terse, and so on, is notalwaystrue of the Yoruba
òwe,which is sometimes quite long-winded. For example, there is nothing pithy
about the following:Gbogboerankoìgb/eacutedotbelowpé,w/oacutedotbelownníàwọnóﬁìkokòṣeaṣípa;nígbà
tógb/oacutedotbelowinú/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowdùn;ṣùgb/oacutedotbelownnígbàtóṣe,óbús/eacutedotbelowkún;w/oacutedotbelownníkílódé?Óníbóyáw/oacutedotbelownlè
túnro/ogravedotbelowrànnáàwòkíw/oacutedotbelownníkìíṣeb/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowm/oacutedotbelow(‘‘All the animals in the forest assembled
and decided to make Hyena their secretary; he was happy to hear the news, but
a short while later he burst into tears; asked what the matter was, he replied that
perhaps they might revisit the matter and reverse themselves’’). The import, de-
pending on the user’s intention, could be either that even in times of good fortune
one should be mindful of the possibility of reversal, or that one should not so focus
on the negative as to be incapable of enjoyment.
the aesthetics of òwe
Isidore Okpewho, one of the most inﬂuential scholars of African traditional verbal
artistry, has decried the tendency on the part of non-African scholars to minimize
6 introduction


--- PAGE 20 ---
the aesthetic properties of these texts, a tendency he blames in part on their lim-
ited or sometimes nonexistent command of the pertinent languages. HisAfrican
OralLiteratureis an elaborate illustration of the sophisticated artistry in African
traditional texts, including brief forms such as the proverb.
Discussion of the proverb in Western folklore scholarship has characteristically
acknowledged the aesthetic aspects of the form. Roger Abrahams describes prov-
erbs as ‘‘among the shortest forms of traditional expression that call attention to
themselves as formal artistic entities.’’ He goes on to illustrate their use of ‘‘all of the
devices we commonly associate with poetry in English: meter, binary construction
and balanced phrasing, rhyme, assonance and alliteration, conciseness, metaphor,
and occasional inverted word order and unusual construction’’ (119). Brunvand
also observes that ‘‘proverbs exhibit most of the stylistic devices of poetry. They
have meter...rhyme...slantrhyme...alliteration...assonance...personi-
ﬁcation...paradox...parallelism... and several other poetic characteristics’’
(56; original emphasis). To these he adds ﬁgures of speech, which occur in prov-
erbs as well as in ‘‘proverbial comparisons.’’ Also worth mentioning is Alan Dun-
des’s essay ‘‘On the Structure of the Proverb.’’
With regard to the Yorubaòwe,Ayo Bamgbose, the dean of Yoruba scholars,
and Olatunde Olatunji have written seminal essays on its artistic qualities and
especially on its structure; both point out that it shares central aesthetic features
with Yoruba poetry in general. Since my earlier collectionAKìí includes a brief
discussion on the subject, what follows only advances my argument in that work,
elaborating upon and clarifying some of its assertions and qualiﬁcations.
Bamgbose highlights the use of lexical contrast and lexical matching in Yoruba
proverbs (and poetry), which he explains as ‘‘the bringing together of two or more
lexical items in such a way as to exhibit a semantic contrast or correspondence’’
and oﬀers examples (Grammar8 3 ,8 4 ,8 5 ) .T h ec o n t r a s t e di t e m s ,w h i c ho c c u ri n
identical locations in parallel sentences, are sometimes antonyms and sometimes
synonyms (or items that belong in the same semantic range), and sometimes they
are unrelated. For example, in the formulation
Ómú ọkùnrin
Ósìmú obìnrin
[He captured men
He also capturedwomen]
ọkùnrin(men) and obìnrin(women) are antonyms. In the following,
/Egravedotbelowhìnkùlél/ogravedotbelowtáwà
Ilélaṣeni ńgbé
[The enemylives in the back yard
The abode of thepersonwhoinﬂictsinjury is the home]
/ogravedotbelowtá(enemy) andaṣeni(inﬂictor of injury) are synonyms (laṣeniis contracted from
niaṣeni), or at least exist within the same semantic range.
Introduction 7


--- PAGE 21 ---
At times the proverb takes advantage of the existence of diﬀerent words in the
language that designate the same thing more or less exactly, resulting in the sort
of wordplay in
Àjànàkú kìíyaaràrá
Ẹnierin-ínbíerinníńjọ
[The elephant does not turn out dwarﬁsh
The child sired by an elephant takes after an elephant]
The lexical itemÀjànàkú(elephant) in the ﬁrst part matcheserin(elephant) in the
second, with the diﬀerence that the ﬁrst word carries the suggestion of mightiness.
But in
Ohuntówálọsí Ṣókótó
Wànínúàpò-o ṣòkòtò
Ṣókótó(a city in northern Nigeria) andṣòkòtò(trousers) are unrelated.
Olatunji, for his part, lists as the main features of Yoruba proverbs: a prescrip-
tive function (meaning the outlining of rules of conduct); a characteristic sentence
form (which might be simple, complex, sequential, or parallel); a high incidence
of lexical repetition and contrast; and terseness (175). In addition, he cites ‘‘tonal
counterpoint’’: that is, contrast in the tones of lexical items that occur in identical
locations in parallel sentences. In the example already cited above,
/Egravedotbelowhìnkùlél/ogravedotbelowtáwà
Ilélaṣenińgbé
the high tone of the ﬁnal syllable in the second line contrasts with the low tone of
the corresponding syllable in the ﬁrst sentence. Another good example is,
Ohuntíaníkíọgb/oacutedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelowniọgb/oacutedotbelowńgb/oacutedotbelow
Ohuntíaníkíọgbàgbàniọgbàńgbà
[Whatever we tell ọgb/oacutedotbelowto hear is whatọgb/oacutedotbelowhears
Whatever we tell ọgbàto accept is whatọgbàaccepts]
The high tones on the pairọgb/oacutedotbelowand gb/oacutedotbelowin the ﬁrst line give way to low tones on
ọgbàand gbàin the second.
One characteristic of proverbs that comprise three lines is that the ﬁrst two
follow a parallel construction, whereas the concluding line deviates. Characteris-
tically, the ﬁrst two lines repeat a concept as a lead-in to the real message of the
proverb, which the third line delivers with a ﬂourish, as it were. Here are examples:
• Ẹnídaeérúleérúńt/ogravedotbelow
Elételèteńyé
Ohunabáṣeníńyéni
8 introduction


--- PAGE 22 ---
[The person who throws ashes is the one ashes follow
The person who proposes is the one to whom the proposal is understood
What one does is what one understands]
• Ìhínilé
/Ogravedotbelowhúnilé
Òjòkìír/ogravedotbelowkópaọmọadìẹ
[ H e r eah o m e
T h e r eah o m e
The rain does not fall and drench a chicken]
• Àńk/oacutedotbelowléikin
Àńy/ogravedotbelowd/egravedotbelowd/egravedotbelowim/ogravedotbelow
Hòròniléàgbék/eacutedotbelowhìn
[Although we build a house of thatch
Although we construct a porch of palm leaves
The grave is the ﬁnal home]
In each of the three examples the burden of the saying, its main thesis, is couched
in the last line: ‘‘What one does is what one understands’’; ‘‘The rain does not fall
and drench a chicken’’; and ‘‘The grave is the ﬁnal home.’’
ASyllogisticQuirk
Another feature that is not peculiar to proverbs but characterizes Yoruba rhetoric
represents a logical non sequitur which Yoruba usage, however, accommodates.
Consider this proverb:
Pípélàńpégb/oacutedotbelown
Akìípég/ogravedotbelow
[ A s s e m b l i n gi sw h a tw ed oi no r d e rt ob ew i s e
We do not assemble to become foolish]
Roughly comparable in its import to the English saying ‘‘Two heads are better than
one,’’ it asserts that a certain problem is not amenable to individual tackling but
demands the pooling of communal wisdom: we must put our heads together if we
wish to come up with a wise solution and not a foolish one. The proverb thus rec-
ommends assembling, pípé,as opposed to its opposite, which would beàdáṣe,as
in Àdáṣeníńhunni;àjọṣekìíhunni (‘‘Going it alone is what gets one in trouble;
collaborating with others does not get one in trouble’’).
We might conceptualize the argument as follows: the desired end is wisdom (ar-
riving at a wise decision), and the means recommended is assembling (pípé), not
unilateral action (àdáṣe). One would expect the argument to be as follows:Assem-
blingis what people do in order to be wise, notgoingitalone. Let the goal (gb/oacutedotbelownor
gbígb/oacutedotbelown)b ex,the means (pípé)b ey,and the alternative not recommended (àdáṣe)
Introduction 9


--- PAGE 23 ---
be z;thus, in order to achieve the endx,the means must bey,not z.We may then
represent the argument as follows:
y-------- x
z // x.
But the proverb does not follow that reasoning. It says,assemblingis what people
do in order to be wise; people do not assembletobefoolish (g/ogravedotbelow), or w.Schemati-
cally, therefore,
y-------- x
y--- / / w
The last phrase it oﬀers as the undesirable eventuality is not a contrast to the action
being recommended, assembling.It would ﬁt better, logically, in the formulation:
Gbígb/oacutedotbelownlàńpégb/oacutedotbelown
Akìípég/oacutedotbelow
[Wisdomis what we achieve by assembling
We do not assemble to achievefolly]
Humor(orWit)
A further inescapable quality characterizing Yoruba òweis the humor many of
them display. It derives, as in other texts and other cultures, from a variety of de-
vices: diﬀerent forms of ironies (situational, verbal, and others), hyperbole, under-
statement, deliberate shock (especially in vocabulary), and so forth. Often it is a
result of tongue-in-cheek cleverness, as in
Agb/oacutedotbelowtajá
Agb/oacutedotbelowtẹran
Èwonitàgùntànlóríàga?
The literal translation is
We hear that of the dog
We hear that of the goat
What about that of the sheep on a chair?
Alternatively,
One could understand if it was a dog
One could understand if it was a goat
But what about a sheep on a chair?
10 introduction


--- PAGE 24 ---
Idiomatically it says, ‘‘One can tolerate the eventuality in the case of a dog, and
one can tolerate it in the case of a goat, but who ever heard of a sheep on a chair?’’
The fact, though, is that not even a goat or a dog is conceivable, or acceptable,
on a chair. The proverb refers to, and plays on, the expressiontajátẹran—liter-
ally ‘‘dogs and goats inclusive’’—the Yoruba equivalent of the English ‘‘every Tom,
Dick, and Harry.’’ One would usually employ the phrase to indicate that all comers
had (for example) taken advantage of a situation to intrude into one’s aﬀairs, even
(and especially) those whom one would exclude as being no better than dogs or
goats. One reluctantly suﬀers them, therefore, as unwelcome necessities imposed
by misfortune. The enormity of the outrage implied in the situation the proverb
describes, likened to a sheep’s usurpation of a chair, is easilyconceivable.The prov-
erb’s statement that one can tolerate a dog, or even a goat, on the chair is not to
be taken seriously but seen as tongue-in-cheek.
Comparable to the foregoing in facetiousness, in incorporating an ironic twist
that somewhat undercuts what the proverb professes to assert, is
Kàkàkígbajúm/ogravedotbelowjẹ/ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelow
Ẹnitíyópak/ogravedotbelowǹk/ogravedotbelowfúnunyójàáde
[Rather than that a popular person would have to eat a toad
Someone who will kill a frog for him or her will emerge]
The idea is, of course, that worthy and well-respected persons will never be re-
duced to suﬀering indignities, because people will rush to their aid. The indig-
nity the proverb chooses for illustration is the eating of a toad, a disgusting if not
abominable prospect. The relief it suggests, though (the eating of a frog instead),
is in Yoruba thinking just about equally disgusting. The point of the proverb is
made, but tongue-in-cheek.
This next example diﬀers somewhat in structure but also incorporates the
tongue-in-cheek element:
Àgbààgbàìlúkìípéjọkíw/oacutedotbelownjẹìfunòkété
Àﬁiyánàná
[The patriarchs of a town will not assemble and eat the intestines of a bush
rat
Only stale, day-old pounded yams]
If the prospect of venerable patriarchs eating the intestines of a bush rat is belit-
tling at best, their eating stale pounded yams is not much better.
The type of humor in the foregoing examples is familiar to students and speak-
e r so fY o r u b ai ns u c hi r o n i cp r a i s e sa s
Ólóhuntóyìnbóòní
A-biná-kọ-n-du-létí-aṣọ
[He or she has what even the white man lacks
Blessed with plump lice in the seams of his or her clothing!]
Introduction 11


--- PAGE 25 ---
yoruba proverb usage
In Yoruba culture a great deal of importance attaches to whatever utterance issues
out of the mouth. Speech being the highest form of utterance, theYoruba approach
it with deliberate care, taking great pains to avoid careless, casual, or thoughtless
statements whose damage might outlast lifetimes. The proverb
Ẹyinl/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow
Bóbábal/egravedotbelow,fíf/oacutedotbelowníńf/oacutedotbelow
[Speech is an egg
When it drops on the ﬂoor what it does is shatter]
bears witness to this concern. In addition, the Yoruba speaker strives to ensure that
the idea he or she wishes to communicate reaches its target ungarbled and in as
unmistakable a form as possible. If an explanation for such care is necessary, one
need only remember the importance of relationality in close-living communal-
ism, especially when speech also happens to be the most available and therefore
most common transactional medium. In such a context, to paraphrase another
proverb, the judicious—not simply correct—application of speech causes the kola
nut to emerge from the pocket, whereas careless use brings out the sword from its
scabbard.
Resort to proverbs is the most important and most eﬀective strategy the Yoruba
have devised to optimize the eﬃcaciousness of speech. The culture’s richness in
them, of which this collection provides evidence, bears out the Yoruba insistence
that bereft of proverbs, speech ﬂounders and falls short of its mark, whereas aided
by them, communication is ﬂeet and unerring. Accordingly, the Yoruba assert,
Òwelẹṣin/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow
Bí/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowbásọnù,òwelaﬁńwáa
[The proverb is the horse of speech
When speech is lost, the proverb is the means we use to hunt for it]
Proverbs, often incisive in their propositions and terse in their formulation,
are deduced from close observation of life, life forms and their characteristics and
habits, the environment and natural phenomena, and sober reﬂection on all these.
Because proverbs are held to express unexceptionable truths, albeit with some
qualiﬁcation, their use in a discussion or argument is tantamount to an appeal to
established authority. This is one reason for their virtual indispensability in formal
and informal verbal interactions in Yoruba society. They accordingly pervade all
other major forms of verbal texts, whose eﬀectiveness their presence enhances.
Just as the formulation of proverbs involves considerable creativity, so does
their application—a fact that is sometimes discounted in exercises that attempt to
assign deﬁnitive applications to speciﬁc sayings. Creativity in their use transcends
simply knowing a great numberof proverbs and the ‘‘correct’’ situation(s) in which
to apply them. Such competencies certainly count for much, but competence is a
12 introduction


--- PAGE 26 ---
far cry from eﬀectiveness, which comes, in part at least, from the ability to deploy
proverbs in ways that are not only appropriate but also demonstrate some inge-
nuity on the part of the user in seeing applicability where others might not. An
original application causes a momentary disorientation on the part of the hearer,
followed by an intimation of some aﬃnity between the subject (or situation) under
discussion and the content (or proposition) in the proverb, and ﬁnally a recogni-
tion of the brilliance of the analogy involved.
Discussion of the rhetorical raison d’être of proverb use speaks incidentally to
their utilityor function.Writing about proverbs in the Nigerian context, John Mes-
senger lists what I describe as their ‘‘active’’ roles—‘‘as a means of amusement, in
educating the young, to sanction institutionalized behavior, as a method of gain-
ing favor in court, in performing religious rituals and association ceremonies, and
to give point and add color to ordinary conversation’’ (64). The Yoruba scholar
Olowo Ojoade, focusing on what I term their ‘‘passive’’ functions, describes them
as ‘‘an open sesame for the workings of the native mind, manners and customs,
traditional wisdom, religion, ideas and ideals, feelings, modes of thought, prin-
ciples of conduct, and philosophy’’ (20). Another scholar, William Bascom, sum-
marizes all the foregoing into four functions—passive and active and all positive—
that proverbs perform for society: they mirror its culture; they aﬀord its mem-
bers a means of psychological and emotional release through venting otherwise
prohibited expressions; they aid in education and socialization; and they main-
tain conformity to accepted patterns while validating institutions, attitudes, and
beliefs (‘‘Four Functions’’ 279–98).
The eminent Yoruba art scholar Rowland Abiodun oﬀers an example of a prov-
erb that connects in obvious and not so obvious ways with the values of its culture:
Kójúómárìíbi
Ẹs/egravedotbelowloògùn-unr/egravedotbelow
[For the eyes to see no evil
The legs are the medicine]
(‘‘Medicine’’ here means something like ‘‘talisman.’’) The import is that the legs
bear the responsibility of transporting the eyes (and their owner, of course) away
from locations that might harbor evil. The saying echoes others such as Kòs/eacutedotbelowni
tómọibitíoríḿbáẹs/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowrè(‘‘There is no person who knows where the head will
accompany the legs’’).
The proverb, Abiodun points out, is a discursive explanation of a phenome-
non in Yoruba (and African generally) ﬁgurative sculpture: the preference for full
ﬁgures over busts. Whereas in some traditions it is permissible for the artist to rep-
resent a subject with a bust, the Yoruba ﬁgure must include the torso (the chest),
the hands, the legs, and the feet, for all these parts are indispensable to the integ-
rity, and the fortunes, of the person represented. Moreover, whereas in Western
iconography the human form is represented according to the Aristotelian idea of
beauty, in which the proportions are as close to real-life ones as possible, in African
portraiture the representation of the human body answers to a diﬀerent aesthetic
Introduction 13


--- PAGE 27 ---
principle, one that can be described as ‘‘metaphorical’’: it assigns relative size to
parts of the body on the basis of their metaphysical importance. Accordingly, the
head, in reality usually about a seventh of the body in size, takes up as much as
a third of the total height of the sculptural image. The same theory explains the
disproportionately large breasts of female images.
Finally, the relative brevity of proverbs in comparison with other traditional
verbal texts—tales, epics, panegyrics—gives them a functional advantage over the
more complex ones. Their characteristic conciseness permits easy recall and ver-
satile application—at any time and on any occasion. Since their use in eﬀect rep-
resents an invitation to pause and enter a laboratory where the matter in hand can
be scrutinized under the lens of the wisdom of the ages, it oﬀers individuals an op-
portunity to engage in what Victor Turner says the whole group does on liminal
occasions, proverbs playing the role of the ‘‘performative genres’’ or ‘‘social dra-
mas’’ that characterize those occasions (99–106).
gender and proverbs
Certain proverbs raise questions concerning a most important issue: gender. The
presence in the Yorubaòwecorpus of derogatory (at least on the surface) state-
ments about women deserves some comment.
Students of Yoruba culture are familiar with the reverence with which the Yor-
uba regard womanhood. It results from the importance they attach to the prac-
tically absolute dependence of human existence on the woman: she is the only
pathway through which people come into existence, and whatever a man’s contri-
bution to the process, it cannot compare in importance or in the awesome psychic
implications of the truth that every human being begins incarnation as an ana-
tomical part of a woman, concealed in the protection of her body, drawing suste-
nance from her, and relying completely on her for some nine months. Not even the
test-tube innovations of science have succeeded in doing away with the woman’s
contribution. The newborn’s dependence on her continues long after birth, for
unlike the oﬀspring of lower animals, those of humans require years of nurtur-
ing before they can survive on their own. Writing about the earliest stages in the
history of hominids, Gerder Lerner observes, ‘‘Only the mother’s arms and care
sheltered the infant from cold; only her breast milk could provide the nourish-
ment needed for survival. Her indiﬀerence or neglect meant certain death’’ (40).
The mysteries and perils of pregnancy, fetal development, and parturition also
play a crucial role in determining the Yoruba apprehension of womanhood—with
awe, humility, and profound appreciation. As one would expect, therefore, Yoruba
folklore—proverbs no less than tales and other forms—testiﬁes to this reverence
and awe forwomanhoodand—to a lesser extent, admittedly—for women.
Nevertheless, the casual observer might point to Yoruba social practices and to
such elements of folklore as irreverent and facile references to women and female
genitalia as proof that the Yoruba woman is no more than a despised object, tol-
erated only insofar as she can give pleasure and satisfaction to men. But that con-
clusion is at variance with the reality and inconsistent with the reverential regard
14 introduction


--- PAGE 28 ---
described above; such radically conﬂicting attitudes can hardly coexist in an orga-
nization that lays claim to any signiﬁcant degree of coherence. The intelligent con-
clusion must be that the apparentcontradictions are susceptible to explanations
that would reveal hidden consistencies and that any analysis that discounts either
perception—reverence for women orseemingdisregard for women—is bound to
result in misrepresentation and misunderstanding.
I suggest that those manifestations ofapparentmale disparagement of or irrev-
erence toward women may be evidence of the almost oppressive impulse (even
necessity) to accord near veneration to womanhood: they are arguably stratagems
to relieve some of the tension born of the imperative of veneration. People often
rebel by ﬁnding occasions to engage in just those behaviors that are socially pro-
scribed, the grossness of the rebellion proportionally reﬂecting the intensity of the
pressure in the prescribed direction. Among instances from the Western experi-
ence, comedy, we learn, probably came into being as a response to the excessive
urge to seriousness and somberness in tragedy, and—closer to our times—the ir-
reverent revels and elaborate ceremonial mockeries of sacred rituals that inmates
of monasteries and nunneries in medieval Europe indulged in were supposedly
responses to the constraints of excessive asceticism. Similarly, in the Yoruba scene,
the annual Òkè’Bàdàn procession in Ibadan—its ribald sexual vocalizations and
demonstrations graphically illustrated with props in the form of modeled geni-
talia—provides the people with a liminal space for otherwise forbidden perfor-
mances and an interlude to recharge their ability to face again their regulated lives.
truth, aesthetics, and ethics
Thus far my discussion of proverbs in general and Yorubaòwein particular has
deferred consideration of certain controversial issues that exist among proverb
scholars. I have considered the aesthetics to some extent as well as the utilitarian
value of the proverb. The question now is, how crucial is either of those in the life
of the proverb? At issue are contentions like Lawrence Boadi’s that ascribing a pri-
marily didactic or utilitarian function to proverbs is ‘‘too pragmatic and limiting
and excludes much about certain aspects of the proverb as an art form. It ignores
the importance that some societies attach to linguistic and literary features asso-
ciated with the proverb, especially the sharp wit, the sarcasm, the humor, the rhe-
toric, and, indeed, all the aesthetic and poetic values of language use.’’ Using prov-
erbs from the Akan (an ethnic group in Ghana) as his examples, Boadi asserts that
their primary function is ‘‘aesthetic or poetic and not didactic’’ (183). He presses
his challenge to the utilitarian argument by noting that whereas a speaker can in
most cases realize the intention of ‘‘putting across a point, exhorting, admonish-
ing, or concealing a fact’’ without the use of proverbs, he nevertheless resorts to
them ‘‘because he wishes to embellish his language with a poetic dimension, or
demonstrate to his opponent his superior sophistication, education, eloquence, or
sensitivity in the use of language’’; in Boadi’s experience, ‘‘brilliant speakers [who]
u s ep r o v e r b s...a r em o t i v a t e di nt h em a i nb yad e s i r et oh e i g h t e nt h e i rm e ssage
poetically’’ (184).
Introduction 15


--- PAGE 29 ---
Having made his case with regard to theuserof proverbs and the secondariness
of utility, Boadi goes on to make a similar case with regard to the audience and also
the moral dimension and truth claim of proverbs: ‘‘the varied emotional and intel-
lectual reactions’’ to proverbs depend more on their aesthetic value, ‘‘the quality
of the imagery and of the wit,’’ than on their ‘‘moral content or truth value.’’ He
accordingly proposes a hierarchy ranging from ‘‘highly valued proverbs used in
serious discussions and debates, generally by adults’’ to ‘‘little-valued ones used by
non-adults or by adults with children, especially during classroom instruction....
The more concrete and unusual the imagery, the higher the proverb rates’’ (185).
It is quite untrue, though, that imagery and wit always trump utility, moral
content, or truth value. Scholars nowadays have, to be sure, discredited the once
current idea that African art is exclusively (or almost exclusively) utilitarian, but I
believe that even so, Boadi’s judgment is quite revolutionary. Without getting into
a rehash of the arguments for utility, I would simply cite Boadi’s own evidence in
rebuttal. He contends (or grants) that the purpose of the speaker who resorts to
proverbs is ‘‘putting across a point, exhorting, admonishing, or concealing a fact.’’
That being the case, it would stand to reason that whatever strategy the speaker
adopts is chosen inordertoensure that ultimate end. It is safe to assume that the
speaker would not resort to any embellishment that would undermine the mes-
sage and abort its intended outcome. Further, Boadi maintains with reference to
his lower-rated proverbs that ‘‘any serious adult public speaker whohopedtodrive
apointhometohisaudience and used these proverbs to illustrate his argument
would be judged an incompetent speaker’’ (186; emphasis added). One assumes
that hewould be judged even more incompetent if he used no proverbs at all. Boadi
thus incidentally, and inadvertently, testiﬁes to the utilityof the proverb and its
eﬃcacyas a device ‘‘to drive a point home.’’ He goes on, helpfully, to observe that
the Akan value rhetoric more than do most societies: ‘‘The importance attached to
brilliance and imaginativeness in public speech,’’ he says, ‘‘leads those who aspire
to enter traditional public life and hope to exert inﬂuence, especially in the courts
and in politics, to cultivate the use of striking images’’ (186). Finally, he claims
that ‘‘the proverb is an important aspect in the training of courtiers, who are re-
quired to show brilliance, wit, and sophistication in debates’’ (189). In short, the
attraction of proverbs to those who aspire to public life is in their eﬀectiveness in
enhancing the aspirants’ prospects for success, and the purpose of training cour-
tiers, of course, is to turn out not artists buteﬀectiveandpersuasive speakers.
With regard to moral content and truth value (and Boadi’s proposed hierarchy),
I believe we can readily grant that native speakers do not evaluate all proverbs
equally, and that those displaying greater wit and more arresting imagery are ad-
judged more pleasing than the more prosaic ones. But a proverb that has no truth
value, however inventive or striking its imagery, is of no value. Although the intru-
sion of the classroom into the discussion, of course, unfortunately drags it into the
modern age, might not one legitimately ask what the traditional locale would be,
and what the occasion, for the use of low-rated proverbs? Proverbs, let us remem-
ber, achieve part of their educational purpose, that part involving the socialization
16 introduction


--- PAGE 30 ---
and instruction of the youth, precisely andnecessarilyin their useinthepresenceof
theyoung.And whereas in such pursuits as drumming, for example, the instructors
or mentors make accommodations for young neophytes, giving them roles and in-
struments commensurate with their limited, less developed physical competence,
proverb users make no such allowances for a presumed mental or rational under-
development in youthful listeners. There is, in other words, no such thing asòwe
ọmọdé(children’s proverbs)—not to my knowledge, anyway. If a statement, any
statement, deliberately employs esoteric language comprehensible only to people
privy to some mystery or some specialized knowledge, then it would exclude un-
initiated adults and children alike. Boadi’s point would be valid, though, if he re-
ferred to raunchy, oﬀ-color formulations, for responsible adults would normally
abstain from their use in the presence of children. But he meansimageryas such.
Furthermore, Boadi’s bold declaration that ‘‘native speakers are sensitive to the
poetic value of proverbs whether or not these contain a moral truth’’ (185) consti-
tutes a serious problem. What, one wonders, does he mean by ‘‘moral truth’’? Say-
ing that people are sensitive to (in other words, applaud) proverbs whether or not
they are based on a universallyaccepted truth, or whether or not they uphold an
approvedor consensualview of morality, is one thing; saying that people approve
of them even when they are devoid ofanysort of truth or morality is quite another.
Kwame Gyekye’s view of the relative importance of aesthetics and truth value in
Akan proverbs is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from Boadi’s. For Gyekye, the goal of the
proverb is to establish what is real and true. The wise person (onyansafo), he as-
serts, ‘‘reﬂects, imagines, intuits, and then condenses these reﬂections, imaginings
and intuitions in proverbs.’’ From human experience he synthesizes what is ‘‘ulti-
mately real and true,’’ which is then ‘‘distilled in proverbs.’’ With regard to ‘‘moral
truth’’ (or morality), Gyekye observes that the aim of Akan philosophers is to gain
a ‘‘comprehensive understanding of the world and human life and conduct.’’ They
not only describe reality but also recommend ‘‘how human beings ought to live
and what their values ought to be—hence the existence of many proverbs relative
to morality. The wise person of the Akan community,’’ he declares, ‘‘is essentially
a speculative philosopher’’ (64).
So useful do Akan sages ﬁnd proverbs, according to Gyekye, that when during
his research he asked people to give the meanings of such concepts as fate or des-
tiny (nkrabea), they usually resorted to proverbs. He concludes, therefore, that ‘‘in
the view of the Akan wise person, analysis of propositions cannot dispense with
experience’’ (65). I might corroborate this valorization of experience with a Yor-
uba proverb. In Duro Ladipọ’s operaỌbaKòSo a messenger arrives at Ọba Ṣaǹgo’s
palace from the Ẹdẹ outpost to report on conditions there. Asked if he is certain
of what he is reporting, he responds rhetorically,Ngóhayókímmám/ogravedotbelow?(‘‘Would
I be satiated and not know?’’). To experience something is to know it, or to really
know something is to experience it.
In AKìí, my earlier collection, I argued against excessive claims about prov-
erbs’ infallibility, speciﬁcally the sort some scholars derived from John Messen-
ger’s claim that in some Nigerian courts, cases were decided on the basis of a skill-
Introduction 17


--- PAGE 31 ---
ful application of proverbs. I pointed out that in the same essay Messenger noted
that the judges went to great lengths, including employing mediums, to ascertain
the merit of each litigant’s case. Few Africans, I argued, believe proverbs to be in-
controvertible; ‘‘most people realize that a number of the sayings make assertions
that are evidently tenuous’’ (6). That is a far cry, though, from denying the rele-
vance of truth.
The diﬃculty of making any valid general statement about the truth value of
proverbs as a whole results from certain obvious facts, one being what one writer
described a century ago as their ‘‘stopped-clock’’ aspect (Spectator694): a stopped
clock is right, or ‘‘truthful,’’ twice every twenty-four hours but wrong, or ‘‘false,’’
the rest of the time. Let me cite two Yoruba examples. The ﬁrst says,
Iléolóorekìíjótán
Tìkàkìíjókù
[The house of a good person never burns completely
That of a wicked person never burns partially]
The other asserts,
Àṣesíl/egravedotbelowlàb/ogravedotbelowwábá
Ẹníbáṣusíl/egravedotbelowáb/ogravedotbelowwábéṣinṣin
[What one sets aside (or leaves behind) is what one returns to ﬁnd
Whoever leaves excrement behind will return to ﬁnd ﬂies]
The ‘‘truth’’ in the ﬁrst proverb is that good people will never lack succor when
t h e ya r ei nn e e d ,w h e r e a se v i lp e o p l ew i l ln e v e rﬁ n dp e o p l et oc o m et ot h e i ra i d .
The second teaches that one reaps what one sows. If the ‘‘truth’’ in these proverbs
is consistent with the prevailing ethos of the society, then surely they purvey a
‘‘moral’’ truth. Even though empirical knowledge tells us that the houses of good
people sometimes do collapse completely, whereas those of wicked people may not
collapse at all, or, again, that one might sometimes leave excrement behind and
return to ﬁnd a sapling rather than ﬂies, that fact is immaterial. A ‘‘moral truth’’
does not have to be absolutely andinvariablyvalid to be relevant. As Barry Hallen
has astutely observed, ‘‘Proverbs do not introduce themselves to us as universal
truths, as generalizations that always apply. Their pith, their point, their punch is
situational or context-dependent to an essential degree’’ (141). To insist on invari-
able, empirical veriﬁability as the measure of proverbs’ truthfulness would there-
fore be to deny nearly all of them any claim to truth. According to that standard,
‘‘Haste makes waste’’ would be untrue, as would ‘‘Every cloud has a silver lining.’’
ArcherTaylor quotes Lord John Russell’s deﬁnition of the proverb as ‘‘one man’s
wit and all men’s wisdom’’ (Taylor ‘‘Wisdom’’). Notwithstanding the consensus
implied in the attribution of the wisdom to ‘‘all men’’ (these days, one would rather
say ‘‘all people’’), one needs no more than a casual knowledge of a culture’s prov-
erbs to discover that they are not always consistent with one another, that for every
one that asserts a ‘‘truth’’ there will be others that contradict it. The proverb
18 introduction


--- PAGE 32 ---
Às/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowàìlàdílópaElempeàk/oacutedotbelowk/oacutedotbelow
Tóníigbáwúwojuàwo
[Speaking without elaborating is what killed Elempe the First
Who said calabash is heavier than china]
is clariﬁed with the information that Elempe the First got himself killed by assert-
ing that calabash was heavier than china, when the penalty for being proved wrong
was execution.
3 In the veriﬁcation process, it turned out that calabash was lighter
than china, mass for mass. The poor man failed to specify that he was speaking
of heavily loaded calabash and empty china. The proverb advises people to spell
things out and not stint on explanation. On the other hand, the proverb
/Ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowpúp/ogravedotbelow,ir/oacutedotbelowlóḿmúwá
[A lot of words only entail lies]
makes an opposite or conﬂicting assertion. Similarly, the advice in Àgbájọọw/oacutedotbelow
laﬁńsọàyà (‘‘It is with ﬁngers bunched together that one strikes one’s breast’’),
meaning that there is strength in numbers, contradicts the injunction implied in
Ọl/oacutedotbelowmúdáọmúìyá/egravedotbelowgbé(‘‘Each breast-feeding child must lift its mother’s breast
by itself ’’). I return to this point later.
In my earlier collection I noted instances in which, in response to some prov-
erbs’ contestable assertions, subsequent wits have coined rebuttals. I cited among
other examples the original proverbOríkìíburúl/oacutedotbeloww/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelow( ‘ ‘ Ah e a di sn e v e rb a di na
group’’—meaning that a single person in a crowdcannot be selectively beset with
ill fortune), to which a wit has retorted, Oríamáaburúl/oacutedotbeloww/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelow;bíabás/ogravedotbelowkòl/oacutedotbelowjà
ẹnìkanniyóbàá (‘‘A head may be bad in a group; if one throws a stone in a market
it will hit one person’’) (AKìí 6–7). One scholar has recently given such rebuttals
the grandiose name ‘‘postproverbials’’ (Raji-Oyelade).
Whereas we might decide to dispose of a stopped clock because of the tiny per-
centage of the time during which it speaks true, we cannot so dispense with prov-
erbs that are similarly true in a comparable percentage of circumstances. The rea-
son is that the truth they aﬃrm when theyaretrue is fundamental, and, to repeat
Okpewho’s words, based on ‘‘intimate observation of human experience and of the
surrounding nature.’’ Many make philosophical, epistemological, and moral as-
sertions that are consistent with the dominant ethos of the community. Olatunji’s
assignment of a prescriptive function to the Yoruba proverb (175) is understand-
able only to the extent that proverbs are believed to accord with the morality of
the group. In other cases, of course, proverbs are true because they present known
contrasting, even oppositional, strains to the dominant ethos.
TheGood,theBad,andtheExpedient
An important fact to bear in mind is that African societies are not as simple and
their mentality and world view not as jejune as some people might suppose. For
that reason, one who looks for simple, uncomplicated concepts of truth and mo-
Introduction 19


--- PAGE 33 ---
rality among them will go astray. With regard to ‘‘good’’ and ‘‘bad’’ in Yoruba
thought, one might go so far as to contend that a signiﬁcant Nietzschean strain
exists in it, something consistent with what that controversial speaker remarked
about Herbert Spencer, ‘‘who considers the conceptgoodqualitatively the same as
the concepts usefulor practical;so that in the judgmentsgoodand bad,humanity
is said to have summed up and sanctioned precisely its unforgotten and unforget-
table experiences of the usefulpractical and the harmfulimpractical’’ (Nietzsche
161).
To the extent that the ‘‘useful practical’’—in other words, the expedient—places
self-interest above all else, including charity, equity, and even honesty, proverbs
that sanction it could be adjudged in one view ‘‘immoral,’’ or at best ‘‘amoral,’’ and
one will ﬁnd several such proverbs in the Yoruba corpus. An acquaintance once
provided me with an eloquent demonstration of the cynicism that supposedly ex-
plains some instances of a sense of community. He cited the proverb
Bíobáńgb/oacutedotbelow‘‘Gbe!Gbè!Gbe!’’
Tíoòbáwọngbée
/Egravedotbelowhìnkùléẹniw/oacutedotbelownḿb/ogravedotbelowwágbéedàsí
[If you hear ‘‘Haul it! Haul it! Haul it!’’
And you don’t join them in hauling it
It is to your backyard they will come to dump it]
One can understand the proposition that if, for example, the community was en-
gaged in a beautiﬁcation project that involved removing eyesores from public view
and dumping them in less public places, the workers might choose as their dump
site a readily available property whose owner was not involved in the cleanup or
not around to protect it. In that case, participation in such a public, communal
project might indicate not public spiritedness so much as self-interest. But the
occasion of my acquaintance’s employment of the proverb was even more cyni-
cal. He used it as the Yoruba equivalent of the English ‘‘If you can’t beat them, join
them’’ to urge the expediency of participating in the raid on public funds by well-
positioned oﬃcials during the infamous Abacha regime of the 1990s.
Another applicable proverb,
Or/eacutedotbelows/egravedotbelow-ẹwèrèoòbùú ṣoògùn
Níbolotimáarítọlọgb/oacutedotbelown?
[You come upon the footprint of an imbecile and you do not take some of
the soil for your juju
Where will you ﬁnd the footstep of a sane person?],
refers to the belief that magical charms made with soil taken from a person’s foot-
print are powerfully eﬀective against the person, and the care people take, there-
fore, not to leave their footprints carelessly about where their enemies might have
access to them. The proverb’s admonition is to take advantage of the vulnerable,
because you will probably never ﬁnd a mentally competent person to so misuse.
Consider also
20 introduction


--- PAGE 34 ---
Ẹnitíògb/oacutedotbelownlààw/egravedotbelowńgbò
[Only the foolish suﬀer the hunger pangs of fasting]
and
Ọgbọ-ọgb/oacutedotbelownlàgbàlagbà-áﬁńsáfúnẹranlá
[It is with dissembling that a venerable man (gender speciﬁcity intended)
ﬂees from a wild beast]
Normally, a person fasting should suﬀer the pangs of hunger which constitute the
sacriﬁce that is the whole point of fasting. And a venerable man does not ﬂee from
danger but confronts it manfully. But the two proverbs pooh-pooh such senti-
ments. In both, the injunction is to do the expedient thing for one’s comfort and
safety, even if it is something normally forbidden or ‘‘not done.’’ The better part
of valor is discretion, they say.
The users of such proverbs could be speaking tongue-in-cheek, not seriously
recommending or justifying the propositions in their sayings, just as they could
be in dead earnest. Evidently, proverb use lends itself to cynicism, and one cannot
always be sure when a proverb is cynical and inconsistent with approved morality
(and the user’s true belief and intention) and when it is a reliable expression of a
society’s mores (and the user’s true inclination).
Relativityof‘‘Truth’’andEthics
Such uncertainty indicates, if nothing else, the need for some guide to understand-
ing the proverbs and howthey mean. Some of the confusion about them would
disappear if, for instance, we were mindful that they are sensitive to what one could
describe as the relativity of ‘‘truth’’ and ethics. The resolute relativism of Yoruba
proverbs is the import of
Kòkòròtój/egravedotbelowf/oacutedotbelowjàre/egravedotbelowf/oacutedotbelow
Ìw/ogravedotbelownlewékońdára-ámọ
[The insect that eats the vegetable is vindicated (in any case brought) by the
leaf
Leaves should be moderate in their attractiveness]
A modern Western court should quite properly be scandalized if a rape defendant
(male or female) were to cite it as a defense! A similar sentiment is evident in a
less objectionable form in
Bíabáńkìl/ogravedotbelowfólè
Kákìl/ogravedotbelowfóníṣu/egravedotbelowbá/ogravedotbelownà
[As we reprimand the thief
Let us also reprimand the owner of the yams beside the path]
Introduction 21


--- PAGE 35 ---
Incidentally, this last may record a shift in morality in the Yoruba world, for
there was a time when a dealer could leave his commodities unattended, simply
indicating the asking price alongside the goods: leaving so many pebbles, for ex-
ample, to indicate so many cowries. Those wishing to purchase any of the items
oﬀered for sale would help themselves and leave the correct amount. The return-
ing owner would ﬁnd the rest of the merchandise and the price of the purchased
goods waiting undisturbed. Any merchant who displays such trust today could be
judged extremely foolish, if not insane.
That said, however, I must acknowledge the existence and usage of proverbs
that are downright inconsistent with generally accepted behavior and are immedi-
ately recognized as such. No Yoruba person who hears
Òyìnbóòfólè
Óf/eacutedotbelowìyára
[The white man does not like stealing
He admires nimbleness]
mistakes its moral contrariety, at least in the context of Yoruba values, even though
its truth with regard to the perceived morality of the white man (in Africa) is not
in question. What it says, in plain language, is that stealing is not an admirable
thing, but if you are good enough at it to get away with it (or if you can ﬁnd a
clever lawyer to argue your case), go for it! Like the earlier proverbs about doing
what is expedient, if its use is not in jest, it is probably cynical.
Raymond Firth’s discussion of Maori proverbs illustrates their problematic ten-
dency toward inconsistency, both with one another and with accepted usage, and
consequently their capability to confound whoever places implicit conﬁdence in
them as evidence of the culture’s mores. Whereas the people place a high value on
hospitality, he notes, their proverbs (whakatauki) are very often antihospitable,
urging people ‘‘not to be too lavish in their gifts, to consume their food themselves
before visitors arrive and they are deprived of the greater share of it, and not to
grant undue hospitality without the prospect of some equivalent in return’’ (249).
The question legitimately arises, then, how does one tell when to take a prov-
erb seriously and when with a grain of salt? In this regard there is no substitute for
a close knowledge of the society concerned and its values. Knowing when a prov-
erb ﬁrst came into use (and to what end) would also be helpful but is impossible
or, at least, unrealistic and in any case inconsistent with the spirit of proverbs and
of traditional oral texts (creative and otherwise) generally.
Firth’s representation of the Maori as inveterately hospitable enables him (and
us) to conclude that proverbs enjoining the opposite of hospitality are facetious,
and our knowledge of Yoruba society similarly enables us to determine that anti-
social Yoruba proverbs are facetious. That is, of course, because we are able to
see the proverbs synchronically. Viewed diachronically, an intentionally facetious
proverb might come to express group ethos after the society has undergone sig-
niﬁcant social and ethical changes. Thus, whereas the Yoruba proverb enjoining
one to take advantage of vulnerable people might have been facetious on its cre-
22 introduction


--- PAGE 36 ---
ation, one can credibly argue that it accords with the prevailing morality in much
of Yorubaland today. The same goes for the advice to ‘‘join them if you can’t beat
them.’’
Authoritarianism(Unanimism)
One weighty objection to reliance on proverbs comes from the Ghanaian philoso-
pher Kwasi Wiredu, for whom they represent a check on youthful aspiration and
development. According to him, they are a means through which African tradi-
tional cultures enforce unquestioning obedience to elders and curtail curiosityand
independence of thought in the young. African proverbs, which he describes as
‘‘concentrations of practical wisdom,’’ are marvelous in clinching arguments and
reinforcing morals, he says, but ‘‘it is rare to come across ones which extol the
virtues of originality and independence of thought’’ (4). An American colleague
of mine made a point not dissimilar to Wiredu’s on looking through my collection
of proverbs. He noted with considerable interest the large number of entries in the
ﬁrst category, especially in that section dealing with self-knowledge, on knowing
one’s place and not exceeding it—in other words, not overreaching. He remarked
that the preoccupation in Western societies is exactly opposite to the one my col-
lection indicates: in the West people areencouragedto overachieve, to dream the
impossible dream.
Wiredu’s opinion is curious, especially his assertion about the paucity of prov-
erbs that encourage the youth to be original and enterprising. It is easy to see,
though, why some do regard certain proverbs as discouraging ambition. Among
the Yoruba, for example, the well-bred person is always careful to avoid the embar-
rassment and disgrace that come from being cut down to size after any arrogant act
of self-overvaluation. Since part of avoiding disgrace is avoidance of overreaching,
of biting oﬀ more than one can chew, the wealth of proverbs that caution, in eﬀect,
‘‘Know your place and do not exceed it’’ is understandable. Examples include
Aw/ogravedotbelowlúmát/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelow,ìw/ogravedotbelownara/egravedotbelowlóm/ogravedotbelow
[The person who enters a town and avoids disgrace achieves the feat because
he or she knows his or her place]
and
Bíatimọlàńkú
Olongokìíkútìyàn-tìyàn
[One dies [or crashes] according to one’s weight
The robin does not die with a resounding noise]
Still, the perception that proverbs encouraging people to strive for excellence,
to overachieve, to climb every mountain and be limited only by their imagina-
tion are a Western monopoly is false, as the proverbs in my section on industry
show. The Yoruba also encourage adventure, achievement, and the pursuit of ex-
Introduction 23


--- PAGE 37 ---
cellence while decrying and even ridiculing indolence and shiftlessness. The fol-
lowing proverbs suﬃce as proof:
Oòṣágil/oacutedotbelowgb/eacutedotbelow
Oòta/ogravedotbelowg/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowfà
Odédìí/ogravedotbelowpẹogb/eacutedotbelownusókèòńretí
/Ogravedotbelowf/eacutedotbelowníńro?
[You did not cut a wound into the tree
You did not shoot an arrow into the palm tree
You arrive at the base of the palm tree and you lift up your mouth
expectantly
D o e si td r i ps a pf o rf r e e ? ]
The proverb refers to the necessary actions one must perform before expecting to
get wine from the palm tree—drilling a hole at the top and collecting the sap in
a container. The message is that one must struggle in order to triumph, make an
eﬀort in order to gain a prize. A second example,
Iwájúiwájúl/ogravedotbelowpá/egravedotbelowbìtìńrésí
[Forward, forward is the direction in which the staﬀ of the [tripped] snare
springs]
is usually employed in a prayer that a person’s fortunes may always advance, but it
also expresses the belief that one must always aspire to move forward, to be better
tomorrow than one is today.
With particular reference to the young, another proverb says,
Ọmọtíyój/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowàṣàmú
Kékerélótińṣẹnuṣámú-ṣámú
[A child that will turn out to be peerless
It is from childhood that he or she distinguishes himself or herself]
Another adds,
Ọmọtókáw/oacutedotbelowsókèlóf/eacutedotbelowkágbéòun
[It is the child that lifts up its arms that asks to be picked up]
T h ec h i l dw h oj u s ts i t smaybe picked up, but the one who raises its arms aids its
cause considerably. The idea is that when opportunities present themselves, one
must still make an eﬀort to take advantage of them, and a child is employed in
the imagery because the logic that applies to the adult applies to children also. In
that regard, remember that even in Western societies people are cautioned against
biting oﬀ more than they can chew (Brunvand 56) and advised to cut their coats
according to their sizes.
As for the preponderance of entries in my ﬁrst category, the explanation re-
24 introduction


--- PAGE 38 ---
sides in the premium the Yoruba place on how other people regard them. They
jealously guard their image and public perception, taking care to keep whatever
might detract from their good reputation well hidden, left behind in the conﬁnes
of the family compound, before they venture abroad. Here are two pertinent prov-
erbs in this regard:
Iléẹnilatińjẹòkétéonídodo
[It is within the conﬁnes of one’s home that one eats a cane rat with a tumor]
Bánidélélàḿmọìṣeẹni
Èèyàngbéòkèèrèníyì
[Going home with a person is how one knows his or her ways
People enjoy good repute when they live at a distance]
The ﬁrst proverb acknowledges the sentiment that one’s home is one’s castle and
that one may do as one likes, even behave dishonorably, in its privacy. The second
refers to the expectation that though one’s guard is usually down at home, those
who venture outside will be on their best—perhaps uncharacteristically good—
behavior. The proverbs advise, in eﬀect, ‘‘Be what youwishto be at home but what
you shouldbe abroad.’’
Nativism
One last word on actual or implied disparagement of proverbs. In his Proverbs,
Textuality,andNativisminAfricanLiterature, the Yoruba scholar Adélékè Adé/egravedotbelowk/oacutedotbelow
discusses African creative writers’ use of traditional elements in their works, and
African critics’ use of traditional criteria in evaluating these works—usages that
he characterizes as ‘‘nativist engagements’’ (ix). In spite of the quite interesting
observations and commentary in the book, his lumping together of traditional re-
sources under the unmistakably pejorative designation ‘‘nativism’’ suggests, per-
haps unintentionally, a dismissive attitude toward traditional (or non-Western)
resources and approaches. The appearance of the book (in 1998) coincided with
the increasing desire among African scholars, in response to an intellectual current
in the West, to distance themselves from such concepts as race, nationalism, and
other means of suggesting, if not asserting, diﬀerences among humankind. The
discountenancing and disparaging of such distinguishing categories have proved
especially attractive to those Africans (philosophers for example) who believe that
attempts to resuscitate and revitalize traditional resources—those that European
colonizing and civilizing eﬀorts of the past several centuries have repressed or
done away with—amount to some sort of recidivism. Describing African cultural
resources and their use as ‘‘nativism’’ is therefore unfortunate. This is not to deny
the impulses driving ‘‘the process of transnationalization,’’ as Achille Mbembe sets
them out in a recent essay, but it is to challenge the assumption that transnation-
alism (or transnationality) is self-evidently preferable to an African speciﬁcity or
diﬀerence.
Introduction 25


--- PAGE 39 ---
considered omissions
Among suggestions made to me about what information to supply for the entries
in this collection are several that I have decided against including.
Sources
On several occasions I have had to explain my refusal to heed a demand that I
supply the sources of the proverbs in my collection. Such a request would make
good sense with regard to certain performative texts, especially elaborate ones
such as epics, ìjálá(hunters’ chanted poetry), and iwìegúngún (masqueraders’
chants), which always bear the unique and unmistakable stamp of the performer.
But hardly ever does a user’s individual signature inﬂect proverb usage, in either
Yoruba or English (as an example) proverbs in general. Do we know the source
of ‘‘Two heads are better than one’’ or ‘‘Haste makes waste’’?
4 W h e r ew ed ok n o w
the sources for English proverbs—Shakespearean ones, for example, such as ‘‘The
better part of valor is discretion’’—it is because we are in that case dealing with a
literarytradition.
The debate on the importance of authorship in literary scholarship and analy-
sis is not irrelevant in this context. Western literary theory has gone back and forth
in its eﬀort to locate the meaning or signiﬁcance of a text, posing such questions
as: Does it reside in the mind of the author of the text?
Is it a stable phenomenon with a stable relationship with its medium?
Is it something (whatever that might be) that the reader makes of it?
Does it matter in this regard who the author is, and should we care?
Is the unattributed text not, like anonymous legal documents, more venerable
than one whose creator we know? (see Eagleton 67–90)
The quality of being unattributed is, moreover, consistent with the Yoruba de-
emphasizing of the individual, especially with regard to the formulation and enun-
ciation of things done and not done.
5 The authority belongs to the people, the
supraindividual entity, whose dictates, unlike those of an individual we may or
may not respect, we are not inclined to challenge.
A s k i n gaY o r u b ap e r s o nt oc i t eh i ss o u r c ef o rap r o v e r bt h a th eh a sh e a r dp e r -
haps a thousand times in his life, the ﬁrst time as a child, is in any case quite unreal-
istic. That is not to say, however, that he could never possibly identify when and
where he ﬁrst heard a certain proverb or number of proverbs. I do recall the ﬁrst
occasion when I heard certain proverbs used, and the identity of the persons who
used them. For example, I ﬁrst heardGbọ-gbọ-gbọlọw/oacutedotbelowńyọjuorí(4232) from Bọla
Ige in Ibadan in 1983, when he was governor of /Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow State;Ìkatót/oacutedotbelowsímúlàńnà
símú(3399) from Victor Olunlọyọ in Ibadan in 1983, when he was campaigning
26 introduction


--- PAGE 40 ---
in the /Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow State gubernatorial race;Ẹnitóbáńjẹláb/eacutedotbelow-ẹJ/eacutedotbelowg/eacutedotbelowd/eacutedotbelowlóńpèénÍgiÀràbà
(2079) from Ayọ Ayọrinde, a friend in Lincoln, Nebraska, in the late 1970s; and
Dì/eacutedotbelowǹdìlòpin-insinimá(4914) from Toyin Falọla some time in the late 1990s and
somewhere in the United States. In no case, though, was any of these ‘‘sources’’ the
originator of the proverb in question. Identifying someone who uses a proverb as
its source would be, in my thinking, preposterous and somewhat arrogant. What
right, I mean, do I have to glorify my‘‘source’’ (as deﬁned above) asthesource
of a proverb, simply because I ﬁrst heard it from him or her, when someone else
could earlier have heard another person use the same proverb? My assigning it to
‘‘X’’ would privilege me in a way that neither ‘‘X’’ nor I deserve.
Proverbs are communal property, and the Yoruba experience diﬀers from that
which, according to Kwesi Yankah, obtains among the Akan, to whom the oﬃce of
‘‘professional proverb custodian’’ is apparently unique. ‘‘After a speaker has com-
posed or eﬀectively used a proverb, particularly in a conﬂict interaction,’’ Yankah
tells us, ‘‘she may register it with the custodian and narrate the circumstances that
t r i g g e r e dt h ep r o v e r b ....T h ec u s t o d i a nt h e nm o v e sf r o mw a r dt ow a r dn a r r a t i n g
the proverb and the circumstances of its original use to the public’’ (79).
HistoricalMarkers
Embedded in some proverbs are bits of dating information that reveal approxi-
mately when they came into being. These are usually references to identiﬁable
historical events, sometimes to historical personalities, and sometimes to items
whose advent is associated with historical developments, such as the introduction
of foreign religions (Christianity and Islam) or the arrival of Europeans. Proverbs
that incorporate historical markers permit an approximate determination of the
time when they came into use. An event referred to in a proverb obviously pre-
dates it, and one that is about a historical ﬁgure probably originated during the
lifetime or soon after the demise of that person. In
Ọl/oacutedotbelowrunòpínd/oacutedotbelowgba
Sajiméj/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowjuKòròfo
[God has not apportioned things equally
The Sergeant Major outranks the Corporal]
the mention of British military ranks bears witness to the prior establishment of
British presence and institutions. One could further narrow the temporal space
in which the proverb probably came into being by suggesting that it postdated
the establishment of the British West Africa Frontier Force and the recruitment of
local soldiers into its ranks.
The proverb
Ìmàlés/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowòjókù
ÓníỌl/oacutedotbelowrúnsán-ìnsíi
[The Muslim spoke and thunder rumbled
He said God has signed oﬀ on the matter]
Introduction 27


--- PAGE 41 ---
provides two diﬀerent markers. First, there is the mention ofÌmàlé,a practitioner
of Islam, and then there is the evidence of authentication he oﬀers, God’s endorse-
ment bysignature, for the habit of signing a document as an indication of agree-
ment or acknowledgment is associated with the European incursion into the Yor-
uba world.
Other proverbs with historical markers, speciﬁcally references to the presence
of Europeans, include
Adì/eacutedotbelowk/ogravedotbelowwé
Òyìnbókàátì
[The chicken wrote something
The white man cannot read it]
With its reference to literacy and the knowledge of writing, this one was a popu-
lar derogatory comment on bad calligraphy during colonial days, particularly in
the primary schools, where penmanship was an important part of the curriculum.
S i m i l a ri ni t sr e f e r e n t si s
Òyìnbótóṣel/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowdìlóṣèrésà
[The same white man who made the lead pencil also made the eraser]
Apart from referring to the new phenomenon of writing and its associated para-
phernalia, it incidentally also acknowledges the culture’s endorsement of unsen-
timental pragmatism.
‘‘Dì/eacutedotbelowǹdì’’lòpin-insinimá
[‘‘The End’’ is the end of the cinema show]
acknowledges a new form of entertainment and propaganda and therefore dates to
some time after the Colonial Film Unit introduced cinema featuring propaganda
shows during the colonial period.
The following proverb refers to both a historical ﬁgure and a historical event:
Akínińj/eacutedotbelowakíni
Aﬁnihànńj/eacutedotbelowaﬁnihàn
Èwoni‘‘Ọkú,aráÌbàdàn’’lójúdeṢódẹk/eacutedotbelow?
[ Ag r e e t e ri sag r e e t e r
A betrayer is a betrayer
What is the motive for ‘‘Hello, Ibadan native,’’ in front of Ṣodẹkẹ’s home?]
It certainly originated in the late nineteenth century during the Yoruba wars and
in the lifetime of one General Ṣodẹkẹ, who led the /Egravedotbelowgbá in their conﬂict with
Ibadan (see Ajayi and Smith). During that conﬂict, a person from Ibadan caught
in Abẹokuta, and especially in front of General Ṣodẹkẹ’s residence, would be as-
sumed to be up to no good.
28 introduction


--- PAGE 42 ---
The extent and precision of timing that these proverbs allow is limited, though,
and insuﬃcient caution on that score can lead to errors such as Dupẹ Oduyọye’s
too precise determination of a proverb’s dating on the basis of its internal refer-
ent. Of the proverb
Aláàárùtójẹbúr/eacutedotbelowdì
Awọorí/egravedotbelowlóńjẹ
[The head porter who eats bread
Is eating the scalp oﬀ his head]
he says that it ‘‘dates about 1850—ﬁrst contact of the Yoruba with wheat bread and
t h eE n g l i s hw o r db r e a d ....I tw a sf a s h i onable but more expensive than the local
staples.’’ His dating suggests that the proverb’s appearance followed immediately
upon the introduction of wheat bread into the Yoruba world. He does say ‘‘about
1850,’’ but how elastic is ‘‘about’’ in this instance? In fact, all we can say, in the ab-
sence of any more speciﬁc evidence, is that it originated sometimeafterthe intro-
duction of the food. If we were able to ascertain the proverb’s ﬁrst appearance in
a collection, then of course we would be entitled to assert that it originated some-
time between the introduction of wheat bread and the date of that publication.
There is no doubt, though, that the proverb has been around for a long time.
Contextualization
My argument for not contextualizing each proverb—that is, placing it in an actual
usage situation, as some well-meaning readers have suggested—is similar to the
one against identifying sources. Whereas one would certainly contextualize other
forms of traditional verbal performance if one intended to make their cultural,
transactional signiﬁcance evident, my caveat with regard to proverbs is that they
are incidental toallother forms of oral performance and discourse, and there are
usually no occasions dedicated to their use. A collector can arrange to hear an in-
formant tell short stories, or may happen on storytelling sessions; one can ask an
i n f o r m a n tt or e c i t es o m eoríkì(praises), rárà(brides’ nuptial chants), orìjálá;one
might be present where a performance is taking place; and one may ask ababaláwo
to reciteIfádivination verses or perhaps have the opportunity to see divination in
action. In all such cases (with the possible exception of command performances)
a description of the context would be useful, and the identity of the ‘‘sources’’ or
informants would be of interest:context,because we would wish to understand the
who, the why, the how, and the wherefore of the performance; identity,because
each performer brings personal idiosyncrasies to the act, sometimes modifying
the text or otherwise putting an individual stamp on the total event.
In his discussion of the signiﬁcant role the audience plays in shaping perfor-
mances, Okpewho cites instances in which the performer altered his text, either
in deference to the sensitivities of particular audiences or to avoid trouble with
the law (57–63). The proverbs that could possibly cause oﬀense in certain quarters
are insigniﬁcantly few, and can be so tagged, but not every proverb merits such
Introduction 29


--- PAGE 43 ---
attention. Although suggesting possible contexts for each proverb might be inter-
esting, any suggestion would simply be one of several possibilities. (I did suggest
occasions on which each of the proverbs inAKìí might be used, but in that book
I was dealing with a fraction of the material in this collection, and the beneﬁt of
doing the same in this volume would not be commensurate with the increase in
heft it would entail.)
OriginalDialects
I have also balked at the call for the use of ‘‘original dialects’’—Ekìtì, /Egravedotbelowgbá, Ìjèṣà,
Ìj/egravedotbelowbú, Oǹdó, /Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow, and so forth—in my transcription of the proverbs.The desire to
‘‘ﬁx’’ pan-Yoruba proverbs in such a manner is, again, inappropriate and alien to
the spirit of proverbs. It is true that werewe able to ﬁx these sayings in theways that
some scholars would like—determining who originated them, when, where, and
why, the original dialect for each one, and the like—we could make some interest-
ing deductions that we currently cannot make. I am not certain, though, that our
inability to perform such exercises is any real loss. Having presented reasons why
I believe eﬀorts at such ﬁxing are not only unnecessary but, more important, mis-
guided, I here stress the epistemic consideration: what is in keeping with the Yor-
uba way and, indeed, the African way. The African way does not countenance the
chiseling of texts in stone, as it were, with the exception of sacred (ritual) materials,
and even these are ﬁxed not according to authorial attribution, dating, and so forth
but bycore content. In general, traditional oral materials (including elaborate ones
such as the Kambili,the Mwindo,and the Ozidi) live in their not being canned,
in their being able to respond to each occasion and each audience according to
the dialectal, idiosyncratic, or any other particularity of the performer (Okpewho
105–15). Their true and ideal mode of existence is not in their recorded, published,
and therefore preserved, form but in theirpotentiality,which is actualized anew at
each performance or, in the case of proverbs, at each utterance. It is in this form
that texts lend themselves to the salutary quality of revisability, enabling a people
to reinvent itself and its history according to its ever-evolving sense of itself.
organizing the collection
The thousands of proverbs presented in this volume—here numbered consecu-
tively within categories for ease of reference and cross-reference—made necessary
a number of decisions about their format, their transcription and translation (and
import), and their categorization and sequence.
Presentation
In this introduction I have rendered the proverbs most often in verse form rather
than in running prose in order to acknowledge their poetic qualities. As my ex-
amples illustrate, one can present them in single lines, in couplets, in triads, or
in quatrains, depending on each individual case. I have not chosen that option in
30 introduction


--- PAGE 44 ---
the body of the collection, however, for considerations both of space and of most
common usage—in common ‘‘prosaic’’ communication.
Nor have I adopted the suggestion that I present each and every proverb with
‘‘interlinear’’ translation. According to that call, the proverb
Ẹnitíóbáńjẹláb/eacutedotbelow-ẹJ/eacutedotbelowg/eacutedotbelowd/eacutedotbelow
NíńpèénÍgiÀràbà
would be rendered as follows:
Ẹni tí ó bá ńjẹ níab/eacutedotbelow-ẹ J/eacutedotbelowg/eacutedotbelowd/eacutedotbelow
Person that he/she happens to customarily eat at underneath (of) Jẹgẹdẹ
Ní ńpè é níIgi Àràbà
It is [that] customarily addresses him as Tree Silk-cotton
Each such rendering would then necessarily be followed by an idiomatically cor-
rect translation—a most extravagant use of space. But my main objection has more
to do with ideology than with paper conservation. If the desire were to provide
illustrations of the peculiarities of Yoruba syntax with particular reference to prov-
erb construction, one or two illustrations like the one above would suﬃce. If, on
the other hand, the intention were to enable linguists who do not speak the lan-
guage to do linguistic analyses of it with the aid of such presentation, then one
must insist that such assistance would not be in the service of good linguistic prac-
tice. I believe that as with English, French, German, Japanese, or Russian, whoever
would claim expertise in the culture’s literary texts, and the competence to carry
out linguistic analyses of them, should have a sound knowledge of the language.
A scholar lacking the requisite language tool should collaborate with another who
isadequately equipped. Adherence to such a requirement would reduce the inci-
dence of such texts as Ryszard Pachocinski’sProverbsofAfrica, which suﬀers from
the author’s lack of knowledge of the languages concerned and therefore consti-
tutes a disservice both to the cultures and to any nonspeaker of the language(s)
who might take the book as a reliable resource.
The Yoruba language is quite supple in its structure, permitting, for example,
what one might describe as a modiﬁed shorthand in the conveyance of meaning. I
refer to the possibility of eliding certain (auxiliary) syntactic elements from a sen-
tence structure, elements that nonetheless continue to be understood and whose
omission does not aﬀect the semantic integrity of the statement. One set of prov-
erbs that proves quite interesting and challenging in this regard has as their sub-
jects noun clauses that are made up of the pronounẸni(Person), followed by an
adjective clause comprising a relative pronoun, an appositive pronoun referring
back to the initial pronoun, a subjunctive, and, lastly, the deﬁning (or delimiting)
quality. The following example clariﬁes what I mean:
Ẹnitíóbáńjẹláb/eacutedotbelow-ẹJ/eacutedotbelowg/eacutedotbelowd/eacutedotbelow
NíńpèénÍgiÀràbà
Introduction 31


--- PAGE 45 ---
It translates, literally, as
Person that he or she happens to customarily eat under Jẹgẹdẹ
Is the person who calls him a silk-cotton tree,
and the entire ﬁrst line constitutes the subject. Yoruba construction permits the
omission of some orall of the elements betweenẸniand ńjẹ(customarilyeat) with-
out detracting from the completeness of the message. We could thus haveẸníbá
ńjẹláb/eacutedotbelow-ẹJ/eacutedotbelowg/eacutedotbelowd/eacutedotbelow...or Ẹnitóbáńjẹláb/eacutedotbelow-ẹJ/eacutedotbelowg/eacutedotbelowd/eacutedotbelow...or evenẸníńjẹláb/eacutedotbelow-ẹJ/eacutedotbelowg/eacutedotbelowd/eacutedotbelow
... The form in which I have entered such a proverb (which depends on the form
in which it occurs most frequently in speech) aﬀects its placement in my alpha-
betization scheme (explained below).
Orthography
I have departed from some current practices not to be contrary but in order to
live up to the expectation that tone marks will reliably guide the reader to the
correct pronunciation of the written text. Therefore, I have chosen to include the
tone that indicates a genitival relationship between two nouns, for examplebàbá-a
Wálé(Wálé’s father or, more appropriately, father-of Wálé), where the midtone
astands in place of the elided but understood midtoneti(of). The ﬁnal vowel of
the substantive word (in this casebàbá,father) is always reduplicated and always
assigned the midtone of the elided word, regardless of its original tone and re-
gardless of the initial tone of the cognate (in this caseWálé). Thus
ọk/oacutedotbelow-ọwa[our hoe]
ọkọ-ọwa [our husband]
ọk/ogravedotbelow-ọwa[our vehicle]
In other instances where the tone of an elided word is retained to indicate its
graphical absence but understood presence (usually in the reduplication of the
preceding vowel), I have continued the practice of using a hyphen between the
original vowel and its reduplication. The tone of the reduplicated vowel is always
high, regardless of the tone of the original vowel, because the reduplication indi-
cates the elision of a high-toned pronounó(he, she, or it). Thus
ọk/oacutedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowlọ[the hoe (it) went]
ọkọ-/oacutedotbelowlọ[the husband (he) went]
ọk/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowlọ[the vehicle (it) went]
The pronoun óis elided, but its tone is assimilated into the following verb. Note,
though, that in the case of ọk/oacutedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowlọ,because the original vowel already carries a
high tone, it is usually not reduplicated in speech but simply rendered asọk/oacutedotbelowlọ.
In rapid speech ‘‘the husband went’’ would also be rendered asọk/oacutedotbelowlọ,making a
32 introduction


--- PAGE 46 ---
possible ambiguity (‘‘the husband went’’or‘‘the hoe went’’), which is however re-
solved by the context and common sense.
The use of a hyphen in cases of reduplicated vowels has the added advantage of
reducing the possibility of confusion in cases of nasalized vowels. Because in writ-
i n gs u c hav o w e l ,a nnis attached to it, its reduplication could result in confusion
for the reader if the hyphen were left out. For example, in the case of agb/ogravedotbelown-/oacutedotbelown
kún(the basket [it] was full), simply writing agb/ogravedotbelown/oacutedotbelownkúnwould leave a reader
wondering what the word agb/ogravedotbelown/oacutedotbelownwas or meant. Where the reduplicated vowel
stands for a direct object, though, I have not connected the vowels with a hyphen:
for example,Akìídáj/oacutedotbelowOròkáy/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelow(One does not set the date for anOròrite and
then ignore it). I have also used a hyphen to separate the two syllables in a diph-
thong if it is nasalized, as in/ogravedotbelowf/oacutedotbelown-/ogravedotbelown(house rat). In speech, especially rapid speech,
when the verb has a high tone, its ﬁnal sound and the mid-tone extension rep-
resenting the direct object come together to form a diphthong, a glide from high
to midtone. Most often, indeed, the high part becomes completely elided, leaving
only the midtone. Thus,Bíobáńgb/oacutedotbelowGbée!Gbè!Gbée!eventually becomes Bío
báńgb/oacutedotbelowGbe!Gbè!Gbe!
Furthermore, I have preferred to indicate the pronunciation in cases where the
future auxiliary yó(will, shall) occurs—in other words, to indicate the associated
low tone by incorporating it in the main verb, which assimilates and retains the
tone: thus, yójàáde (will emerge) rather than yóòjáde. The same is true of the
negative máas in májòó (not dance), which others would render asmáàjó or (in
Ayo Bamgbose’s orthography)májó. I have maintained that practice in all cases
where a high-toned proposition (such assí,meaning ‘‘to’’ or ‘‘into’’ or ‘‘toward’’)
is followed by a low-toned object (likeìlú,meaning ‘‘town’’), in which case I have
written sílùúrather than s/iacuteigravelúor sí.lú.
6
I have also departed from the more or less standard practice of spelling the Yor-
uba word for ‘‘person’’ or ‘‘human being’’ asènìà(alternatively ènìyàn). My pref-
erence is èèyàn,which I believe to be more accurate from the standpoint of both
etymology and semantics.The word incorporates the belief that each human being
on the verge of incarnation kneels before the Creator and chooses what path he
or she will pursue in life. The path, or fate, isà-kúnl/egravedotbelow-yàn(‘‘what one chooses on
one’s knees,’’ or ‘‘what one kneels to choose’’). Thus, the choosing agent isèè-yàn
(‘‘one who chooses’’).The Yoruba speaker knows that in pronouncing the word the
nasalization begins at the point of sounding they,almost as though one were say-
ing èè-nyàn.The original orthographers, not thinking of etymology, based their
orthography on sound. (Note that inènìàthe ﬁnal vowel would be nasalized be-
cause of the eﬀect of the precedingnsound, unless the speaker made a deliberate
(and I would say unnatural) eﬀort otherwise.The same mistaken process led to the
spellings aiyéinstead of ayé(world) and ẹiyẹinstead of ẹyẹ(bird), both of which
Ih a v ec o r r e c t e d .
Furthermore, my rendering of the nasalized vowels diﬀers from what some
writers of Yoruba would prefer in such words as the place nameÌbàdànand such
nouns as iyán(pounded yam), /ogravedotbelownà(path), itàn(story), and ọkàn(heart). Some
Introduction 33


--- PAGE 47 ---
writers would prefer Ìbàd/ogravedotbelown,iy/oacutedotbelown,/ogravedotbelown/ogravedotbelow,it/ogravedotbelown,and ọk/ogravedotbelown.As there is no uniformity
in pronunciation across Yorubaland, the choice poses no diﬃculty.
Finally, in those cases where a proverb employs a characteristic statement to
stand for a character, I have hyphenated the entire statement (e.g., 3025) or, alter-
natively, placed it within quotation marks (e.g., 433) or sometimes both (23).
ClassiﬁcationScheme
In his introduction toTheYoruba:History,Culture,andLanguage, the Yoruba his-
torian and scholar J. Adebọwale Atanda testiﬁes that the basic motivating force for
the Yoruba is the desire to have a good life. It is why they worshipòrìṣà(divini-
ties) and why, if oneòrìṣàfails to deliver, the people turn away from that divinity.
‘‘Hence the saying,’’ he says, ‘‘Òrìṣà,bíoòlegbèmí,ṣemíbíotibámi (Òrìṣà,
if you cannot improve my lot, do not worsen it).’’ He continues, ‘‘But it must be
added that a seeming rebellion against anòrìṣàdid not mean abandoning religion.
It meant turning to anotheròrìṣà,another agent, to seek the good’’ (24; diacritics
added). Roland Hallgren, writing about the Yoruba a few years earlier, had given
his study of their traditional religious culture the titleTheGoodThingsinLife, ex-
plaining that for the Yoruba ‘‘the desire for ‘the good things in life’ is sanctioned
not only by traditional religion but also by the entire culture’’ (13). Indeed, one of
the comments one hears the Yoruba make about any person who has lived a good
life is Ayéyẹ/eacutedotbelow(‘‘Life suited him or her well’’), and one of their wishes for a per-
son to whom they are well disposed is Ayéáyẹ/eacutedotbelow(‘‘Life will suit you well’’). The
underlying, somewhat Calvinistic world view holds that if the gods favor a person,
the evidence will be manifest inthislife in the guise of the person’s access to such
good things as wealth—especially wealth in children, relatives, people (friends),
and the like—as well as health, a good reputation, and so forth. Proverbs, being
designed in one way or another to aid people in negotiating the sometimes tricky
path through life, would then presumably be concerned also in one way or another
with the conditions for the enjoyment of a good life.
Furthermore, the reduction of the concept ‘‘wealth’’ to an abundance of people
around one, as inẸnitíòlówóaléèyà n... (‘‘Whoever lacks money should have
p e o p l e... ’ ’ ) ,o rt h ee q u a t i o no fw e a l t h( i nc l o t h i n g )w i t habundance of children,
as in Ọmọlaṣọ (‘‘Children are garments’’), lends credence to the claim that the
maintenance of good relations is of crucial importance in Yoruba social life. That
includes relations with one’s immediate family, with other members of the com-
munity, with total strangers, with the poorand the destitute, with fauna, with ﬂora,
with nature itself, with the supernatural, and not least with the self.
By relations with the self (or oneself) I mean those that constitute ‘‘self-care,’’
encompassing such things as self-knowledge, comportment, and habits—quali-
ties, that is, that reﬂect on the self but do not necessarily involve or aﬀect others.
An example is the import of the proverbEégúntójótíkòtàpá,àbùkùara/egravedotbelow(‘‘The
masquerader that dances and does not kick up his legs, the disgrace is his [alone]’’).
Quite diﬀerent are habits that aﬀect (or reﬂect on) oneself in the ﬁrst instance
but alsocause oﬀense to others, as in the sense of the proverbÀìﬁnipeni,àìfèèyàn-
34 introduction


--- PAGE 48 ---
pèèyàn,laráoko-óﬁńsánìbàǹt/eacutedotbeloww/ogravedotbelowlú(‘‘A lack of proper regard for others, a lack
of proper regard for people, is what emboldens the country bumpkin to venture
into town clad only in a loincloth’’).
It was in accordance with the foregoing considerations that I arrived at my clas-
siﬁcation categories by posing the question ‘‘What are the conditions for having
a good life?’’ I came up with three answers:
O n em u s tb eag o o dp e r s o n ,o rb ec o n s i d e r e dag o o dp e r s o n .
One must be fortunate.
One must have good relationships.
Having determined those factors, I was faced with the reality that certain condi-
tions in life fall outside the realm of possible human control and are unaﬀected
by human qualities, judgment, actions, or relationships. The human condition
itself is an example. I make a distinction here between things existential and the
accident of fortune; proverbs concerned with the latter occupy a category of their
own. Furthermore, there are such proverbs that deal with human rights and re-
sponsibilities which would not ﬁt in the other groupings and therefore have a
separate one to themselves. My concluding category comprises a large number of
sayings that express truisms about Life, the World, Human Experience, and so
forth.
My ﬁnal groupings are therefore as follows:
Category 1 is devoted to the qualities that make a good person: caution, hon-
esty, moderation, patience, perspicaciousness, prudence, reasonableness, reli-
ability, resilience, sagacity/wisdom, savoir faire (worldly wisdom), self-control,
self-knowledge, self-respect, and thoughtfulness.
Category 2 encompasses those things that conduce to the good life, material and
otherwise: happiness, health, wealth, longevity, and good name (good repute).
Category 3 is made up of relational observations and prescriptions, those things
that conduce to good relations, and things to do, to mind, and so forth: behav-
ioral do’s and don’ts regarding the divine and the Supernatural, the community
in general, the family, friends, other people and elders, strangers, the less for-
tunate, and nature (ﬂora and fauna).
Category 4 embraces statements (and observations) on human nature, existen-
tial, congenital, and the like: dependence on fate (for example), the ﬁnitude of
human life, the opacity of the future.
Category 5 comprises observations on rights and responsibilities: the right to
life, to be oneself, to human dignity, to patrimony, and to property; included
also are statements on the responsibilities that go with rights as well as the be-
lief in just deserts.
Introduction 35


--- PAGE 49 ---
Category 6 is the catchall home for the rest, or miscellaneous: general com-
ments and truisms about life, the world, human behavior, and the like.
These six categories constitute the collection. Each of Parts 1 through 5 com-
prises several sections or chapters (Part 6 has only one), within each of which the
proverbs appear in alphabetical order. (I use the word-by-word alphabetization
system and treat a hyphenated element as a single word. Note, however, that the
Yoruba alphabet diﬀers from the English in omitting C, Q, V, X, and Z but adding
Gb (one letter), Ẹ, Ọ, and Ṣ. The full sequence including upper and lower case is
a sf o l l o w s :Aa ,Bb ,Dd ,Ee ,Ẹẹ ,Ff ,Gg ,G bg b ,Hh ,Ii ,Jj ,Kk ,Ll ,Mm ,Nn ,
Oo ,Ọọ ,Pp ,Rr ,Ss ,Ṣṣ ,Tt ,Uu ,Ww ,Yy . )
The problem of classiﬁcation is not an easy one to resolve, as other proverb
scholars have pointed out. I have always argued that it is something of a presump-
tion to classify proverbs according to usage—that is, according to the situations
in which they may be applied or the values they address—because proverbs are
multivalent and are available for diverse usages, depending upon the acumen and
creativity of the user. Classiﬁcation on the basis of usage involves making a judg-
ment that a particular proverb is available for one particular application out of
several possibilities. Yet since the aim of classiﬁcation is to establish discrete cate-
gories, with as little overlap as possible, assigning a proverb to multiple usages
would undermine that aim.
Having pointed out the absurdity of classifying only alphabetically, Hulme
shows that even classiﬁcation by subject, though it has advantages, is not without
diﬃculties, for ‘‘we very soon ﬁnd that we come to something that declines to be
thus pigeon-holed,’’ while ‘‘others...m i g h tw i t halmost equal appropriateness
ﬁnd a home under three or four headings’’ (51). Indeed, it is possible, even likely,
given that some proverbs can be (and are) employed in diﬀerent situations, for
one to place a proverb one way one day and another way the next day. Thus, be-
cause I completed the classiﬁcation not at one sitting but over a period of several
months, there is bound to be some inconsistency in my assignment. An entry that
could have been classiﬁed under ‘‘relationships’’ at one sitting could quite conceiv-
ably have wound up under ‘‘reasonableness’’ at another. I oﬀer as an instance the
proverb ‘‘Múwá!Múwá!’’lapáẹyẹléńké (‘‘‘Bring! Bring!’ is the cry of the pigeon’s
wings’’). It is part of a man’s complaint about the incessant demands of his girl-
friend—a rather inconsiderate girlfriend, or a rather greedy girlfriend, or a rather
unreciprocative girlfriend. At the ﬁrst pass (during the process of translating and
explaining), the implied lack of consideration was what struck me; later (at the
classiﬁcation stage), it was the lack of reciprocation—the woman’s constant taking
without ever giving.A sIh a v ej u s ti n d i c a t e da b o v e ,Ic o u l da l s oh a v ec l a s s i ﬁ e di t
under ‘‘greed.’’
I readily concede that my scheme is open to legitimate objections. To some ex-
tent the headings are quite arbitrary. I could have devised a very diﬀerent scheme
with diﬀerent rubrics, and I suspect that other scholars could come up with alter-
natives that might be better than mine. It would be quite easy, and free of contro-
versy, for example, to group proverbs according to the real-life objects they em-
36 introduction


--- PAGE 50 ---
ploy as the bases for their declarations or observations, the experiential sources
of their metaphorical constructions: does a proverb base its meaning on analogy
to human relations, or on natural phenomena, or on observed animal behavior,
o r...?I would not be unduly perturbed, therefore, if someone else chose to take
up that task; indeed, I would embrace the prospect. One of my major intentions
in compiling this treasury has always been to make it available for a variety of
uses, not least as data for legitimate scholarly investigations and manipulations.
Suggestions by other scholars with regard to explication, usage, and classiﬁcation
diﬀerent from mine would be consistent with that intention.
Duplications
Readers will ﬁnd that I have sometimes tagged proverbs as variants of other prov-
erbs often listed in quite diﬀerent sections. The seeming discrepancy is actually
no discrepancy at all, because, as I have sought to stress, any given proverb can be
invested by its user with values and meanings that diﬀer from occasion to occa-
sion. That ﬂexibility also explains why other users might oﬀer explications diﬀer-
ent from the ones I have provided for some of these proverbs.
The same applicability to diﬀerent occasions and instances may also some-
what excuse my inadvertent repetitions. Although I have made an eﬀort to avoid
duplications—as distinct from variants—of proverbs, I am certain that I have not
been successful in eliminating them all. One problem has been the diﬃculty of
remembering so many sayings and recognizing an entry toward the end of the
collection as a duplicate of something near the beginning. This problem will dis-
appear, though, with the envisaged digitization of the entire corpus as a searchable
electronic document. The Electronic Text Center of the University of Nebraska–
Lincoln has completed a pilot project that involved the digitization of about two
thousand of the proverbs, thus demonstrating the feasibility of converting the en-
tire collection to an electronic format publishable on the Internet (see http://libr
.unl.edu:2000/yoruba). If the required funding materializes, interested scholars
and users will be able to access the entire collection on the World Wide Web.
Notes
1. Brunvand is, of course, following Archer Taylor, whose examples he borrowed and who
includes others such as ‘‘Once in a blue moon,’’ ‘‘As blue as the sky,’’ and ‘‘You can never tell’’
(5–6) within his rather liberal conception of the proverb. Wolfgang Mieder, whose monu-
mental EncyclopediaofWorldProverbs lists 18,520 entries, seems to support the view that
a proverb is a sentence, inasmuch as practically all his examples are complete sentences,
with rare exceptions such as ‘‘Much ado about nothing’’ (his 67), ‘‘Many kinsfolk and a few
friends’’ (8,654), and ‘‘Slow and sure’’ (14,643).
2. AmericanHeritageCollegeDictionary deﬁnes proverbas ‘‘a short pithy saying that ex-
presses a basic truth or practical precept’’; apothegmas ‘‘a terse, witty, instructive saying;
a maxim’’;maximas ‘‘a succinct formulation of a fundamental principle, general truth, or
rule of conduct’’; andaphorismas ‘‘a terse statement of a truth or opinion; an adage,’’ and
Introduction 37


--- PAGE 51 ---
‘‘a brief statement of a principle.’’ Evidently, elaborations on the diﬀerences among what
these various words—adage, aphorism, apothegm, maxim, proverb—designate may be no
more than intellectual hairsplitting.
3. The reference is presumably to Elempe, a ﬁfteenth-century king of the Nupe people. Yor-
uba historians identify him as the maternal grandfather of Ṣàngó, to whose court he at-
tempted to retire after his disgrace and ﬂight from /Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow (Hodgkin 31, 110).
4. Wolfgang Mieder identiﬁes ‘‘Two heads are better than one’’ as an English proverb
(1986:221), whereas G. L. Apperson credits it to Homer in theIliad,10.224 (655).
5. This observation is not at variance with Rowland Abiodun’s argument that the Yoruba
sometimes acknowledge and celebrate the authorship of works of art. He deals with sculp-
tors mainly, a form of art that is quite visible and whose practice is often a lineage profes-
sion, but he also acknowledges the fact of anonymity, with reasons, even in this case.
6. For a discussion of assimilated tones in Yoruba, see Bamgbose, ‘‘Assimilated,’’ 1–13.
38 introduction


--- PAGE 52 ---
The Good Person
one


--- PAGE 53 ---



--- PAGE 54 ---
On humility, self-control, self-knowledge,
self-respect, and self-restraint
A
1. Adigàárìsíl/egravedotbelowewúr/eacutedotbelowńyọjú;ẹrùìranr/egravedotbelowni?
We prepare the saddle, and the goat presents
itself; is it a burden for the lineage of goats?
(Goats that know their place do not oﬀer
their backs to be saddled. This is a variant
of 4.)
2. Aﬁ/oacutedotbelowjọbaòńṣàwúre;of/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowjẹỌl/oacutedotbelowrunni?
Y o uh a v eb e e nc r o w n e dak i n g ,a n dy e t
you make good-luck charms; would you
be crowned God? (Being crowned a king is
about the best fortune a mortal could hope
for.)
3. AﬁjógbaAwà;afìjàgbaAwà;b íaòbájó,
bíaòbájà,bíabátigbaAwà,kòtánbí?
By dancing we take possession of Awà [a
woman’s name]; through ﬁghting we take
possession of Awà; if we neither dance nor
ﬁght but take possession of Awà anyway, is
the result not the same? (Why make a huge
production of a matter that is easily taken
care of?)
4. Agbégàárìọmọewúr/eacutedotbelowńrojú;kìíṣeẹrù
àgùntàn.
We lift a saddle and the goat scowls; it is no
burden for a sheep. (The goat has no cause
to scowl, because no one will condescend to
ride it anyway. This is a variant of 1.)
5. Akìíbáọbapàlàkíọk/oacutedotbelowọbamáṣàn-ánni
l/eacutedotbelows/egravedotbelow.
One does not share a farm boundary with
a king without getting one’s feet gashed by
the king’s hoe. (One should be cautious in
dealing with people in authority. Compare
1354.)
6. Akìíb/egravedotbelowrùikúb/egravedotbelowrùàrùnkáníkíọmọókú
sinni.
One does not so fear death and disease that
one asks that one’s child die before one.
(One should not be more concerned with
saving oneself than with saving one’s depen-
dents.)
7. Akìíbínúààtànkádal/egravedotbelowsígb/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelow.
One does not get angry with the rubbish
dump and discard one’s rubbish into the
bush. (One should not act in unreasonable
and harmful ways because of anger.)
8. Akìíbínúoríkáﬁfìlàdéìbàdí.
One does not get angry with one’s head and
therefore use one’s cap to cover one’s but-
tocks. (Do not cut oﬀ your nose to spite
your face.)
9. Akìíbọòrìṣàlójú/ogravedotbelowf/oacutedotbelown-/ogravedotbelown;bóbádal/eacutedotbelowa
máatúpẹpẹ.
One does not sacriﬁce to a god in the pres-
ence of a house rat; otherwise, when night
falls it invades the rafter shelves. (Do not do
things that might constitute temptation to
others.)


--- PAGE 55 ---
10. Akìídàgbàmálàáyà;ibiayébábánilà
ńjẹ/eacutedotbelow.
One does not become an adult and yet lack
courage; one lives life as it ﬁnds one. (One
should do what is ﬁtting for one’s station in
life.)
11. Akìídáọw/oacutedotbelowléohuntíaòlègbé.
One does not lay hands on a load one can-
not lift. (One should not overreach.)
12. Akìídáj/oacutedotbeloworòkáy/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelow.
One does not set the day for anoròrite and
then ignore it. (One must not let important
matters slide.)
13. Akìídák/eacutedotbelowkáṣìwí;akìíwòsùn-ùnká
dáràn.
One does not keep quiet and yet misspeak;
one does not silently contemplate the world
and yet get into trouble. (A careful and
cautious person seldom gets into trouble.)
14. AkìídéMàr/oacutedotbelowk/oacutedotbelowsinẹl/eacutedotbelowj/oacutedotbelow.
One does not arrive at Màr/oacutedotbelowk/oacutedotbelow ahead of
the litigant.
1 (One should not take charge of
other people’s business.)
15. Akìíﬁg bèsès/oacutedotbelowrùnṣ/ogravedotbelowṣ/oacutedotbelow.
One does not carry debt around one’s neck
and live like a dandy. (One should dis-
charge one’s obligations before indulging in
extravagance.)
16. Akìíﬁìkaroetí,káﬁroimú,káwátún
ﬁtaehín.
One does not use one’s ﬁnger to clean one’s
ear passages, use it to pick one’s nose, and
then use it to pick one’s teeth. (One should
always behave with decorum.)
17. AkìíﬁoríwéoríiMo kúṣiré;bíMokúkú
láàár/ogravedotbelowajílál/eacutedotbelow.
1. Màr/oacutedotbelowk/oacutedotbelow is a place-name and the site of a court.
One does not liken one’s fortune to Mokú-
ṣiré’s; if Mokú dies in the morning, he res-
urrects at night.
2 (Never emulate people who
know tricks you don’t.)
18. Akìíﬁpàtàkìb/eacutedotbelowèlùb/oacutedotbelow;ẹníbáníṣuló
ḿb/eacutedotbelowẹ.
One does not come by yam ﬂour because
of one’s importance; only people who have
yams can make yam ﬂour. (One cannot eat
importance.)
19. Akìíﬁnijoyèàwòdìkámálègbádìẹ.
One cannot be given the title ‘‘eagle’’ and
yet be incapable of snatching chickens. (One
should be able to live up to expectations.)
20. Akìígbésàráàkọjá-am/oacutedotbelowṣáláṣí.
One does not carry alms beyond the mosque.
(Excess brings disgrace.)
21. Akìígb/oacutedotbelow‘‘Lùú’’l/eacutedotbelownuàgbà.
One never hears ‘‘Beat him or her up’’ in the
mouth of an elder. (Elders resolve disputes;
they do not goad disputants on.)
22. Akìígb/oacutedotbelownjuẹnitíamáadÍfáfún.
One cannot be wiser than the person for
whom one will consult the Ifá oracle.
3 (It is
better to listen to the supplicant rather than
put words in his or her mouth. Compare the
two following entries.)
23. Akìígb/oacutedotbelowntóBáyìí-ni-ngó-ṣe-ǹkan-àn-
mi.
One cannot be as wise as ‘‘Thus-will-I-do-
my-thing.’’ (Never impose your preferences
2. The name Mokúṣiré means ‘‘I play at dying.’’
3. Ifá, the Yoruba divination system, is based on
an extensive library (the Ifá corpus) of case histories,
precedents, and remedies. It comprises sixteen major
chapters (Odù), each divided into sixteen subchapters
(omoOdù, the children ofOdù).
42 the good person


--- PAGE 56 ---
on other people in their own aﬀairs. Com-
pare the following two entries.)
24. Akìígb/oacutedotbelowntó‘‘Èmi-lóni-í.’’
One cannot be as wise as ‘‘I-am-the-owner.’’
(One should not presume to know as much
about a thing as the owner of it. Compare
the foregoing and following entries.)
25. Akìígb/oacutedotbelowntóẹnitíńtannijẹ.
One is never as wise as the person deceiving
one. (The deceiver always has the advantage
of the dupe. Compare the preceding two
entries.)
26. Akìíjayéọbakáṣusára.
One does not so luxuriate in one’s majesty
that one shits on oneself. (Lack of modera-
tion and decorum will bring disgrace to even
the most elevated person.)
27. Akìíjẹoyèẹnu/ogravedotbelownàkal/eacutedotbelow.
One does not bear the title of gatekeeper
even until nighttime. (As one advances in
age, so should one’s responsibilities advance
in gravity and importance.)
28. Akìíkóèléṣ/egravedotbelowṣ/oacutedotbelow.
One does not live fashionably on borrowed
money. (Live within your means.)
29. Akìíkórira/ogravedotbelowf/oacutedotbelown-/ogravedotbelownkáﬁnábọahéré.
One does not so hate the bush rat that one
sets one’s farm hut alight. (One should
not destroy oneself simply to get at one’s
enemy.)
30. Akìík/oacutedotbelowàgbàlagbàpébóbárúnkórún.
One does not teach an elder that what has
been crushed should remain crushed. (An
elder should know when a matter should
end.)
31. Akìíkọẹl/eacutedotbelowṣinkátúnlọf/eacutedotbelowẹl/eacutedotbelows/egravedotbelow.
One does not divorce a horse rider and
go marry a pedestrian. (One should ever
progress, never regress.)
32. Akìíléèkútéiléẹnikáfọw/oacutedotbelowṣ/eacutedotbelow.
One does not shoo the mouse in one’s house
and break one’s hand. (One should be safe
from hazards in one’s own home.)
33. Akìím/oacutedotbelowegbòfúnraẹnikásunkún.
One does not treat one’s own sore and yet
cry from the pain. (One should know one’s
own pain threshold.)
34. AkìímọìyáÒjójuÒjólọ.
One does not presume to know Òjó’s
mother better than Òjó himself does. (Never
claim to know a thing better than the people
closest to it. Compare the next entry.)
35. Akìímọ/ogravedotbelownàọgbàjuọl/oacutedotbelowgbàlọ;ẹnímúni
wálàńt/egravedotbelowlé.
Do not presume to know the way to or
around a garden better than the owner of
the garden; always follow the person who
brought you. (Never presume to have a
better knowledge of a matter than has the
person most intimately involved. Compare
the preceding entry.)
36. Akìím/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowròbíẹl/eacutedotbelowj/oacutedotbelow.
One never knows how to present it like the
owner of the case. (No one can know better
than the person himself or herself where it
hurts most and what relief is needed.)
37. Akìímúokol/oacutedotbelownàkáṣèm/eacutedotbelowl/eacutedotbelow;tajátẹranní
ḿbúni.
One does not farm a plot by the road and
neglect its care; every dog and goat would
ridicule one. (Never expose yourself to insult
by behaving badly in public view.)
38. Akìíníagbárakékeréṣeèkejì.
One does not oﬀer to second a combatant
in spite of one’s negligible strength. (Never
Onhumility 43


--- PAGE 57 ---
attempt more than you have the power to
accomplish.)
39. Akìíní/ogravedotbelowkánjúwàkám/ogravedotbelow;aráiléẹniní
ńsọfúnni.
One does not know that one has covet-
ousness; it is one’s kin who so inform one.
(Often, only those close to one can recognize
and point out one’s ﬂaws.)
40. Akìípeìyàwókókanalárẹnà.
One does not summon the wife and so in-
volve the go-between. (People should mind
their own business.)
41. Akìípenilákọẹrankáṣoríbòró.
One does not enjoy the designation ‘‘He
Goat’’ and yet sport a smooth [hornless]
head. (A person should live up to his or her
billing.)
42. Akìíp/egravedotbelowlú/ogravedotbelowbọjáko.
One does not join a monkey in roaming the
bush. (Do not join others in their madness.)
43. Akìíṣíwájúẹl/eacutedotbelowè/eacutedotbelowd/eacutedotbelow.
One does not conclude for the person who
says, ‘‘/Egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowd/eacutedotbelow...’’ (Never presume to know
what someone else intends to say.)
4
44. Akìíyàgòfúnẹl/eacutedotbelowṣinàná.
One does not get out of the way for a per-
son who rode a horse yesterday. (Past glory
avails little in the present.)
45. Akìíyàgòfún‘‘Mogunẹṣinrío!’’
One does not get out of the way for ‘‘I used
to ride a horse!’’ (People should not expect
to live on past glory. The preceding entry is
a variant.)
4. In Yoruba numeration/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowd/eacutedotbelow...indicates a cer-
tain amount (or ﬁgure) ‘‘less than... ’ ’ :/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowdógún,for
instance, is ﬁfteen (ﬁve less than twenty);/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowd/eacutedotbelowgb/egravedotbelowrinis
seven hundred (one hundred less than eight hundred).
46. Aléṣusíl/egravedotbelowpáńd/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowjálùú;èlémbénì?
We group yams in lots, and the fruit of the
sausage tree drops among them; does it
count as complement to a lot, or as gratuity?
(The fruit might look something like a yam,
but it does not belong with yams.)
47. Àḿbánimúadìẹàńforúnkúnbó;b/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow
bábaòkókó ,aònífúnal ádìẹ?
One helps to catch a chicken and scrapes
one’s knees; having laid hands on the chick,
will one not hand it over to the owner? (One
should not be overzealous in helping others,
especially when no beneﬁt will accrue to one
from the eﬀort.)
48. Àḿb/egravedotbelowrùalájá,ajáṣebíòunlàḿb/egravedotbelowrù.
One shows deference to the dog’s owner,
and the dog thinks the deference is to it.
5
(A person who has a powerful patron mis-
takenly believes that the respect he enjoys
from others is due to his or her own quali-
ties, whereas it is reﬂected from the patron.)
49. Àńgéel/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow,óḿbọòrùka.
His hand is being severed, yet he is slip-
ping on a ring. (The person has been judged
undeserving of a hand; it is an aﬀront, there-
fore, for him or her to adorn the ﬁngers—an
indication of heedlessness.)
50. Aníkáwáẹnitól/eacutedotbelowhìnkáfọmọfún,abuké
níòunrèé;tigànnàkù/egravedotbelowhìn-inr/egravedotbelowlàńwí?
One seeks a person with a prominent back
as suitor for one’s daughter, and the hump-
back presents himself; who spoke of pro-
truding back? (Since the expression that
translates as ‘‘prominent back’’ is an idiom
meaning a proud pedigree. the humpback
makes a rather embarrassing mistake. Com-
pare 55.)
5. In Yoruba usage one would not apply personal
pronouns to animals, even though Yoruba pronouns are
not diﬀerentiated by gender.
44 the good person


--- PAGE 58 ---
51. AníTanlúkúòm/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowjó,Tàǹlukúwágbèé
l/eacutedotbelows/egravedotbelow.
People say that Tanlúkú is a poor dancer,
and Tanlùkù comes to his aid. (A person
who is as helpless as the person in trouble
should not oﬀer to rescue him/her.)
6
52. Àńjáìbàǹt/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowhìn,óńjátaráiwájú.
His loincloth is being stripped from behind,
yet he is stripping those of the people ahead
of him. (Attacks on him do not stop him
from belaboring his enemies.)
7
53. Àńs/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowolè,aboyúnńdáhùn;odiidièèyàn
lógbépam/oacutedotbelow.
We speak of stealing, and a pregnant woman
intervenes; she herself is concealing a whole
person. (Her condition makes her guilty of
concealment.)
54. ÀńsunkúnAwúgbó,Awúgbóòsunkún
ara-a/egravedotbelow.
We lament Awúgbó’s plight; Awúgbó does
not lament his own plight. (The person the
proverb is aimed at is too daft to realize his
or her sorry plight.)
55. Àńwáẹnitíaófọmọfún,olòṣì ńyọjú.
We seek a person to give a child to [in mar-
riage], and a worthless person presents him-
self. (People should know their place and
not overrate themselves. This is a variant
of 50.)
56. Àńw/oacutedotbelownààtiﬁaṣiwèrèsíl/egravedotbelow,óníbíabádé
òkèodòkádúródeòun.
People are scheming to shake an imbecile
6. As the names suggest, the one is a virtual clone of
the other; the aid the one oﬀers will not make the other
a n yb e t t e ra sad a n c e r .
7. The proverb recalls theoríkì( p r a i s ep o e m )o f
Ògèdè/mgravegbé, the nineteenth-century Ìjèṣà warrior,
which says, Àńléeb/ogravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowhìn,óńléaráiwájúlọ(‘‘He is
being pursued from behind, and yet he is in pursuit of
people in front’’).
from their company, and he asks that they
wait for him on reaching the bank of the
river. (If people are seeking ways of getting
rid of a person, that person should not lay
down his conditions for remaining with
them.)
57. Aòlóbìnrinàńdáoóy/oacutedotbelowsí;bíabádáoóy/oacutedotbelow
síewúr/eacutedotbelowniyójẹ/eacutedotbelow.
Without having a wife, a person sparesoóy/oacutedotbelow
8
to grow; if it ﬂourishes, it is destined to be
food for goats. (The vegetable is used in
stews, and stews are for wives to cook.)
58. AòmọohuntíDárò-óníkótówípéolè-é
kóòun.
One does not know what Dárò owned before
he claimed to have been robbed. (The poor
person conveniently blames his poverty on
thieves. This is a variant of 410.)
59. Aòmọohuntíeléwé-egbégbéńtàkótó
sọpéọjàòtà.
One does not know what the seller ofgbégbé
leaves was selling before she started com-
plaining about the slow market. (The seller
of goods nobody wants blames her fortune
on the slow market.
9 This is a variant of 411.)
60. Apè/oacutedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowmọerín-màgbọnòńy/ogravedotbelow;ìwọ
pàápàálómìí?
You are described as the child of the ele-
phant that swallows coconuts, and you
rejoice; are you the one who swallows coco-
nuts? (The description honors the father,
not the person being addressed.)
61. Aríèyírínitonílé;aòríèyírínitàlejò;
bónílébáníkájẹ/eacutedotbelowtán,àlejòaníkájẹ/eacutedotbelowkù.
8. Corcchorusolitorius, or Jew’s Mallow (Tiliaceae);
see Abraham 533.
9. Gbégbéleaves are used for making charms that
enable the user to transport himself instantly over long
distances.
Onhumility 45


--- PAGE 59 ---
‘‘Its like has been seen before’’ is what the
host says; ‘‘No one has ever seen its like be-
fore’’ is what the guest says; if the host says
that we should empty the plate, the guest
should argue for leaving a little. (A host
might minimize his hospitality, but the guest
should praise it; if the host is lavish, the
guest should not be greedy.)
62. Arígilókokátóﬁ/ogravedotbelowm/ogravedotbelowgb/eacutedotbelowìlù.
We saw other trees in the bush before we
settled on /ogravedotbelowm/ogravedotbelowfor making drums.
10 (One
should never presume to be the only pos-
sible answer to every challenge.)
11
63. Asìnkútán,alugbáòlọ;óf/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowṣúpóni?
The funeral is over, but the calabash beater
does not take his leave; does he want to in-
h e r i taw i f e ?
12 (This proverb has the same
import as 653.)
64. Aakaògbé/ogravedotbelowdàn;igbóníńgbé.
The hedgehog does not live in the grass-
land, only in the forest. (Certain things are
proper; certain things are not.)
65. Àáyáyóníj/oacutedotbelowkan,óníkákáòunléhín
/ogravedotbelowkánkán.
The colobus monkey ate its ﬁll one day
and asked that its front teeth be knocked
out. (Excessive happiness made the animal
careless.)
66. Aáyánatieèràáṣígun,w/oacutedotbelowníàw/oacutedotbelownńlọ
múadìẹ;àlọlarí,aòráb/ogravedotbelow.
Cockroach and ant make ready for war and
10. Cordiamillenii (Boraginaceae) is used for
making b/egravedotbelow/mgraveb/eacutedotbelowdrums, large drums with a deep sound.
11. Other trees may feel superior to/ogravedotbelowm/ogravedotbelowin other
regards, but they cannot beat it as drum material.
12. A calabash is the dried, cut-oﬀ bottom part
of a gourd, often used as a bowl and sometimes as a
percussion instrument. The calabash beater is some-
one employed to clear evil spirits ahead of the funeral
procession by means of a charm-laden calabash.
say they are oﬀ to capture chicken; we see
their departure but not their return. (Never
forget your limitations. Compare 4714.)
67. Aáyánf/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowgẹṣin;adìẹniògbàfúnun.
The cockroach would ride a horse; it is the
chicken that does not allow. (A cockroach
that stirs in the presence of a chicken is as
good as dead. Compare 68 and 133.)
68. Aáyánf/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowjó;adìẹniòj/eacutedotbelow.
The cockroach would dance; it is the chicken
that does not allow. (This is a variant of the
previous entry. Compare also 133.)
69. Aáyánkìíyánẹs/egravedotbelowerin;èèyànkìíyánẹs/egravedotbelow
irò.
A cockroach does not trip an elephant; a
human being does not trip a chimpanzee.
(One should not take on adversaries one
cannot match.)
70. Àbániikánńdá;ikánòlèmuòkúta.
T h et e r m i t ei so n l ys t r i v i n g ;i tc a nn e v e re a t
a rock. (Though termites may make their
tunnels on a rock, the rock will be safe.)
71. A-báni-gbékìíyáná;a-b/ogravedotbelowrìṣàkìísun
òtútù;ẹying/eacutedotbelowg/eacutedotbelowkìígbéàwùjọ;ilékannáàni
w/oacutedotbelownk/oacutedotbelowfúnàwọnm/eacutedotbelowt/egravedotbelow/egravedotbelowta.
A guest does not warm himself by the ﬁre; a
priest or priestess does not sleep in the cold;
a delicate egg does not live in a crowd; the
same house was built for all three. (Know
yourself and your place.)
13
72. A-bánijẹun-bí-aláìmọra,óbuòkèlèbí
/egravedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelownìyá/egravedotbelow.
He-who-eats-with-one-without-self-restraint
13. All three propositions are similar in indicating
conditions that are inappropriate: that a visitor take
over the seat by the ﬁreplace, that the priest or priestess
be without shelter, or that delicate eggs be crushed
together.
46 the good person


--- PAGE 60 ---
breaks oﬀ morsels like his mother’s senior.
(When eating in company, one should be re-
strained. A man eating with the child of his
younger sister need show no such restraint.)
73. A-bèèrèkìíṣìnà.
He who asks the way does not lose his way.
(One should admit one’s weaknesses. Com-
pare 760.)
74. À-bí-ì-k/oacutedotbelow;à-k/oacutedotbelow-ì-gbà;òdelótińk/oacutedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelown
wálé.
A-child-that-was-never-taught-how-to-
behave, a-child-that-was-taught-but-
refused-to-heed-instruction: it is from out-
side the home that he will learn wisdom.
(Look well to your child’s upbringing.)
75. A-binú-fùfùníńwáoúnjẹfúna-binú-
w/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelow-w/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelow.
A volatile-tempered person secures food for
a mild-tempered person. (Whatever good
fortune might have been meant for the vola-
tile person will wind up in the lot of the
mild-mannered person.)
76. Aboyúnkìíjób/egravedotbelow/mgraveb/eacutedotbelow:a-bodò-ikùn-
k/egravedotbelowr/egravedotbelowb/egravedotbelowt/egravedotbelow.
A pregnant woman does not dance tob/egravedotbelow/mgraveb/eacutedotbelow
music: pendulous-stomached woman. (One
should match one’s actions to one’s circum-
stances.)
14
77. Àb/ogravedotbelowejòkìígbéisà.
Half a snake does not live in a burrow.
(One should act according to one’s circum-
stances.)
78. Abùlàǹgàkìíṣasán:bíyàáòl/oacutedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow,babaa
lówól/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow.
The arrogant person is not arrogant for
14. B/egravedotbelow/mgraveb/eacutedotbelowis a type of music named after the bass
drum that it employs; the dancing to this music is close
to stomping.
nothing; if his mother is not wealthy, his
father must be rich. (There is, or should be,
some basis for one’s strutting.)
79. Abùléra/ogravedotbelowf/oacutedotbelown-/ogravedotbelown:óníọj/oacutedotbelowtíológbò-ótibí
òunòìtí-ìdáaníbáríkà.
Mouse-that-does-not-know-its-place: it
says that since the day the cat delivered [a
baby], it has not gone to oﬀer congratula-
tions. (Never forget your vulnerabilities and
limitations.)
80. Àbúròkìípa/egravedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelownnítàn.
The younger person does not give the older
person history lectures. (One should not
exceed one’s station.)
81. Àbúròrẹńdáṣọfúnọ,on íoòloelékuru;
taníńloalákàrà?
Your junior brother [or sister] buys clothing
for you, and you say you will not wear any-
thing with bean-grits patterns; who has the
right to opt for clothing with a bean-fritter
pattern? (One should act in accordance to
one’s station in life.
15 Compare 318.)
82. A-dá-má-lè-ṣeàdàbàtíńdúnb/egravedotbelow/mgraveb/egravedotbelow.
Start-something-it-cannot-ﬁnish dove
makes bombastic noises. (Bombast often
masks ﬁckleness.)
83. Ad/eacutedotbelowt/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowníòunòlèfúnwàrà,ṣùgb/oacutedotbelownòún
lèyíidànù.
The leper says he may not be able to squeeze
out milk, but he can spill it. (Even feckless
people can cause some damage.)
84. Ad/eacutedotbelowt/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowríwèrè,ókánlùgb/eacutedotbelow.
T h el e p e rs e e sam a dp e r s o na n dd a s h e s
into the bush. (A person who should be
ostracized ostracizes others.)
15. Presumably èkuruis a less desirable meal than
àkàrà,but the beggar cannot (or should not) presume
to exercise a choice.
Onhumility 47


--- PAGE 61 ---
85. Ad/eacutedotbelowt/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelows/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowméjì,ófìkanpur/oacutedotbelow;óní
nígbàtíòúnluọmọòunlábàrá,òúnjáa
léèékánnápàtì.
The leper said two things, one of them being
al i e ;h es a i da f t e rh eh a ds t r u c kh i sc h i l d
w i t hh i sp a l m ,h ea l s op i n c h e dh i ms e v e r e l y
with his nails. (One fools only oneself when
one claims to have done the impossible.)
86. Adìẹfunfunòmọara/egravedotbelowlágbà.
The white chicken does not recognize
itself as an elder. (One should act one’s age
always.)
16
87. Adìẹòbíyọyọkúy/ogravedotbelow.
A chicken does not give birth to a multitude
of chicks and die of the exertion. (Children
should not be the death of their parents.)
17
88. Adì/eacutedotbelowtóṣutíkòt/ogravedotbelow,ara-ar/egravedotbelowlókùsí.
The chicken that shits and does not piss re-
tains the rest in its body. (Self-deprivation
hurts the person concerned, not anyone
else.)
89. Adígb/oacutedotbelownránkúńﬁkúṣeré.
Death-feigning-beetle ﬂirts with death. (If
one persists in ﬂirting with disaster, disaster
is likely to befall one.)
18
90. A-dìtan-m/oacutedotbelowèsúó;óníèkùlùlóbíìyáòun.
The red-ﬂanked duiker, desperate to claim
relationship, says that its mother was born of
a crested duiker. (Never make preposterous
claims of kinship.)
16. White hair is associated with age, and the
chicken’s white feathers compare with white hair. The
chicken, of course, is unaware of the implications of age
among humans.
17. The proverb was obviously suggested by the
usual description of a chicken asọl/oacutedotbelowmọ-yọyọ,mother of
aﬂ o c ko fc h i c k s .
18. The beetle in question plays dead whenever it is
touched.
91. Aditíògb/oacutedotbelow,‘‘Yàgò!’’
The deaf do not hear, ‘‘Make way!’’ (Cau-
tionary words are lost on reckless people.)
92. À-fà-tiirinitìyàwó;bíabáfàátíkòtiiri,
óníohuntóńṣeé.
Resisting-while-being-pulled is the proper
behavior for a bride; if she is pulled and
does not resist, something is the matter with
her. (However eager the bride, she must ap-
pear coy and shy; one should behave with
decorum appropriate to one’s position.)
93. Àﬁohuntíakìítàl/oacutedotbelowjàlẹrúkìíjẹ.
The only thing a slave cannot eat is some-
thing not available in the market. (A slave
h a sn oc h o i c e . )
94. Afínjúníńjẹiwọ;/ogravedotbelowm/ogravedotbelowrànníńjẹobì;
màrí-màjẹníńjẹawùsá.
I ti saﬁ n i c k yp e r s o nw h oe a t siwọ;it is a
sagacious person who eats kola nut; it is
someone not squeamish about what he eats
that eats awùsá.
19 (People are what they eat;
each to his or her own taste.)
95. Afínjúwọọjàórìngbẹnd/eacutedotbelowkẹ;/ogravedotbelowbúnwọọjà
órìnṣù/egravedotbelowṣù/egravedotbelow;/ogravedotbelowbùnníóruẹrùafínjúrelé.
The fashionable person enters the market
and walks in a leisurely manner; the ﬁlthy
person enters the market and walks in a
sluggish manner; it is the ﬁlthy person that
will carry the fashionable person’s load to
the house for him or her. (Good breeding
confers great advantages.)
96. AfínjúuÀàre;óﬁàkísàdíorùbà;óńwá
ẹniire-ébásúepo.
19. Iwọis a substance from the brimstone tree,
òrúwọ,whose sap is used in weaning children from
breast-feeding because of its bitterness (see Abraham
489). Awùsáis the fruit of the vineTetracarpidiumcono-
phorum; the English name by which people refer to it is
wallnut.
48 the good person


--- PAGE 62 ---
Fashionable woman of Ààre, she cocks her
oil jar with a rag, and she expects good
people to buy oil from her. (Never compro-
mise on cleanliness and good character.)
97. Afínjú-upóńpólà,ogékunosùnláìw/egravedotbelow.
Unusual-fashionable-person, the preener
anoints herself with camwood without
taking a bath. (Cleanliness should be more
than a matter of appearance.)
98. Àfòpinátóf/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowpaná-asúyà;ẹránp/ogravedotbelowsíi.
The moth tries to put out the barbecue ﬁre;
the meat becomes more plentiful. (A per-
son who foolishly attempts dangerous tasks
courts destruction. This is a variant of the
following entry.)
99. Àfòpinátóníòunópafìtílà,ara/egravedotbelowni
yópa.
The moth that attempts to kill [put out]
the oil lamp will kill itself. (It is unwise to
take on an adversary one knows can destroy
one.)
100. Af/oacutedotbelowjútódijú,tóníòúnsùn,ìgbàtíkòsùn
talórí?
The blind person who shuts his eyes and
says he is asleep, when he was not asleep,
whom did he see? (The deceiver deceives
himself or herself.)
101. A-f/oacutedotbelownú-f/oacutedotbelowraníńﬁòṣìjóbàtá.
It is a person who is both incapable of
thought and shameless that dances tobàtá
music while in poverty.
20 (Know your place
and live according to your circumstances.)
102. Àgótógbóṣáṣá,/egravedotbelowbìtípaá;áḿb/ogravedotbelowsìolóósè
a-bara-kù/ogravedotbelowkù/ogravedotbelow.
The nimble, sprightly rat fell victim to the
trap; how much more the sluggish, sickly
20. Bàtái sak i n do fm u s i cr e s e r v e df o ra ﬄ u e n t
people.
mouse. (If the green wood is consumed, the
dry wood has no prayer.)
103. Àgùnbánir/ogravedotbelowníńfojúdini.
It is the person taller than another who
shows no respect for the other. (Even in a
company, each person should know his or
her relative station.)
104. Àgbàajákìíbàw/ogravedotbelowj/eacutedotbelow.
A grown dog does not deface its skin.
(Decorum goes with age.)
105. Àgbàìmàlekìíkáṣọk/oacutedotbelowrùn.
A Muslim elder does not throw a sheet
over his shoulder for clothing. (One should
behave as is proper for one’s position.)
106. Àgbàkánṣeb/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowlÓgùn;Yemajalógbée
lọ.
An elderly person tried it [something] in
the river Ògùn; the river goddess carried
him away. (Thoughtless emulation of others
could be disastrous.)
107. Àgbàkìífàár/ogravedotbelowhọìdíkómákanfunfun.
A grown person does not scratch his but-
tocks in the early morning without showing
some whiteness. (Improper behavior brings
disgrace.)
21
108. Àgbàkìíṣeréekí-ló-bá-yìí-wá?
An elderly person does not engage in the
kind of play that provokes the comment,
‘‘What brought all this about?’’ (Elders
should show decorum. See 126.)
109. Àgbàkìíṣoròbíèwe.
An elderly person does not perform ritu-
als like a youth. (The elder’s performance
should be commensurate with his station
and status.)
2 1 .T h ed r ys k i nw i l lb ec h a f e d .
Onhumility 49


--- PAGE 63 ---
110. Àgbàkìíwàl/oacutedotbelowjàkóríọmọtitunw/oacutedotbelow.
An elder who is not present at a market per-
mits a child’s head to rest askew. (Elders
must not permit untoward happenings in
their presence.)
22
111. Àgbáòfìfoníńpariwo;àpòtókúnfówókì
ídún.
It is an empty barrel that is noisy; a sack full
of money makes no sound. (Persons of little
worth make the most noise.)
112. Àgbàtíkòl/eacutedotbelows/egravedotbelowníl/egravedotbelowal/oacutedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelownnínú.
An elder who has no substance should have
cunning. (One should know one’s limita-
tions and how to compensate for them.)
23
113. Àgbàtíkòmọìw/ogravedotbelownara-ar/egravedotbelowlodòńgbél/oacutedotbelow.
It is an elder who does not know his limita-
tions that is washed away by a river. (Elders
who cannot swim will be cautious near
rivers.)
114. Àgbàtíkònítìjú,ojúkanniìbání;ojú
kannáàawàl/oacutedotbelowganganiwájú-ur/egravedotbelow.
An elder without self-respect might as well
have only one eye, that one eye being in the
center of his forehead. (Shamelessness does
not become an elder.)
115. Àgbàtíyót/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelow,bófárítán,aníókujárá
ẹnu.
An elder courting disgrace, after his head
has been shaved, says, ‘‘Now, how about
shaving the beard [as a gratuity]?’’ (One
should know how far one may go before one
suﬀers disgrace.)
22. Babies are carried on their mothers’ backs, and
when they fall asleep their heads may loll crookedly.
Since the mothers cannot see behind them, responsible
people are required to call their attention to a baby’s
crooked posture.
23. The phrase níẹs/egravedotbelowníl/egravedotbelow,l i t e r a l l y‘ ‘ t oh a v ef e e to n
the ground,’’ means to have substance or inﬂuence.
116. Àgbàtóbúọmọdéﬁèébú-ur/egravedotbelowtọrọ.
An elder who insults a youth makes a
present of his own insult. (Only those who
show respect for others may expect respect
in return. Compare the preceding and fol-
lowing entries.)
117. Àgbàtóﬁara-ar/egravedotbelowféwelèweḿbú.
It is an elder who delivers himself unto
youths that the youth will insult. (If one
wants to be respected, one should respect
oneself. Compare the preceding two entries.)
118. Àgbàtómọìtìjúkìífolèṣeré.
An elder who is wary of disgrace will not
play at stealing. (Anything that smacks of
s t e a l i n gw i l ld i s g r a c ea ne l d e r . )
119. Àgbàtótoríogójìwọìy/egravedotbelowwù:igbawóòtó
ohunà-mú-ṣèyẹ.
The elder who escapes into his inner cham-
ber because of 40 cowries: 200 cowries are
not enough for casual spending.
24 (One
must act as one’s station demands. Compare
2891.)
120. Àgbààgbàìlúòlèpéjọkíwọnójẹìfun
òkété,àﬁiyánàná.
The elders of the town will not assemble and
e a tt h ei n t e s t i n e so fab u s hr a t ,o n l ys t a l e
pounded yams. (People should behave in
ways that beﬁt their station.)
25
121. À-gbàb/ogravedotbelow-ọṣòkòtò,bíkòfúnnil/eacutedotbelows/egravedotbelowaṣoni;
r/eacutedotbelowmúr/eacutedotbelowmúniohunẹniḿbanimu.
24. Cowries (or cowrie shells) are small, nutlike,
white seashells that were used as currency in parts
of West Africa before the arrival of Europeans. They
continue to adorn traditional ritual regalia.
25. Pounded yam is made by using a mortar and
pestle to pound cooked and peeled yams into a paste,
which is eaten with a stew. The prescription ofstale
pounded yams is a humorous twist, since that is not the
sort of food that self-respecting people would choose to
eat, although it is certainly better than rat intestines.
50 the good person


--- PAGE 64 ---
Borrowed trousers: if they are not too tight
around the legs, they will be too loose;
one’s own things ﬁt one exactly. (Borrowed
articles are never like one’s own.)
122. Àgbà-ìyàtíńmùkọ/ogravedotbelowníní:ónínítoríomi
gbígbónáorí-ir/egravedotbelowni.
Worthless elderly person who is eating corn
gruel worth one-tenth of a penny: he says
he only wants the hot water on top of it.
(One should act according to the demands
of one’s status.)
123. Àgbàlagbàakàntókósígarawa;yègèdè,
ojútìí.
The elderly crab that enters into a bucket
is thoroughly disgraced. (One should avoid
potentially disgraceful actions.)
124. Àgbàlagbàkìíṣelágbalàgba.
An elder should not behave in an unbecom-
ing manner. (One should behave according
to one’s status.)
125. Àgbàlagbàkìíwẹw/oacutedotbelowtánkóníòunójẹsi.
An elder does not wash his hand and then
decide to eat more. (An elder should know
his mind.)
26
126. Àgbàlagbàkìíyọay/ogravedotbelow-ọkí-ló-báyìí-wá?
An elder does not rejoice in a manner that
would provoke, ‘‘What brought all this
about?’’ (Moderation and decorum in every-
thing. This is identical in intent with 108.)
127. ÀgbàlagbàtíòkíÀàrẹńﬁokùnsinara-a
r/egravedotbelow.
An elder who does not greet the Ààrẹ tries
a [hanging] rope for size.
27 (One must avoid
a c t i o n st h a tw i l lp l a c eo n ea tg r a v er i s k . )
26. Traditionally, the Yoruba eat with their ﬁngers,
and washing one’s hand after eating is a sign that one is
done.
27. Ààrẹis a high chieftaincy title.
128. Àgbàlagbàtóńgun/ogravedotbelowpẹ,bóbájálul/egravedotbelowó
d/ogravedotbelowrun.
An elder who climbs palm trees: if he
crashes from the tree, he will ﬁnd himself in
heaven. (An elder should know better than
to climb palm trees; one should not court
danger. Compare 223; see also 1500.)
129. Àgbàlagbàtów/egravedotbelowwùàṣejù,/egravedotbelowt/eacutedotbelowniyóﬁrí.
An elder who wears the garment of im-
moderation will ﬁnd disgrace because of it.
(Immoderation brings disgrace.)
130. Àgbàrába/ogravedotbelownàj/eacutedotbelow,óròpéòúntún/ogravedotbelownàṣe.
The rain ﬂood ruins the path believing that
it is repairing it. (Ignorance or incompetence
in tackling a task often leads to unintended
results.)
131. Agbárawolówàl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowigbátóf/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowﬁgb/oacutedotbelown
omiòkun?
What strength does the calabash have at its
disposal that makes it attempt to scoop up
all the water in the ocean? (People should
not overreach.)
132. Àgbéréàwòdìníńníòunójẹìgbín.
It is an overreaching kite that proposes to
eat snails. (Know your limits. See 1997.)
28
133. Àgbérélaáyángbétóníòunójòóláàárín
adìẹ.
The cockroach overreaches itself when it
says it will dance in the company of chick-
ens. (The chickens will eagerly peck it to
death. Compare 67 and 68.)
134. Àgbérélẹyẹńgbé;kòlèmuomiinú
àgbọn.
The bird only attempts the impossible; it
28. The kite is notorious for swooping down to grab
chicks with its talons, but the snail’s hard shell makes it
invulnerable to the bird.
Onhumility 51


--- PAGE 65 ---
cannot drink the milk in a coconut. (One
should know one’s limits.)
135. Àgbéré-eṣìgìdìtóníkágbéòunsójò:bí
apátińyanitanńya;kidirioríòlèdádúró.
The overreaching mud idol that asked to be
put in the rain: as the arms fell oﬀ, so did the
thighs; the rounded head could not support
itself. (One should know one’s limitations.)
136. Ah/oacutedotbelownniìpínnl/egravedotbelowẹnu.
The tongue is the border of the mouth.
(There is a limit to everything.)
137. Àì-jọnilójúl/oacutedotbelowsàn-ánníḿmúnijarunpá
lunilóru.
Lack of regard for a person during the day
makes one kick the person during the night
as one tosses restlessly in sleep. (Familiarity
breeds contempt.)
29
138. Àì-kúkú-joyè,ósànju,‘‘Ẹnuùmiòká
ìlú’’lọ.
Not-assuming-the-position-of-ruler-at-all is
far better than, ‘‘My word is not heeded by
the people.’’ (A person who does not assume
a responsibility is better oﬀ than a person
who takes it on and fails to fulﬁll it.)
139. Àì-lápálàdáòmú;bíabálápá,ọmọ
owútó-ógégi.
It is a deﬁciency of biceps that blunts the
machete; if one has strong biceps, one can
cut trees with a cudgel. (One should not
blame one’s deﬁciencies on one’s tools.)
140. Àì-lè-jàniàńsọpé,‘‘Ojúdebaba-àmiò
déìhín.’’
I ti si n a b i l i t yt oﬁ g h tt h a tp r o m p t so n et o
say, ‘‘My father’s front yard does not extend
29. It is sometimes necessary for a person to share
as l e e p i n gm a tw i t has u p e r i o r ,b u to n ei na w eo ft h e
superior would not forget oneself even in sleep.
this far.’’ (A coward will ﬁnd any excuse to
a v o i daj u s tﬁ g h t . )
141. Àì-m/ogravedotbelow-kan,àì-m/ogravedotbelow-kànníḿmúèkúté-ilé
peológbòníjà.
It is severe ignorance that prompts a mouse
to challenge a cat to a ﬁght. (Never taunt an
adversary you cannot handle.)
142. Àìsíèèyànlókolàḿbáajás/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow.
It is the absence of people on the farm that
brings one to converse with a dog. (But for
unfortunate circumstances, one would not
deign to associate with certain people.)
143. Àìsí-ńléẹkùn,ajáńgbó.
The leopard being away from home, the dog
barks. (When the master is away, the minion
will strut. See the following entry, and also
146.)
144. Àìsí-ńléológbò,ilédiléèkúté.
The cat being away from home, the house
becomes a domain for mice. (People will
take advantage of any relaxation of supervi-
sion. See the previous entry.)
145. Àìsoàbàlóm/eacutedotbelowyẹwáj/egravedotbelowgbá;ẹyẹkìíj/egravedotbelowgbá.
T h ef a i l u r eo ft h eàbàtree to fruit brought
the bird to eating garden egg; ordinarily,
birds would not eat bitter tomato. (But for
unavoidable misfortune, one would not have
been reduced to the demeaning circum-
stance in which one ﬁnds oneself.)
146. Ajákìígbóníbojìẹkùn.
A dog does not bark in the leopard’s lair.
(One must defer to one’s superiors. See also
143.)
147. Ajákìílọságinjùlọṣọdẹẹkùn.
A dog does not go into the wild to hunt a
leopard. (One should not attempt feats one
is unqualiﬁed to accomplish.)
52 the good person


--- PAGE 66 ---
148. Ajákìíroròkóṣ/oacutedotbelowojúléméjì.
A dog is never so ﬁerce that it can guard two
doorways. (One cannot serve two masters
simultaneously.)
149. Ajámọìgb/eacutedotbelow;ẹl/eacutedotbelowd/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowmọàf/ogravedotbelow;tòlótòlómọ
ẹnitíyóyìnbọnìdísí.
A dog knows excrement; a pig knows a mud
pit; a turkey knows to whom to direct its
fart. (People should know who are their
peers and who are not.)
150. Ajáògbọd/ogravedotbelowdém/oacutedotbelowṣáláṣíìkókòṣàlùwàlá.
A dog dares not go to a wolf ’s mosque to
make ablutions. (One should not exceed
one’s station.)
30
151. Ajáríepokòlá;ìyá-ar/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowṣuihábí?
The dog sees palm oil but does not lick it;
did its mother excrete palm-nut pericarp?
(One should not be unreasonably squeam-
ish.)
152. Ajátóńlépaẹkùn,ìyọnulóńwá.
A dog that chases a leopard is seeking
trouble. (One should not overreach oneself.)
153. Ajátúnpadàsíèébì-ir/egravedotbelow.
The dog returns to its vomit. (To accept
what one has once rejected is to lose face.)
154. Àjàjàṣogeàparò,abàyàkelú.
The uncharacteristically spruced-up par-
tridge swells its chest. (The nouveau riche
always goes to extremes in consumption.)
31
155. Àjànàkúòtulójúalájá;o-nígba-ajáò
gbọd/ogravedotbelowt/oacutedotbelowpaerin.
30. The proverb has added force because dogs are
considered unclean by Muslims and are not allowed
near mosques. See 561.
31. For some reason the Yoruba consider the par-
tridge an unfortunate and lowly bird.
The elephant does not break and run at the
sight of dogs; a person with two hundred
dogs dares not stalk an elephant. (Even two
hundred dogs are no match for an elephant.)
156. Àjàpáníkòsíountódàbíountíam/ogravedotbelow
/oacutedotbelowṣe;óníbíòúnbájuẹyìns/eacutedotbelownu,òunatu
èkùr/oacutedotbelowsíl/egravedotbelow.
Tortoise says there is nothing quite like ex-
pertise in one’s calling; it says if it puts a
palm fruit into its mouth, it spits out a palm
nut. (Nothing succeeds like expertise.)
157. Àjàpáníòuntíìbásólósùnyí,b/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowniẹní
básùnkìísó.
Tortoise argues that it that might have farted
but was sound asleep, and, surely, those
that sleep do not fart! (Some defenses are so
transparent as to be frivolous.)
158. Àjàpáńlọsájò,w/oacutedotbelownníìgbàwoniyódèé,
óníódìgbàtíòúnbát/eacutedotbelow.
Tortoise set out on a journey and, asked
when it would return, replied that it would
be after it had earned disgrace. (Certain
people will not change course until they are
disgraced.)
159. Àjátìàw/ogravedotbelownníńk/oacutedotbelowòrofól/oacutedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelown.
It is a loosely hung net that teaches the
fruit pigeon a lesson. (Careless, imprudent
persons have their nemesis waiting for
them.)
160. À-jẹ-ì-kúròníńpaẹm/oacutedotbelown;à-jẹ-ì-kúròní
ńpaàfè;à-jẹ-ì-kúròníńpamáláàjú.
Feeding-without-leaving kills the Tull-
berg’s rat; feeding-without-departing kills
the spotted grass mouse; feeding-without-
departing kills the máláàjúrat. (Lack of
moderation leads to death.)
161. À-jẹ-p/ogravedotbelownitàdán.
Eating-until-vomiting is the trait of the bat.
Onhumility 53


--- PAGE 67 ---
(This observation on a being with no self-
r e s t r a i n tc o u l da l s ob eaw i s ht h a tap e r s o n
not beneﬁt from something he or she has
appropriated.)
162. À-jẹ-tán,à-jẹ-ì-mọra,káﬁọw/oacutedotbelowm/eacutedotbeloww/egravedotbelow/egravedotbelowwá
jẹunòyẹọmọèèyàn.
Eating-absolutely-everything, eating-with-
abandon, eating with all ten ﬁngers is un-
worthy of human beings. (People should not
be slaves to food.)
163. À-jókòó-àì-dìde,à-s/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow-àì-gbèsì,kásinni
títíkámápadàsílé:àì-sunw/ogravedotbelownníńgb/egravedotbelowhìn-in
r/egravedotbelow.
Sitting-without-getting-up, speaking-
without-waiting-for-responses, walking
people on their way and not turning back:
unpleasantness is what they breed. (Excess
and self-forgetfulness in anything bring
unpleasant results.)
164. Àkàtà/mgravepòòtóìjà-ájà;tanítómúigi
wákòólójú?
The bow cannot ﬁght, but who dares con-
f r o n ti tw i t has t i c k ?( As t i c ki sn om a t c hf o r
ab o w . )
165. Àk/iacuteigravej/eacutedotbelowmúòrìṣàníyì.
Refusal-to-acknowledge-salutations en-
hances the god’s dignity. (Distancing oneself
from ordinary people lends one prestige.)
166. Àkísà-ámọìw/ogravedotbelownara-ar/egravedotbelow,ógbépáráj/eacutedotbelow.
The rag knows its place; it remains quietly
on the rafters. (A person of low stand-
ing should not call attention to himself or
herself.)
167. Àkókóinúigbóníàw/oacutedotbelownlègb/eacutedotbelowodó;/ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelow
lódòóníàw/oacutedotbelownlèl/oacutedotbelowìl/egravedotbelowk/egravedotbelow;awúrebéníàw/oacutedotbelownlè
hunaṣọ.
Woodpeckers in the forest say they can
carve mortars; frogs in the stream say they
can string beads; and awúrebesay they can
weave cloth. (Misplaced self-conﬁdence
leads the creatures into empty boasts.)
32
168. Akóriraòníǹkan;/ogravedotbelowdùnòsunw/ogravedotbelowfún
ṣòkòtò.
An overly squeamish person owns nothing;
raﬃa cloth is no good for trousers. (Exces-
sive squeamishness renders one helpless and
destitute.)
169. Akú,nkòníomitooro-or/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowlá;àìkú,nkò
níípèéránníṣ/eacutedotbelow.
Dead, I will not eat its broth; alive, I will
not send it on an errand. (One need pay no
mind to a person who can in no way aﬀect
one’s fortune. Compare 2188.)
170. Àkùkọadì/eacutedotbelowﬁdídájíṣàgbà;óﬁṣí ṣu-síl/egravedotbelow
ṣèwe.
The rooster shows its maturity by its early
rising; it shows its lack of maturity by defe-
cating on the ﬂoor. (Nobody is free of some
blemish.)
171. Aláàńtètè:ójíníkùtùkùtùóníòunódàá
yànp/ogravedotbelown-yànp/ogravedotbelownsíl/egravedotbelow.
The cricket arises in the morning and vows
to perform wonders. (The puny person’s
boasts are always empty.)
172. Aládàálólàṣẹàro.
It is the owner of the machete who exercises
authority over mutual laborers. (One yields
authority to one’s host, or the owner of the
property.)
33
32. The woodpecker’s habit has some slight resem-
blance to the carving of a mortar (for a mortar and
pestle); the eggs of frogs have some slight resemblance
to strung beads; and the action ofawúrebe(an archaic
word for some animal) resembles weaving, but in each
case the product is not quite what humans have in
mind.
33. The owner of the machete in this case is the per-
son on whose farm mutual-help workers are engaged.
54 the good person


--- PAGE 68 ---
173. Aláìnítìjúlọkúsíléàna-ar/egravedotbelow.
A shameless person goes to die in his in-
laws’ house. (One should never demean
oneself with unbecoming actions.)
174. Alákòrókìísáfógun.
A wearer of a battle helmet does not ﬂee
from war. (A warrior does not run from
battle.)
175. Aláǹgbákìíléríàtipaejò.
A lizard does not boast that it will kill a
snake. (People should not propose what they
cannot accomplish.)
176. Aláṣejùajáníńlépaẹkùn.
It is an overreaching dog that chases leop-
ards. (One should not challenge people one
cannot match.)
177. Aláṣejù,babaojo.
The immoderate person, greatest of cow-
ards. (Immoderation is a cloak for cow-
ardice.)
178. Aláṣejùníńgb/eacutedotbelowbọkọjáìdíèṣù;a-gbé-
sàráà-kọjá-a-m/oacutedotbelowṣáláṣí.
It is an immoderate person who carries his
oﬀering past Èṣù’s shrine; one-who-carries-
his-alms-past-the-mosque.
34 ( I ti sag r i e v o u s
fault not to observe discreet limits.)
179. Aláṣejù,p/egravedotbelowr/egravedotbelowníńt/eacutedotbelow;àṣéjù,babaàṣet/eacutedotbelow.
The immoderate person easily ﬁnds dis-
grace; immoderation is the father of dis-
grace. (Immoderation brings disgrace. See
also 206.)
In the traditional mutual-help arrangement, the owner
of the farm being worked on is the person in authority.
34. Èṣù, gatekeeper before shrines and messenger
to the Creator and to Ifá (god of divination), is much
feared because of his capacity for mischief. Erroneously,
Christians equated him with their Devil and folklorists
with the Trickster.
180. Aláṣejùtíńpọkọníbaba.
Overzealous wife calls her husband ‘‘father.’’
(The wife who calls her husband ‘‘father’’
carries respect beyond reasonable limits;
one should not be overzealous observing
proprieties.)
181. Aláṣọàlàkìíjókòósís/ogravedotbelowelépo.
A person dressed in white does not sit at the
stall of a palm-oil seller. (One should not
expose oneself to abuse or danger.)
182. Aláṣọ-kankìínáànárẹ.
A person who has only one set of clothing
does not bargain until he is wet. (A person
with meager resources should husband them
judiciously. See also the following entry.)
183. Aláṣọ-kankìíṣeréòjò.
A person who has only one set of clothing
does not play in the rain. (See the preceding
entry.)
184. Alátiṣeníḿmọàtiṣeara-ar/egravedotbelow.
The person who must settle his or her aﬀair
knows best how to plan to go about doing
so. (One should not second-guess others or
try to make their decisions for them.)
185. Àlejòkìílọkómúonílédání.
The visitor does not take his or her leave
and take the host along. (Each person must
confront his or her destiny alone.)
186. Àlejòkìípìtànìlúfónílé.
The visitor does not recount the history of
the town for the host. (Never presume to
know more than the custodian of knowl-
edge.)
187. Àlémúòyẹàgbà;àgbàkìíṣeohun
àlémú.
To be pursued does not become an elder; an
elder does not cause himself to be pursued.
( E l d e r ss h o u l da l w a y sb e h a v ei nw a y st h a t
would cause them no disgrace.)
Onhumility 55


--- PAGE 69 ---
188. A-lu-dùndúnkìídárin.
The dùndúnplayer does not lead a song. (A
subordinate does not set policy.)35
189. Àm/ogravedotbelowt/eacutedotbelowkùn-únfarajọẹkùn,kòlèṣebí
ẹkùn.
The àm/ogravedotbelowt/eacutedotbelowkùnlooks like a leopard, but it
cannot do what a leopard can do.36 (Looking
a part does not indicate an ability to play the
part.)
190. Amùrínòsunw/ogravedotbelown,óyísáró.
The lizard is not good-looking to start with,
and it slips into indigo dye. (A person who
has enough ﬂaws should not seek ways to
add to them.)
191. Ànán-mánàánẹtújìnfìn;oní-mónìíẹtú
jìnfìn;ẹranmìírànòsínígból/eacutedotbelowhìnẹtu?
Yesterday the antelope was caught in a pit
trap; today the antelope is caught in a pit
trap; is there no other animal in the forest
besides the antelope? (If the same person
repeatedly ﬁnds himself or herself in diﬃ-
culties others are able to avoid, one should
look to the person’s character for the expla-
nation.)
192. Apáèkúté-iléòkáawùsá;kìkìiyíyíkiriló
mọ.
The mouse cannot get a grip on theawùsá
nut; all it can do is roll it around. (Some
people are beyond any schemes by their
enemies.)
193. Àpáráńlá,ìjàníńdà.
Excessive ribbing unfailingly leads to a ﬁght.
(Jokes should have limits.)
35. Dùndúnis a minor drum in the traditional
‘‘talking drum’’ ensemble.
36. Àm/ogravedotbelowt/eacutedotbelowkùnis a variety of leopard that the Yoruba
consider inferior to the ‘‘real’’ leopard.
194. Àpáráńlániináńdá;ináòlèríomi
gbéṣe.
The ﬁre is being most overbearing; there is
nothing ﬁre can do to water. (This entry has
the same application as the following one.)
195. Àpáráńlánikánńdá;ikánòlèmuòkúta.
The termite is being most overbearing; a ter-
mite cannot eat a rock. (Certain people do
not know their place; certain people are be-
yond the reach of their adversaries. Compare
the preceding entry.)
196. Àp/oacutedotbelownléni‘‘F/oacutedotbelowmaànù’’;ẹnìkanòlèṣe
èèyànm/eacutedotbelowrin.
Calling a person a foreman is only a mark
of respect; nobody can be four men. (People
whose positions earn them respect should
not forget themselves, or people would
forget their positions. See the following
entry.)
37
197. Àp/oacutedotbelownléni‘‘I
/dotbelow
yá-aKáà’’;ìyákanòsíní
káàtíkòlórúkọ.
Calling a person ‘‘Mother of the Com-
pound’’ is only a mark of respect; there is
no mother in the compound who does not
have a name. (People in a position of re-
spect should not forget that respect can be
withdrawn. See the preceding entry.)
198. Aráokóníòúngb/oacutedotbelowfínrínfínrín;talósọ
funbíkòṣearáile?
The bush dweller says he heard a rumor;
who told him, if it was not a town dweller?
(People should not presume to instruct
those who know better than they.)
199. Ara-àìbal/egravedotbelow,olóríàrùn.
Restlessness, father of all diseases. (No dis-
ease is greater than hyperactivity.)
37. The proverb plays on ‘‘foreman,’’ which it
deliberately mistakes for ‘‘four men.’’
56 the good person


--- PAGE 70 ---
200. Àrífíniléòj/eacutedotbelowkájẹòròmọadìẹ.
Fear of losing face within one’s home dis-
suades one from eating day-old chicks. (A
person who would retain esteem among his
or her peers must not act beneath himself or
herself.)
201. À-rí-ì-gbọd/ogravedotbelow-wí:baáléiléṣusápẹ.
Something-seen-but-unmentionable: the
man of the house shits in the saucepan.
(When an illustrious person does the un-
mentionable, no one dares speak. See the
following entry also.)
202. Àrí-ì-gbọd/ogravedotbelow-wí,baáléiléyọkunlémú.
Something-seen-but-unmentionable: the
man of the house walks around with mucus
dripping from his nose. (When a venerable
person acts like a fool, few dare tell him so.
See the preceding entry.)
203. Ar/ogravedotbelowl/egravedotbelowk/egravedotbelowòrọbàtà;gb/eacutedotbelowdó-gb/eacutedotbelowdóòrọ
ojúgun.
The bead maker cannot fashion a shoe; the
mortar carver cannot manufacture a shin-
bone. (People should stick to what they are
qualiﬁed to do.)
204. Àṣákìíràkádìẹgbékòkòròdání.
When a kite hovers, a chicken does not
hang on to an insect. (When a great dan-
ger threatens, one does not wait for small
favors.)
205. A-ṣe-b/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowkìnní-má-kìíyè-sábíyá,gbogbo
abíyád/oacutedotbelowṣẹ.
He-who-lives-in-style-but-pays-no-
attention-to-his-armpits: both armpits are
taken over with foamy ﬁlth. (Attention to
detail is integral to good character or breed-
ing.)
206. Àṣejùbabaàṣet/eacutedotbelow;/egravedotbelowt/eacutedotbelowníńgb/egravedotbelowhìnàṣejù;
àgbàlagbàtów/egravedotbelowwùàṣejù/egravedotbelowt/eacutedotbelowniyóﬁrí.
Lack of moderation is the father of disgrace;
disgrace comes of immoderation; a grown
person who clothes himself in immodera-
tion will ﬁnd disgrace. (Immoderation leads
to disgrace. This is a more elaborate form of
179.)
207. À-s/eacutedotbelow-kúlàgbàlagbàńs/eacutedotbelow/ogravedotbelowràn.
Denying-until-death is the way an old per-
son denies a matter. (One must never admit
to doing something unworthy of one’s posi-
tion.)
208. Àṣ/egravedotbelowṣ/egravedotbelowyọmàrìwò,óníòunókan/ogravedotbelowrun;
àwọnaṣáájúur/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowṣeb/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowrí?
The newly emerged palm frond says it will
touch the sky; did those that came before it
do so? (Ambition should be tempered with
realism. See the following entry.)
209. Àṣ/egravedotbelowṣ/egravedotbelowyọ/ogravedotbelowgọm/ogravedotbelowóníòunókan/ogravedotbelowrun;
àwọnaṣáájú/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowṣeb/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowrí?
( T h i si sav a r i a n to ft h ep r e v i o u se n t r y ,u s i n g
a diﬀerent name,/ogravedotbelowgọm/ogravedotbelow,for ‘‘palm frond.’’)
210. Aṣiwèrèèèyànníńsọpéirúòunòsí;irúu
r/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowójuẹgbàágbèjelọ.
Only an imbecile says there is no one else
like himself; the likes of him are many more
than several thousands. (There is no one the
likes of whom the world has never seen.)
211. Aṣọà-f/ogravedotbelow-fúnòj/eacutedotbelowkámọolówó.
Clothes washed clean make identifying the
rich person impossible. (A poor person who
looks to his or her appearance appears rich.)
212. Aṣọtókunikùníńj/eacutedotbelowgọgọwú.
Whatever clothing one is left with is one’s
best. (One makes the most of what one has.)
213. A-ṣúra-múòt/eacutedotbelowb/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow.
A person who is mindful of his or her image
is not easily disgraced. (People take one as
Onhumility 57


--- PAGE 71 ---
one presents oneself. Compare the following
entry.)
214. À-t/eacutedotbelow-/egravedotbelow-kániiyìọl/oacutedotbelowlá;sálúbàtàniiyì
ọl/ogravedotbelowt/ogravedotbelow;báabágbéralágbèéjùọbaniw/oacutedotbelownńﬁni
íṣe.
Spreading-the-mat-without-rolling-it-back-
up is the mark of the wealthy; sandals are
the mark of the illustrious; if one sings one’s
praise too loudly, one is liable to be made
a king. (People take one as one presents
oneself.)
215. À-wín-ná-wóòyẹni;à-gbà-b/ogravedotbelow-ọṣòkòtòò
yẹọmọèèyàn;bíkòfúnnil/eacutedotbelows/egravedotbelowadòrògí;ohun
ẹniníńyẹni.
Borrowing-money-to-spend does not speak
well of one; borrowed trousers do not be-
come a person: if they are not tight around
the legs, they are diﬃcult to remove; it is
one’s own things that ﬁt. (One should not
live beyond one’s means.)
216. Àwòròtíaòbálùkìíluni.
A priest you do not hit does not hit you.
(A person who wants to be respected must
respect others.)
217. A-w/ogravedotbelowlú-má-t/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelow,ìw/ogravedotbelownara-ar/egravedotbelowlóm/ogravedotbelow.
One-who-enters-a-town-and-maintains-
his-or-her-reputation does so because he or
she knows his or her place. (Self-knowledge
guarantees one’s reputation.)
218. Àwúrèbeéníòúnlèy/egravedotbelownà;taníj/eacutedotbelowtọ/ogravedotbelownà
àwúrèbe?
Àwúrebe says it can make a path; who would
wish to follow a path it makes? (One should
not oﬀer one’s services where one’s abilities
are inadequate.)
38
38. The reference is apparently to an insect that
makes paths in the sand.
219. Ay/ogravedotbelowày/ogravedotbelowjùlàkèréﬁńṣ/eacutedotbelownítan.
It is excessive rejoicing that breaks the frog’s
thigh. (Immoderate happiness breeds un-
happiness.)
220. Ày/ogravedotbelow-yónibàtáà-jó-fẹ-ehín.
Dancing to bàtámusic and exposing one’s
teeth is excessive happiness. (Happiness
should know moderation.)
B
221. Babaaláwokìíbèrèẹbọàná.
The diviner does not ask for yesterday’s sac-
riﬁce. (One should not demean oneself by
demanding piddling favors.)
39
222. Bẹbẹlúbẹòìt/iacuteigravedéb/egravedotbelow,ib/egravedotbelowlóḿb/ogravedotbelow.
The busybody is not there yet, but he is on
his way. (There is no keeping a nosy person
out of others’ aﬀairs.)
223. Bíabádàgbààyéogun-únjà.
When one becomes old, one stops warring.
(An elder should leave oﬀ things that are a
mark of youth. Compare 128 and 1500.)
224. Bíabáﬁinúwénú,iwọlàńjẹ.
If we compare notes with others, we wind
up eating bile. (Comparing fortunes with
others is likely to leave a bitter taste in one’s
mouth.)
225. Bíabáḿbáọmọdéjẹunlóko,gànmù-
ganmuimúẹniníńwò.
If one eats with a youth on the farm, he
stares at the protrusion of one’s nose. (Too
much familiarity with youth breeds con-
tempt.)
39. Diviners hold back for their own use some of the
items they prescribe for sacriﬁce.
58 the good person


--- PAGE 72 ---
226. Bíabáńgúnyán,kòmẹs/egravedotbelowáyọ.
If one prepares pounded yams, the unin-
vited should depart. (The well-bred visitor
should make an exit when the hosts turn to
intimate aﬀairs.)
227. Bíabátilèṣelàńwí;akìíyanànaẹni
lódì.
One admits to one’s limits; one does not
cease speaking to one’s relatives-in-law.
(One should not let an inability to fulﬁll a
formal obligation prevent one from fulﬁlling
essential obligations.)
228. Bíabátimọlàńdé;a-láì-l/eacutedotbelowṣinkìídé
w/ogravedotbelownw/ogravedotbelown.
One arrives according to one’s worth; a
horseless person does not arrive with the
noise of hoofs and stirrups. (One should
act according to one’s worth. See also the
following entry.)
229. Bíabátimọlàńkú;olongokìíkú
tìyàntìyàn.
One dies according to one’s weight; the
robin does not die and make a resounding
noise [on hitting the ground]. (One acts ac-
cording to one’s worth. See also the previous
entry.)
230. Bíabát/ogravedotbelowsílé,onípòamọipò.
If someone wets the bed, each person should
know where he or she slept. (In the event
of a crime, the guilty should not attempt to
shift the blame to others.)
231. Bíabáwípéódọw/oacutedotbelow-ọbabaláwo,baba-
láwoalódọw/oacutedotbelowIfá;bíabáníódọw/oacutedotbelowàgbà
ìṣègùn,àgbàìṣègùnalódọw/oacutedotbelow/Ogravedotbelowsanyìn;bí
abáníódọw/oacutedotbelowààfáàtógbójú,aníódọw/oacutedotbelow
Ọl/oacutedotbelowrun/ogravedotbelowgáògo.
I fo n es a y st h a tam a t t e rn o wl i e si nt h e
hands of the Ifá priest, the Ifá priest says it
lies in the hands of Ifá; if one says that it
lies in the hands of the venerable medicine
man, the venerable medicine man says it
rests in the hands of the god of herbs; if one
says it rests in the hands of the formidable
Muslim priest, he says it is in the hands of
God the most glorious. (All achievements
are creditable to the powers that make them
possible, not to the agents.)
232. Bíakòbádáṣọléaṣọ,akìípe/ogravedotbelowkan
lákìísà.
If one has not acquired one garment after
another, one does not call the ﬁrst one a rag.
(One may not disdain an old tool until one
i sa b l et or e p l a c ei t . )
233. BíakòbálèdáTápà,Tápàkìídáni.
If one cannot throw a Nupe man in a wres-
tling match, he should not throw one. (If
one fails, one should at least avoid disgrace.)
234. Bíakòbálọsókoir/oacutedotbelow,akìípaám/oacutedotbelowni.
If one does not go to the farm of lies, lies
are not told against one. (If one does not lay
oneself open to lies, one is not lied about.)
235. Bíakòbáṣèké,ak ìíﬁ/egravedotbelowt/eacutedotbelowkú.
If one has not been false, one does not die
in disgrace. (One’s honesty is one’s vindica-
tion.)
236. Bíakòbátíìjókòó,akìínas/egravedotbelow.
If one has not yet sat down, one does not
stretch one’s legs out. (Until one has thor-
oughly secured one’s position, relaxation is
premature.)
237. Bíakòbátíìlèk/oacutedotbelowléàg/oacutedotbelowlàńpa.
If one is yet unable to build a house, one
makes a tent. (One should neither overreach
oneself nor refrain from striving.)
238. Bíakòbátóbabaọmọ/oacutedotbelowṣe,akìípe
alákàrà.
Onhumility 59


--- PAGE 73 ---
If one lacks the wherewithal to act like a
father to a child, one does not summon the
seller of bean fritters. (If one has no means
of oﬀering hospitality, one should not invite
visitors.)
239. Bíakòbátóìyà-ák/ogravedotbelowtíàńk/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelow,àjẹkún
ìyàlàńjẹ.
If one lacks the means to reject suﬀering and
attempts to reject it, one’s suﬀering simply
multiplies. (Whoever cannot defend himself
or herself must learn forbearance.)
240. Bíaótitókìíj/eacutedotbelowkáhùwàbúburú;bíaó
timọkìíj/eacutedotbelowkáhùwàrere.
The heights one will reach keep one from
evil deeds; the ordained limit to one’s great-
ness keeps one from doing good deeds.
(A person’s achievements are enhanced or
limited by the person’s character.)
241. Bíàgbàkòbáṣeohun/egravedotbelowrù,ọmọdékìísá.
If an elder does not do something fearful,
the youth do not ﬂee. (Youth responds to
age according to how age acts.)
242. Bíajárójúẹkùn,apar/oacutedotbelowr/oacutedotbelow.
When the dog sees the eyes of the leopard,
it keeps very still. (In the presence of one’s
betters, one keeps one’s place.)
243. Bíàjànàkúòbáríohungbémì,kìíṣe
inúgbẹndus/oacutedotbelowdẹ.
Unless an elephant had swallowed some-
thing, it would not turn its bloated stomach
to the hunter. (Unless a person has some
resource to rely on, he or she does not tempt
fate.)
244. Bíayábámojúọkọ,alárìnnàayẹs/egravedotbelow.
When the wife has got to know the husband,
the marriage broker makes way. (Once one’s
task is done, one removes oneself.)
245. Bíayébáńyẹni,ìwàìbàj/eacutedotbelowlàńhù.
If life is being good to one, one is likely to
act disgracefully. (Prosperity breeds tempta-
tions to misbehave.)
246. Bíbaál/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowbáńtàkìtì,òrógilàḿbá
ẹmẹs/egravedotbelow.
If the chief is turning somersaults, the mes-
senger should be found standing erect. (The
great may indulge themselves, but the lowly
must keep their heads.)
247. Bíeegb/oacutedotbelownbásom/oacutedotbelowajál/eacutedotbelownu,akátálàńní
kójáa?
If a tick fastens onto a dog’s mouth, does
one ask a jackal to dislodge it? (A person of
great substance is not asked to minister to
a person of no substance. See also the next
entry.)
248. Bíeegb/oacutedotbelownbásoayínrínnímú,adìẹk/oacutedotbelowni
yója.
If a tick clings to a fox’s nose, it is not a
chicken that will remove it. (The prey is not
sent to minister to a predator. See also the
preceding entry. Compare 283.)
249. Bíèèyánbáníkòsíirúòun,àwọn
ọlọgb/oacutedotbelownamáawòye.
If a person says there is no one like him or
her, wise people maintain a contemplative
silence. (A person who thinks he or she is
peerless fools no one but himself or herself.)
250. Bíẹkùnòbáf/egravedotbelow,èselàńpèé.
If a leopard does not act mighty, one refers
to it as a cat. (A person who acts beneath his
station loses some respect.)
251. Bíẹl/eacutedotbelowbọòbápeẹni,àṣefínòyẹni.
If the person oﬀering a sacriﬁce does not
invite one, intruding is not proper. (It is bad
form to intrude into other people’s aﬀairs.)
60 the good person


--- PAGE 74 ---
252. Bíìlàríbáf/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowt/eacutedotbelow,aníkílọbaóṣe?
When a courtier seeks disgrace, he asks,
‘‘What can the king do?’’ (If one does not
show respect for one’s patron, one courts
disgrace.)
253. Bíinábádunọb/egravedotbelow,adá/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowsọ.
If the ﬁre gets at the stew, the stew will burst
into speech. (If the excitement is strong
enough, coyness disappears.)
254. Bíkòsíàkóp/ogravedotbelow,kílewúr/eacutedotbelowwádéìs/ogravedotbelowadìẹ?
Were it not for the fact that they were trans-
ported together, what would a goat want
in the chicken’s stall? (Necessity brings
together people who would otherwise have
nothing to do one with another).
255. Bíkòsít/ogravedotbelowbùnèèyàn,taniìbájílówùúr/ogravedotbelow
tíkòb/oacutedotbelowjúṣáṣá?
But for a person of ﬁlthy habits, who would
wake in the morning and not wash his or
her face clean? (Antisocial people betray
themselves by their habits.)
256. Bímobátoríokokúngóròfáhéré;bí
mobátorí/ogravedotbelowg/egravedotbelowd/egravedotbelowkúngóròfódò;bímobá
toríalábàjàòkìkíkú,ngóròfórí-ìmi.
I fId i eo na c c o u n to faf a r m ,Iw i l ll a ym y
case before the hut; if I die on account of
bananas, I will lay my case before the river;
if I die on account of the famous woman
with facial scariﬁcation, I will lay my case
before my head. (Were I to die for a woman,
the forces ordering my fortune would know
why.)
40
257. Bíódiọdúnm/eacutedotbelowtatíẹkùn-úntińṣeòjòjò,
olugbelaóharánlọb/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowwò?
If it has been three years since the leopard
took ill, is it a monkey that one sends to
40. This is apparently the plaint of a man besotted
by his attraction to a woman.
ask its condition? (Even though one may
be down on one’s luck, there are yet certain
propositions one would consider insulting.)
258. Bíòfétińfòlatiḿm/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowlákọẹyẹ.
It is by its ﬂight that the parrot proves itself
a formidable bird. (One shows one’s quality
through one’s accomplishments.)
259. Bíojúbárí,ẹnuadák/eacutedotbelow.
When the eyes see, the mouth remains quiet.
(The mouth does not reveal everything the
eyes see.)
260. Bíojúkòbárí,ẹnukìísọnǹkan.
If the eye does not see, the mouth says noth-
ing. (The mouth can tell only what the eye
sees.)
261. Bíojúkòbátiolè,atiaráilé/egravedotbelow.
If the thief feels no shame, members of his
household should. (A person’s disgrace must
concern his relatives.)
262. Bíojúonílébámọtíntín,tíojúàlejòótó
gbòǹgbò,oníléníńṣeọkọàlejò.
Even though the host’s eyes are tiny, and
the guest’s eyes are huge, it is the host who
holds sway over the guest. (The host is lord
over the guest.)
263. Bíòkúf/egravedotbelow,bíkòf/egravedotbelow,kábiọmọolókùú
léèrè.
Whether the funeral is grand or is not, one
should ask the heir of the dead. (Only those
most intimately concerned know the close
truths of an aﬀair and should be asked about
them.)
264. Bíolódeòkú,òdeer/egravedotbelowkìíhugb/eacutedotbelowgi.
If the owner of a yard does not die, his yard
is not overgrown with wild grass. (If one
does not die, one is able to look after one’s
aﬀairs.)
Onhumility 61


--- PAGE 75 ---
265. Bíolóúnjẹ/eacutedotbelowbárojúàﬁàìjẹt/eacutedotbelowẹ.
If the owner of the food is reluctant to share,
one disgraces him by refusing to eat. (The
best way to treat a miser is to refuse anything
from him.)
266. Bíọdúnbádún,bọnnọnb/oacutedotbelownn/oacutedotbelownapàw/ogravedotbelow
dà.
When the year is done, thebọnnọnb/oacutedotbelownn/oacutedotbelown
tree changes its color. (When the seasons
change, one changes one’s habits.)
267. Bíọjàábátútán,akuolórí-ipàtẹpàtẹ,a
kuàgbààgbàsà-ǹkòsà-ǹkòl/oacutedotbelowjà;bÍfábáp/egravedotbelowdí
tán,ìw/ogravedotbelow-ǹw/ogravedotbelowadìde.
When the market disperses, only the head of
the market women remains; only the vener-
able elders remain; when Ifá has had his say,
the genius that consults him arises. (When
a matter is done, those involved should
disperse.)
268. Bíọj/oacutedotbelowewúr/eacutedotbelowbápé,aníkòsíohuntí
alápatàálèﬁòunṣe.
W h e nag o a t ’ sd a y[ t od i e ]a r r i v e s ,i ts a y s
there is nothing a butcher can do to it. (A
person who does not recognize and heed
danger courts death.)
269. Bí/ogravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowòlèjà,alèkútù/egravedotbelow.
If a lazy man cannot ﬁght, he should be able
to die disgracefully. (A person who cannot
defend his rights should yield to death.)
270. BíỌl/oacutedotbelowrunòṣeẹniníbaba,àﬁì yànjúṣe
bíàgbà.
If God does not make one a father, one
strives to act like an elder. (Even if one has
no inﬂuence, one strives to act responsibly.)
271. Bíọmọdébáf/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowṣìṣeàgbà,ọj/oacutedotbeloworí-ir/egravedotbelowò
nííj/eacutedotbelow.
If a youth attempts to act like an elder, his
age will stop him. (A youth does not have
what it takes to be an elder.)
272. Bíọmọdébágunòkèàgbà,óńlátigb/oacutedotbelown.
If a child ascends the height of maturity, he
or she must become wise. (Wisdom goes
with age.)
273. Bíọmọdébáńṣeọmọdé,àgbàamáaṣe
àgbà.
When a child is being a child, an elder must
remain an elder. (One should not permit
other people’s misbehavior to deﬂect one
from the proper course.)
274. Bíọmọdéńléríbébé,tíkòníbaba,ti
babalàńṣe.
If a child brags a great deal but has no father,
one acts the part of a father. (One should
n o td e a lt o oh a r s h l yw i t hac h i l dw h oh a sn o
o n et od i r e c th i mo rh e r . )
275. BíỌyańkọl/oacutedotbelowrun,bíṢàngóńjóláyé,
kònííburúfúnbabakóníódọw/oacutedotbelowọmọòun
l/oacutedotbelowrun.
Even if the goddess Ọya sings in heaven
and the god Ṣango sings on earth, matters
cannot be so bad for the father that he will
s a yi ti sa l lu pt oh i sd e a dc h i l di nh e a v e n .
(Even in suﬀering, one should never disgrace
oneself.)
41
D
276. Dídák/eacutedotbelowleríndák/eacutedotbelow;àjànàkúlólẹgàn.
The elephant has only chosen to remain
silent; to the elephant belongs the forest.
(The mighty need not proclaim their impor-
tance. Compare 4136.)
41. The proverb refers to the Yoruba belief that the
dead have the power to protect their living survivors.
Normally, though, the living look to the spirits of dead
elders for such protection, never to the spirits of their
dead children.
62 the good person


--- PAGE 76 ---
277. Dìgbòlugi-dìgbòlùùyànòj/eacutedotbelowkámọajá
tòót/oacutedotbelow.
The mad dog, and the person who behaves
like a mad dog, both make it impossible for
one to know the real dog. (He who acts like
a dog makes himself the equal of a dog.)
E
278. Eegunàjànàkú:óháìkokòl/eacutedotbelownu.
An elephant’s bone: it sticks in the wolf ’s
mouth. (A person has overreached himself
or herself and is paying the price of folly.)
279. Eégúnjueégún;òrìṣájuòrìṣà;Pààkálé
oníṣàngów/ogravedotbelowgb/eacutedotbelow.
Some masqeuraders are greater than others;
some gods are greater than others; the mas-
querader Pààkáchases the Ṣango worshiper
into the bush. (Every company has its hier-
archy; each person should know his or her
place.)
280. Eégúnònaobìnrinlág/ogravedotbelow;obìnríntú
kíjìpáìdí-ir/egravedotbelow,óﬁna eégún.
The masquerader did not hit a woman with
his shroud, but the woman unwraps her
home-woven wrapper and hits the masquer-
ader with it. (A person is fortunate to have
been overlooked by trouble, but he or she
goes to deliberately provoke it.)
42
281. Eégúnp/eacutedotbelowlóde,ófètèòkèdáhùn;w/oacutedotbelownní,
‘‘Babakúàb/ogravedotbelow,’’óní,‘‘Hììì.’’
The masquerader stayed too long on parade
and was reduced to speaking with his upper
lip. They said, ‘‘Welcome, father,’’ and he
responded, ‘‘He-e-e-e.’’ (A person who has
disgraced himself speaks softly.)
42. Women are forbidden to approach masquer-
aders, on pain of being whipped, and are supposed to
run into hiding whenever masqueraders are about.
282. Eégúnwọlé,óníòunòríEjonto;Ejontó
ní,‘‘Àkísàni,àbíkíníwọlé?’’
The masquerader enters a house and claims
he did not see Ejonto; Ejonto asked, ‘‘Is
that a rag that entered the house, or what?’’
(A person who disregards one earns one’s
disregard.)
283. Eegb/oacutedotbelownsom/oacutedotbelowàyìnrínl/eacutedotbelownu,aníkíadìẹ
wáyánanjẹ;adìẹm/ogravedotbelowpéòunnáàoúnjẹ
àyìnrín.
A tick fastens on a fox’s mouth and a
chicken is asked to peck it oﬀ; the chicken,
though, knows that it itself is food for a
fox. (One wastes one’s time inviting others
to endanger themselves. Compare 248.)
284. Èèyànbí/ogravedotbelowbọl/ogravedotbelowbọńyaláṣọ.
Only people like monkeys have their cloth-
ing torn by monkeys. (Those who consort
with undesirables are likely to have their
reputation soiled.)
285. Èèyànòríbisùn,ajáńhanrun.
Humans have no place to sleep, and a dog is
snoring. (A lowly person lays claim to what
h i so rh e rb e t t e r sl a c k . )
286. Èèyàntíònítìjúojúkanniìbání,a
gbórínatótẹṣin.
A shameless person deserves to have only
one eye, that one as large as a horse’s.
(Human endowments are wasted on grace-
less people.)
43
287. EjòkìítiojúÀàrẹgunọgbàlọ.
A snake does not escape over the fence while
43. The proverb plays onìtìjú,literally ‘‘the pushing
at the eyes,’’ which is the Yoruba word for shame. A
person who is insensitive to ‘‘the pushing at the eyes’’
certainly can do without a second eye, and the one he
or she does have can be as large as possible, since it will
be insensitive to pushing, and the disﬁgurement would
mark the person as grotesque while having no eﬀect on
h i mo rh e r .
Onhumility 63


--- PAGE 77 ---
a warrior watches.44 (One does not permit
disaster on one’s watch; one must live up to
the expectations of one’s position.)
288. Èmídákọokòó,ìw/oacutedotbelowdákọokòó,òńpèmí
nímùkọ-mùkọ.
I bought 20 cowries’ worth of corn pap, and
you bought 20 cowries’ worth of corn pap,
and you call me a corn-pap addict. (One
should not criticize others for ﬂaws that are
also one’s lot. Compare 555.)
289. Èmiìw/ogravedotbelowfà,ìwọìw/ogravedotbelowfà,oníbabáníká
gbowówá;odátìrẹsíl/egravedotbelowná?
I am a pawn, you are a pawn, and you
tell me the creditor sent you to collect his
money; have you repaid yours? (Whoever
will correct others should ﬁrst take care of
h i so rh e ro w nf a i l i n g s . )
290. Eponimorù;oníyangímábatèmij/eacutedotbelow.
It is palm oil that I am carrying; sandman,
do not ruin my fortune. (I am cautiously
going about my own business; let no one
bring trouble my way.)
291. Erinkìífọnk/oacutedotbelowmọ-ọr/egravedotbelowófọn.
An elephant’s trumpeting is never answered
by its young’s trumpeting. (Lowly people
should not emulate illustrious ones.)
292. Èrò/ogravedotbelownàniyóròhìnọkàtógbó.
It is people who use the path that will spread
the word about mature corn. (A noteworthy
accomplishment need not advertise itself.)
293. Èsúrúṣefújàót/eacutedotbelowl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowoníyán;aláǹgbá
ṣefújàót/eacutedotbelowl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowògiri;Ọlámọnrínàjàpáṣe
fújàót/eacutedotbelowl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow-/ogravedotbelowmi.
Èsúrúyam forgets itself and loses favor with
the maker of pounded yams;
45 the lizard
4 4 .I nt h i sc a s eÀàrẹis the short form of the highest
/Ogravedotbelowy/ogravedotbelow military title,Ààrẹ/OgravedotbelownàKakaǹfò.
45. Dioscureadumetorum (see Abraham 324);
forgets itself and falls into disfavor with
the wall; tortoiselike He-who-will-remain-
nameless forgets himself and loses all regard
with me. (A person who does not know his
or her place soon suﬀers disgrace.)
294. Etílobìnrínﬁńgb/oacutedotbelowohùnorò.
It is only with the ears that a woman hears
the voice of Orò. (One must not intrude into
aﬀairs that do not concern one; undesirable
people should be kept in the dark about
important or delicate matters.)
46
295. Èwolótó/egravedotbelowkọ-/oacutedotbelowgbànínúewéìrúgbàá?
Which among the leaves of the locust-bean
tree is adequate to receive corn loaf? (Cer-
tain feats are beyond certain people; people
should not presume to do things beyond
their capabilities.)
47
296. ÈwonitiSíkíránílùúÌwó.
What business does Sikirat have in the town
of Ìwó? (One should not intrude into mat-
ters that do not concern one.)
48
297. Ewújùtíyóòtú/ogravedotbelowpẹ:gbogboehín/egravedotbelowniyóò
kántán.
the starch content is so low that it is not suitable for
pounding.
46. Orò is a secret divinity connected with the
secret supreme political and juridical council known
as Ògbóni or Òṣùgbó. His cult is forbidden to women;
at the sound of the bull-roarer announcing his public
outings, women must go into hiding. A man who is not
a member of the cult also runs the risk of being killed
if he intrudes into its rites even accidentally. (When
lower-cased, the wordoròis used as a generic term for
rites or rituals.)
47. Corn loaves are cooked wrapped in large leaves,
much larger than the leaves of the locust-bean tree,
which are inadequate for the purpose. The proverb
plays on gbà(to receive) and the end ofìrúgbàá(gbàá),
which means ‘‘receive it,’’ or ‘‘accommodate it.’’
48. Sikirat is a Muslim name for a woman; the
town of Ìwó is, presumably (as far as this proverb is
concerned), a stranger to Islam.
64 the good person


--- PAGE 78 ---
The cane rat that attempts to uproot a palm
tree will lose all its teeth in the attempt.
(One should not attempt a task for which
one is not qualiﬁed.)
298. Ewúr/eacutedotbelowkìíbínikálọsís/ogravedotbelowàgùntànlọj/egravedotbelow.
If sired by a goat, one does not go foraging
in the realm of sheep. (One should keep to
one’s proper company.)
299. Ewúr/eacutedotbelowòwípéòunòṣọmọàgùntàn;
àgùntànlówípéòunòṣọmọewúr/eacutedotbelow.
The goat did not say it was not sired by the
sheep; it was the sheep that said it was not
sired by the goat. (The goat would like to as-
sociate with the sheep, but the sheep would
not associate with the goat; ‘‘superior’’
people reject association with ‘‘inferior’’
people, not the other way around.)
Ẹ
300. ‘‘Ẹfàáwọlé’’lóyẹẹl/eacutedotbelowṣin.
‘‘Lead it into the stable’’ is what becomes a
horseman. (To be able to aﬀord a horse but
not a groom is something of a disgrace.)
301. Ẹj/eacutedotbelowkámí,ẹj/eacutedotbelowkásimi;èèyànníńfìdí
èèyànjókòó;èèyànìbáṣebíỌl/oacutedotbelowrunkònííj/eacutedotbelow
kámí.
Let us breathe, leave us in peace; the fashion
is for people to sit on their behinds; were
humans in the position of God, they would
not permit people to breathe. (People are
wont to be too full of their authority; it is a
good thing they have less power over others
than God does.)
302. ‘‘Ẹkú-ulé’’òyẹaráilé;‘‘Ẹkúatìbà’’ò
yẹnitíńtàjòb/ogravedotbelow;ẹnitíòkíẹni,‘‘Kúatìbà’’-á
pàdánù‘‘Ẹkú-ulé.’’
‘‘Greetings to you, housebound ones’’ is
improper for the housebound to utter; ‘‘wel-
come home’’ is not proper for the person
arriving from a trip; whoever fails to give
‘‘welcome’’ to the person returning does
himself or herself out of ‘‘greetings, house-
bound.’’ (Whoever does not extend cour-
tesies cannot expect to receive courtesies.
Compare 4520.)
303. /Egravedotbelowbìtìẹnuòtàsé.
The mouth trap never misses. (The mouth
easily accomplishes even impossible feats.)
304. Ẹgb/eacutedotbelowẹnilàńgúnyánewùràdè.
It is for one’s peers that one makes pounded
yam with ewùràyams. (One may take liber-
ties only with one’s peers.)
305. /Egravedotbelowgb/egravedotbelowrìòm/ogravedotbelowpéarẹwàkìígbé/egravedotbelowkú;
gbogboehínkin-kìn-kinláb/eacutedotbelowaṣọ.
The novice does not know that a good-
looking person does not wear a masquerade;
all his perfectly white teeth are concealed
beneath the cloth. (It is a foolish person who
conceals his or her endowments.)
306. /Egravedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelownṣíwájúósoaṣọk/oacutedotbelow;àbúrò-ók/eacutedotbelowhìn
ów/egravedotbelowwù;bíaòm/ogravedotbelowlẹ,/ogravedotbelowlẹòmọara-ar/egravedotbelow?
The elder walks in front, a loincloth draped
over his shoulder; the younger walks be-
hind, wearing a garment; if people cannot
tell which one is shiftless, does he not know
himself? (The shiftless person cannot hide
his shiftlessness either from himself or from
others.)
307. Ẹl/eacutedotbelowd/egravedotbelowńpàf/ogravedotbelowóròpéòúnńṣoge.
The pig wallows in mud but thinks it is
being a dandy. (People who lack good judg-
ment are never aware of their own misbehav-
ior.)
308. Ẹl/eacutedotbelowd/egravedotbelowòm/egravedotbelowyẹ.
A pig does not know what is becoming.
(Some people do not know ﬁtting behavior.)
Onhumility 65


--- PAGE 79 ---
309. Ẹl/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowd/eacutedotbelowńlọ/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowd/eacutedotbelow,oní‘‘/Egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowd/eacutedotbelowgb/egravedotbelowtaniàbí
/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowd/eacutedotbelowgb/egravedotbelowfà?’’;èwologbéníb/egravedotbelow?
A person says he has lost an unspeci-
ﬁed amount of money, and you ask if the
amount is 500 cowries or 1,100 cowries;
which amount did you steal? (A person who
is too inquisitive about other people’s aﬀairs
raises suspicions about his or her motives.)
310. Ẹl/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowfàkìílọẹ/eacutedotbelowfà-ar/egravedotbelowkásọpéodiìjẹfà
tíatijẹun.
When a person proclaims the loss of six
articles, one does not respond by saying one
has not eaten in six days. (If one can oﬀer
no help to a person in trouble, one should
not complicate the person’s plight.)
311. Ẹniàbáﬁsókokódàparò,óníòunẹni
ilé.
The person one would leave on the farm
hoping he would become a partridge boasts
that he is the indispensable presence of
the household. (An unwanted person be-
lieves himself to be indispensable.
49 See the
following three entries also.)
312. Ẹniàbátàkáfowó-or/egravedotbelowraàdá:óníìyà
àdáńjẹòun.
A person who should be sold for money
to purchase a machete bemoans his lack
of a machete. (A person who is only most
grudgingly tolerated in a company com-
plains about his lack of privileges. This is a
variant of the preceding and the following
two entries.)
313. Ẹniàbátàkáfowó-or/egravedotbelowraàtùpà:óní
òunà-jí-tanná-wò-lóru.
A person who should be sold for money
to purchase a lamp boasts that he is one-
49. The Yoruba word for the partridge,àparò,can
be rendered etymologically as à-pa-rò(something
one kills and boasts about killing), because the bird is
desirable for stew meat.
people-light-lamps-to-admire-at-night. (A
person most unwanted in a company re-
gards himself or herself as the soul of the
party. This is a variant of the preceding two
and the following entries.)
314. Ẹniàbátàkáfowó-or/egravedotbelowraèbù:óníèlé
òúnkó/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowdúnrún.
A person one would sell for money to pur-
chase quartered yams for planting claims
that he has enough earnings to buy three
hundred yam pieces. (A person considered
worthless and expendable makes claims to
equal rights. This is a variant of the preced-
ing three entries.)
315. Ẹniàńgbég/egravedotbelowg/egravedotbelowniyóbaara-ar/egravedotbelowj/eacutedotbelow.
I ti st h ep e r s o nw h oi sr e v e r e dt h a tw i l ld i s -
grace himself or herself. (People who are
placed on pedestals have ample opportuni-
ties to topple themselves.)
316. Ẹníbádẹojú-ur/egravedotbelowsíl/egravedotbelowárímú-ur/egravedotbelow.
W h o e v e rg a z e sd o w n w a r dw i l ls e eh i so rh e r
nose. (Whoever comports himself or herself
indecorously will be disgraced.)
317. Ẹnídádétikúròl/oacutedotbelowmọdé.
The person who wears a crown has out-
grown childhood. (A high oﬃce carries high
responsibilities with it.)
318. Ẹnitíabáńdáṣọfúnkìíkaèèw/ogravedotbelow.
The person who is clothed by others does
not list what he will not wear. (Those who
depend on the charity of others must be
satisﬁed with whatever they can get. Com-
pare 81.)
319. Ẹnitíaf/eacutedotbelowyàt/ogravedotbelowsíẹnitóníkòsíirúòun.
A person one loves is diﬀerent from a person
who says there is no one like himself or her-
self. (One’s worth is more a matter of what
other people think than what one thinks of
oneself.)
66 the good person


--- PAGE 80 ---
320. Ẹnitíagbégunẹl/eacutedotbelowd/egravedotbelow,ìw/ogravedotbelownnikóy/ogravedotbelowmọ;
ẹnitógẹṣin,il/egravedotbelowlóḿb/ogravedotbelow.
T h ep e r s o nw h o mp e o p l eh a v es e a t e do n
a pig should moderate his or her strutting;
even a horse rider will eventually come
down to earth. (One should not let good
fortune go to one’s head; circumstances do
change.)
321. Ẹnitíalègbékìídaw/oacutedotbelow.
A person who can be lifted does not hang
limp. (There is no point in resisting the
irresistible.)
322. Ẹnitíàńwòláwò-sunkúnńwoara-ar/egravedotbelow
láwò-r/eacutedotbelowrìnín.
A person whose appearance moves one to
tears is moved to laughter by his own ap-
pearance. (The miserable person has no
notion of his own miserableness.)
50
323. Ẹnitíaòf/eacutedotbelow,àl/oacutedotbelowòkànán.
A person whose company is not desired gets
no turn at riddling. (A person not wanted in
a group should not press his or her rights.
Compare the following entry.)
324. Ẹnitíaòf/eacutedotbelownílùúkìíjólójúagbo.
A person not welcome in the town does not
take a turn in the dancing circle. (A person
not wanted in a group should keep a low
proﬁle. Compare the preceding entry.)
325. Ẹnitíìbáhùwàipáòhùwàipá;ẹnití
ìbáhùwà/egravedotbelowl/egravedotbelowòhu/egravedotbelowl/egravedotbelow;/ogravedotbelowkùntónígbaọw/oacutedotbelow,tó
nígbaẹs/egravedotbelowńhùwàp/egravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelow.
The person one would expect to be reckless
is not reckless; the person one would expect
to be cautious is not cautious; the millipede
with two hundred arms and two hundred
legs behaves very gently. (Even though one
50. This proverb is usually a comment directed at a
particular person rather than a general proposition or
observation.
has a great deal of weight, one should still
tread lightly.)
326. Ẹnitíkòlègbéeèrà,tíńkùsàsíerin,tít/eacutedotbelow
níńt/eacutedotbelow.
A person who lacks the strength to lift an
ant but rushes forward to lift an elephant
ends in disgrace. (One should know one’s
capabilities and limit oneself to what one
can accomplish.)
327. Ẹnitíkòríayéríníńsọpékòs/eacutedotbelownitó
gb/oacutedotbelownbíòun.
It is a person with limited experience of
life who thinks there is none as wise as he.
(No wise person claims he or she is the best
there is.)
328. Ẹnitíkòtógèlètèkìímífìn-ìn.
A person who is not huge in stature does not
breathe heavily. (One should match one’s
strutting to one’s accomplishment.)
329. Ẹnitótanara-ar/egravedotbelowlòrìṣàòkèńtàn:àpọń
tíòláyanílé,tóníkíòrìṣàóbùnunl/oacutedotbelowmọ.
It is the person who deceives himself that the
gods above deceive: a bachelor who has no
wife at home but implores the gods to grant
him children. (It is self-deceit to expect the
gods to do everything for one who has not
lifted a ﬁnger on his or her own behalf.)
330. Ẹnitótijútìífúnara-ar/egravedotbelow.
The person who is self-aware protects his or
her own reputation thereby. (Good character
beneﬁts the owner more than others.)
331. Ẹnìkankìíj/eacutedotbelow‘‘Àwádé.’’
Nobody is entitled to say, ‘‘Here we come.’’
(However mighty, a person is still only one
person.)
332. Ẹrankílaòjẹrí?/Ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowbánilábàtàóba
búrúbúrú.
What sort of meat is it the likes of which
Onhumility 67


--- PAGE 81 ---
o n eh a sn e v e rt a s t e d ?At o a dc o m e su p o n
one at the swamp and cowers in fright. (A
person for whom one has no use wastes his
or her time if he or she goes to great lengths
to hide from one.)
333. /Egravedotbelowrúk/oacutedotbelowńṣebíọk/oacutedotbelow.
T h eh a f to ft h eh o ei sb e h a v i n gl i k eah o e .
(A certain person is putting on airs to which
he or she is not entitled.)
334. /Egravedotbelowṣ/oacutedotbelowkìígbaọfàl/eacutedotbelowhìn;iwájúganganní
ńﬁ-ígbaọgb/eacutedotbelow.
A palace guard does not receive arrows in
his back; he suﬀers wounds only in front.
(One must act in a manner that beﬁts one’s
station.)
335. /Egravedotbeloww/ogravedotbelowntótó/ogravedotbelowpẹòtó-ódáerindúró;
ìtàkùntóníkíerinmáròkè/ogravedotbelowdàn,tòunterin
níńlọ.
A chain as thick as a palm tree cannot stop
an elephant; the vine that proposes to stop
the elephant from going to the grassland will
go with the elephant. (Whoever attempts to
stop an irresistible force will be swept along
by it.)
336. /Egravedotbelowyálóbími,ẹkùnlówòmídàgbà,oló-
gìnnígbàmít/oacutedotbelow;bíkòs/eacutedotbelowranl/oacutedotbelowb/egravedotbelownkòjẹ.
Iw a sb o r no fam o n k e y ,Iw a sr a i s e db y
a leopard, I was adopted by a cat; if there
is no meat in the stew I will not eat it. (I
will not act in a way inconsistent with my
upbringing.)
337. Ẹyẹakòko-óníòúnlegb/eacutedotbelowodó;taníj/eacutedotbelowﬁ
odóakòkogúnyánjẹ?
The woodpecker boasts that it can carve a
mortar; whoever used a mortar carved by
the woodpecker to make pounded yam?
(The puny person’s best eﬀorts cannot
amount to much.)
338. Ẹyẹòlèríomiinúàgbọnbùmu.
A bird cannot get at the liquid inside a coco-
nut to drink. (One should not attempt the
impossible.)
339. Ẹyẹtóﬁarawéigún,/egravedotbelowhìnàdìròníńsùn.
Whatever bird emulates the vulture will ﬁnd
itself behind the cooking hearth. (People
w h oh a v ee v e r y t h i n gt ol o s es h o u l dn o t
emulate those who have nothing to lose.)
F
340. Fáàárí/ogravedotbelowbọòjuinúìgb/eacutedotbelowlọ.
The monkey’s showing oﬀ is limited to the
conﬁnes of the forest. (One may be esteemed
in one’s own locality and be quite unknown
in another.)
341. Fálànàgb/oacutedotbelowtìrẹ,taraẹnilàńgb/oacutedotbelow.
Falana, look to your own aﬀairs; one’s at-
tention should be focused ﬁrst on one’s own
aﬀairs. (People should keep their noses out
of other people’s business.)
51
G
342. Gànràn-gànrànòyẹẹniabíire.
Unrestrained and thoughtless behavior does
not beﬁt a well-born person. (One should
behave in a manner that reﬂects well on
one’s family.)
Gb
343. ‘‘Gbàjẹ’’òyẹàgbà.
‘‘Take this and eat it’’ does not become an
elder. (It better becomes an elder to give
than to go begging.)
51. Falana is a proper name that has come to be
associated with uninvited intrusion into other people’s
aﬀairs.
68 the good person


--- PAGE 82 ---
344. ‘‘Gbàmí,gbàmí!’’òyẹàgbà;àgbàkìíṣe
ohunàlémú.
‘‘Save me, save me!’’ does not become an
elder; an elder should not do something
that will make him the object of pursuit.
(One should behave in a manner that be-
ﬁts one’s station. Compare the entry that
follows.)
345. ‘‘Gbàmí,gbàmí!’’òyẹeégún;‘‘ẹran
ńlémib/ogravedotbelow’’òyẹọdẹ.
‘‘Save me, save me!’’ does not beﬁt a mas-
querader; ‘‘An animal is chasing me!’’ does
not beﬁt a hunter. (One should act in ways
that become one’s station.
52 Compare the
preceding entry.)
346. ‘‘Gbawèrè,’’‘‘Ngògbawèrè’’lọjà-áﬁ
ńhó.
‘‘Accept imputation of imbecility’’; ‘‘I will
accept no imputation of imbecility’’ is the
explanation for market noise. (One may
have no means of avoiding insult from
others, but it is always in one’s power to
reject insults.)
53
347. Gbogboèèyànníńsunkún-unBá-njọ;
ṣùgb/oacutedotbelownBá-njọòsunkúnara/egravedotbelow.
Everybody laments Banjọ’s fate, but Banjọ
does not lament his own fate. (Some people
remain blissfully unaware of their own mis-
fortune, even though the misfortune is
obvious to others.)
348. Gbogboẹgb/eacutedotbelowńjẹMá-y/egravedotbelow-lóyè,òńjẹSáré-
pẹgb/eacutedotbelow.
52. Eégún,masqueraders supposed to be the in-
carnations of dead ancestors, are themselves objects of
terror. Fright does not become them.
53. The expression Gbawèrè, translated as ‘‘Accept
imbecility,’’ means ‘‘acquiesce in being treated like an
imbecile.’’ The back-and-forth haggling during market
transactions is here seen as each bargainer proposing
terms to the interlocutor, who would be an imbecile to
accept them.
Everybody is taking the titleMáy/egravedotbelowlóyè(May-
you-never-lose-the-title), but the title you
receive is Sáré-pẹgb/eacutedotbelow(Run-and-assemble-
the-associations’ members: in other words,
Courier or Messenger). (The addressee is
backsliding among his or her peers but
believes he or she is doing rather well.)
349. Gbogbo/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowníńṣojúèké.
The busybody is privy to all matters. (There
is nothing the busybody will admit he or she
does not know about.)
350. Gb/ogravedotbelown-/oacutedotbelown-gb/ogravedotbelown-/oacutedotbelownkanòsí,àﬁẹnitóbá
ńtiara/egravedotbelow.
There is no cause for staggering about,
except for the person pushing himself or
herself. (Some people make more trouble
for themselves than others can ever make for
them.)
I
351. Ìbàj/eacutedotbelowọj/oacutedotbelowkanòtánb/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow.
The diagrace one incurs in one day does not
disappear that soon. (Reputations are easy
to destroy but most diﬃcult to repair.)
352. Ibitíabápèlórí,ak ìíﬁtẹl/egravedotbelow.
Whatever one names as the head, one does
not tread the ﬂoor with it. (Never misuse or
abuse your prized possessions or attributes.)
353. Ibitíaﬁarasílarańgbé.
Wherever one situates the body, there it
inhabits. (One should conﬁne oneself and
one’s activities to the appropriate spheres.
See the following entry.)
354. Ibitíaﬁiy/ogravedotbelowsílóńṣomisí.
Salt dampens only the place where it is
placed. (One should conﬁne one’s activi-
ties to the proper arena. See the preceding
entry.)
Onhumility 69


--- PAGE 83 ---
355. Ibitíapèlóríníńhurun.
The part one names the head is the one that
grows hair. (One should act in accordance to
one’s station.)
356. Ibitíatimú/ogravedotbelowlẹòkúnná;ibitíatimú
alágbáraátóoko-óro.
The place where a lazy person was appre-
hended bears no marks; the place where a
powerful man was apprehended is broad
enough to plant a farm. (A worthy person,
even if eventually vanquished, will leave
signs of powerful resistance behind.)
357. Ibitíatińpìtànkátójogún,kám/ogravedotbelowpé
ogúnib/egravedotbelowòkanni.
Where one must recite genealogies in order
to establish one’s claim to inheritance, one
should know that one really has no claim
to patrimony there. (One need not go to
great lengths to establish one’s claim if it is
legitimate.)
358. Ibitíayébáẹniniatińjẹ/egravedotbelow.
Where life catches up with one, there one
lives it. (One lives according to the condi-
tions one ﬁnds oneself in.)
359. Ìb/oacutedotbelowndídáolówólóníkíw/ogravedotbelowfàrínrínrín
kósọàdánù.
It is the master’s engaging in silly antics that
aﬀords the pawn the opportunity to laugh
so hard that he tosses his cutlass away. (If the
person in charge behaves irresponsibly, then
those over whom that person has charge
have an excuse for irresponsible behavior
also.)
360. Idàahunlaﬁńpaahun.
It is with its own sword that one kills the
tortoise. (Each person carries his or her own
bane.
54 Compare 5019.)
54. Customarily, the tortoise is killed by pulling out
the head and rubbing the neck against the sharp edge
361. Idàńwóiléara/egravedotbelowóníòúnḿbaàk/ogravedotbelowj/eacutedotbelow.
The sword is destroying its own home,
and it says it is ruining the scabbard. (Said
of a person whose actions will eventually
r e c o i lo nh i mo rh e r ,e v e nt h o u g ht h ep e r -
son thinks that he or she is hurting others.
Compare 1167.)
362. Ìdíméjèèjìítóolúwa-ar/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowjókòó.
The two buttocks are suﬃcient for their
owner to sit on. (One should be satisﬁed
with one’s own resources.)
363. Igúnnugúnbàléòrùlé;ojútóiléótóoko.
The vulture perches on the roof; its eyes see
the homestead as well as the farm. (Said of a
busybody whose eyes get into everything.)
364. Ìgbàtíṣìgìdìíbáf/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowṣeeré/egravedotbelowt/eacutedotbelowaníkíw/oacutedotbelown
gbéòunsójò.
When the clay statue hankers for disgrace, it
asks to be placed in the rain. (A person who
so forgets himself or herself as to overreach
will wind up in disgrace.)
55
365. ÌgbàwoniMákùúònííkú?Mákùúòmọ
awoóḿbúọpa;Mákùúòmọìw/egravedotbelowóḿb/oacutedotbelowsódò.
When will (or how can) Maku avoid the
danger of dying? Maku does not know the
m y s t e r i e so ft h ec u l ty e th ej o i n si ni t sv o w s ;
Maku does not know how to swim, and yet
he jumps into the river. (A person who will
not cooperate in safeguarding himself or
herself frustrates the eﬀorts of others.)
56
366. Ihòwolèkútéńgbétóníiṣ/eacutedotbelowiléńdíw/oacutedotbelow?
What sort of hole does the rat live in that
of the shell behind the neck until it comes apart. That
part of the shell is known as the tortoise’s sword.
55. Ṣ`ìgìdìis a clay image one makes of one’s enemy
and endows by means of incantations with the power
to harm the enemy in his or her dreams. Although thus
endowed with supernatural powers, if it is placed in the
rain it will crumble.
56. The name Mákùú (mákùú) means ‘‘Do not die.’’
70 the good person


--- PAGE 84 ---
makes him say that household work pre-
occupied it? (One should not oversell one-
self.)
367. Ìjàkùm/ogravedotbelowkìírin/ogravedotbelowsán;ẹniabíirekìírin
òru.
The wild cat never roams in daylight; a well-
bred person does not wander around in the
nighttime. (People who care about their
reputation should stay away from question-
able actions.)
368. Ìjàlọòlègbéòkúta.
The brown ant cannot lift a boulder. (One
should not attempt a task that is beyond
one’s capability.)
369. Ìjokòóẹniníḿmúnidaewé/egravedotbelowkọnù.
How one sits causes one to carry the leaves
used to wrap corn meal to the dump.
(People treat one the way one presents one-
self.)
57
370. Ìjọbańpè/oacutedotbelowoníòḿmugààríl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow;taní
ni/oacutedotbelow,taníniomitíoﬁḿmugààrí?
The government summons you, and you say
you are busy eating cassava grains soaked
in water; who owns you, and who owns the
water with which you are eating the cassava?
(When the law summons, one has no option
but to heed the summons.)
371. Ilékìíjókíbaáléilétàkakà.
A house does not burn while the landlord
lounges with indiﬀerence. (One must not
ignore matters of grave concern to oneself.
Compare the following entry.)
372. Ilékìíjókíoorunkunojú.
A house does not burn and ﬁll the eyes with
sleep. (One must not ignore grave matters.
Compare the previous entry.)
57. It is the manner of one’s sitting in a company
that causes one to be selected as the right person to
clear the garbage.
373. Ilé-ni-mo-wàkìíj/egravedotbelowbiẹj/oacutedotbelow.
‘‘I-was-in-my-home’’ is never the guilty
party in a dispute. (One does not get into
trouble by minding one’s own business.)
374. ÌlùkanòtóÈgùnjó;bíabálùfúnuna
máaluàyà.
One drum is not enough for an Ègùn person
t od a n c et o ;i fo n ed r u m sf o rh i m ,h et o o
will play a rhythm on his chest. (Said of a
p e r s o nw h oi sn e v e rs a t i s ﬁ e dw i t hw h a t e v e r
others do for him/her but must always make
some adjustment.)
375. Ináńjóògiriòsá,ówáńgbágẹẹrẹgẹẹrẹ
sómi.
Fire burns and the wall does not run from
it; now it moves threateningly toward water.
(A person who is powerless against others
should not make threatening moves.)
376. Inúburúkúlàgbàńní,àgbàkìíníojú
burúkú.
An unpleasant inside is what a venerable
elder should have; a venerable elder should
not have an unpleasant mien. (One should
not permit the way one really feels to push
one into unseemly behavior.)
377. Ipaọgb/eacutedotbelowníńsàn;ipaohùnkìísàn.
The wound left by a cutlass may heal, but
the wound left by speech does not heal. (In-
jury inﬂicted through speech is impossible
to heal.)
378. Ìpàk/oacutedotbelowonípàk/oacutedotbelowlàńrí;eniẹl/eacutedotbelowniníńrítẹni.
One sees only other peoples’ occiputs; only
others can see one’s own. (One usually pays
closer attention to other people’s faults than
to one’s own, of which others are quite
aware. Compare 3888.)
379. Ìpéǹpéjúòníenini;àgbàlagbàirùngb/ogravedotbelown
òṣeòlòó.
The eyelashes do not make dew; a venerable
Onhumility 71


--- PAGE 85 ---
old beard does not behave like an ingenue.
(Some habits are ﬁtting for one’s station;
others are not.)
380. Ìr/eacutedotbelowjẹòsínínúuf/oacutedotbelowtò;bíobáṣejókòónio
óbàáara-àrẹ.
There is no cheating in photography; it is
just as you sit that you will ﬁnd your image.
(One’s public perception depends ultimately
on one’s self-presentation.)
381. Irúaṣọòtánnínuàṣà.
The likeness of a particular type of cloth
is not lacking among those in fashion. (No
one has a monopoly on certain qualities.
Compare the following entry.)
382. IrúerinòtánníÀl/oacutedotbelow.
The likeness of an elephant is not scarce in
Àl/oacutedotbelow.
58 (Nobody is one of a kind. Compare
the preceding entry.)
383. Ìrùk/egravedotbelowr/egravedotbelowkìíyanIfálódì;oge,dúróo
kími.
The horse-tail whisk does not shun Ifá;
high-fashion maiden, pause awhile and give
me a greeting. (One should not neglect to
say hello to other people.)
59
384. Ìsáǹsáòyọ/egravedotbelowgún;ìsáǹsákìíkáwoọb/egravedotbelow.
The fugitive does not stop to pull a thorn
[from his or her feet]; the fugitive does not
stop to clear dinner dishes. (A person who
has committed a crime does not wait around
to be caught.)
385. Ìṣ/eacutedotbelowòtiibìkanmúẹni;ìyàòtibìkanjẹ
èèyàn;bíobárìnrìnòṣì,bíobáojúìṣ/eacutedotbeloww/ogravedotbelowlú,
igbá-kígbániwọ nóﬁbuomifúnẹmu.
Destitution does not attach to one at a par-
ticular place; suﬀering does not attack a
58. Àl/oacutedotbelow, mythical city of elephants, is also a jungle.
59. Ìrùk/egravedotbelowr/egravedotbelow,horse-tail whisk, is one of the tools for
consulting Ifá, the Yoruba oracle.
person at a particular place; if one walks like
a wretch into a town, if one looks like a loser
when when one enters a town, it is with a
miserable calabash that the people will oﬀer
one water to drink. (People treat one the
way one presents oneself.)
386. Ìtàkùntótó/ogravedotbelowpẹkòtópékérinmálọ;
ìtàkùntópékérinmálọÀl/oacutedotbelow,tòunterinní
ńlọ.
A vine as thick as a palm-tree trunk will not
stop an elephant; whatever vine attempts
to stop an elephant from going to Alọ will
go with the elephant instead. (A powerless
person will not stop a mighty person from
doing what he wants; one who attempts it
invites suﬀering for himself.)
387. Ìwàníńjọoníwàlójú.
Character is always remarkable (or good)
in the opinion of its owner. (One naturally
approves of one’s own character.)
388. Ìw/ogravedotbelowfàníḿmúìw/ogravedotbelowfàjó.
Ap a w n e dp e r s o na l w a y sd a n c e sw i t ha
pawned person. (People should know who
share their station and conﬁne their dealings
to them.)
389. Ìw/ogravedotbelownekunìw/ogravedotbelowìt/eacutedotbelow;olongokìígbétìmù-
tìmù.
The measure of the rat is the measure of
the nest; a robin does not live on a cushion.
(One should cut one’s garment according to
one’s size.)
390. Ìw/ogravedotbelowsíníḿbailéàgbàj/eacutedotbelow.
Trading insults brings ruin to an elder’s
h o m e .( A ne l d e rw h of a i l st om a i n t a i nh a r -
mony among the members of his household
will see it destroyed.)
391. Ìyàwótónaọmọọbàkan,/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowlóf/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelow.
The wife who whips a relative of her hus-
72 the good person


--- PAGE 86 ---
band is asking for stern rebuke. (One should
not engage in inappropriate actions.)60
J
392. J/eacutedotbelowj/eacutedotbelowleégúnàgbàńjó.
Sedately is the way an elderly masquerader
dances. (Grown-up people should behave in
a decorous manner.)
393. Jòkùm/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowṣebí/egravedotbelowlú,arólab/egravedotbelowl/oacutedotbeloww/egravedotbelow.
The jòkùm/ogravedotbelowplant looks like the indigo
plant; it is the indigo dye, though, we have
use for. (One should know and employ the
appropriate materials for one’s tasks.)
K
394. Kárínilódeòdàbí-ikábánidélé.
To see a person in the streets is not the same
as going home with the person. (To really
know a person, one must see the person
where he or she lives.)
395. Kárínis/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowfúnniòdàbí-ikás/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowfúnni
kágbà.
Having people to advise one is nothing like
knowing how to take advice. (Nobody can
help anyone who will not help himself or
herself.)
396. Káwífúnẹnikágb/oacutedotbelow;kás/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowfúnniká
gbà;kábèrèọnàl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowèròtókùl/eacutedotbelowhìnkáyé
baàlèyẹni.
If one is spoken to, one should listen; if
one is advised, one should heed the advice;
one should seek direction from straggling
wayfarers in order that one’s life might be
pleasant. (It is wise to heed advice, and it is
60. A wife is expected to accord respect to the rela-
tives of her husband, even very young ones, especially
those born into the family before she married into it.
wise to seek direction from those who have
greater experience. Compare the preceding
and the following entries.)
397. Káwífúnnikágb/oacutedotbelow;kás/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowfúnnikágbà;
à-wí-ìgb/oacutedotbelow,à-gb/oacutedotbelow-ìgbàníńﬁigbáàdánùbu
omimu.
If one is spoken to, one should listen; if one
is advised, one should accept the advice; re-
fusal to listen to speech and refusal to accept
advice leads to using the calabash of depri-
vation as a drinking cup. (Refusal to heed
advice leads to deprivation. Compare the
following two entries.)
398. Káwíkágbàlóyẹọmọèèyàn.
T oh e e da d v i c ei sw h a tb e s tb e c o m e sa
human being. (One should heed advice.
Compare the preceding two entries.)
399. Káwíogún,káwíọgb/ogravedotbelown,‘‘Ngòf/eacutedotbelow,ngò
gbà’’laṣiwèréﬁńp/egravedotbelowkun/ogravedotbelowràn.
Whether one speaks twenty times or speaks
thirty times, ‘‘I do not like it, and I will not
accept it’’ is how the imbecile ends the dis-
cussion. (The incorrigible person will never
listen to reason.)
400. Kàkàkád/ogravedotbelowbál/egravedotbelowfúnGà/mgravebàrí,kár/oacutedotbelowjúká
kú.
Rather than prostrate oneself in homage or
obeisance to a Hausa person, one should
rather die. (An expression of Yoruba super-
ciliousness toward the Hausa.)
401. Kàkàkíàgbòké,àgbòakú.
Rather than cry out, the ram will die. (A
g r o w nm a nm u s tk n o wh o wt oh i d eh i s
pain.)
402. Kàkàkíbàbáranọmọníàdábọoko,
oníkálukúagbéti/egravedotbelow.
Rather than the father carrying the son’s
cutlass home from the farm, each will carry
his own. (People may withhold their respect
Onhumility 73


--- PAGE 87 ---
from one, but one should not abet their
insolence.61 Compare 404.)
403. Kàkàkíigaakànópadàsẹhìn,akán.
Rather than bend backward, the crab’s claws
w i l lb r e a k .( D e a t hi st ob ep r e f e r r e dt or e -
treat.)
404. Kàkàkíkìnìúnṣeakápòẹkùn,ọl/oacutedotbelowdẹa
múọdẹ/egravedotbelowṣe.
Rather than the lion serving as carrier for
the leopard, each will hunt separately. (One
would rather leave a company than remain
in it and be subordinate to those one con-
siders inferior. Compare 402.)
405. Kékerél/ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowﬁgajuil/egravedotbelowlọ.
The toad is only slightly taller than the
earth. (Said of people who behave as though
t h e ya r es u p e r i o rt oo t h e r st h o u g hh a v el i t t l e
reason to believe so.)
406. Kíẹrúmọara/egravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowrú;kíìw/ogravedotbelowfàmọara/egravedotbelow
níw/ogravedotbelowfà;kíọmọlúwàbímọara/egravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowrúỌl/oacutedotbelowrun
ọba.
Let the slave know himself or herself as a
slave; let the pawn know himself or herself
as a pawn; let the well-born person know
himself or herself as the child of God.
62
(Everybody should know himself or her-
self and his or her station in the scheme of
things.)
407. Kìídọw/oacutedotbelow-ọbabakólódiọw/oacutedotbelowọmọ.
Responsibility does not devolve on the
f a t h e ro n l yf o rh i mt os a yi ti sh i ss o n ’ sd u t y .
(An elder must do his or her duty and not
shove it on the youth.)
408. Kíniàǹfàníik/egravedotbelowt/egravedotbelowk/egravedotbelowt/egravedotbelowlárak/eacutedotbelowt/eacutedotbelowk/eacutedotbelowt/eacutedotbelow
à-gùn-fẹs/egravedotbelow-w/oacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelow?
61. The proper thing is for the son to carry the
cutlass for the father.
62. Iw/ogravedotbelowfà(pawn) is a person whose temporary
services one acquires in return for a loan of money.
What is the point of bragging about an ass
which, when one rides on it, one’s feet drag
on the ground? (It is pointless to make too
much of a virtually worthless thing.)
409. Kíniapáríńwáníìs/ogravedotbelowonígbàjám/ogravedotbelow?
What does a bald man want in the stall of
the barber? (One should stay out of places
where one has no business. Compare 412.)
410. KíniDáàróníkótósọpéolè-ékóòun?
What did Dáàró own before he claimed he
was robbed? (Said of a person who could
do nothing in the best of circumstances but
blames his or her lack of success on certain
eventualities. This is a variant of 58.)
411. Kínieléwé-e-gbégbéńtàtíóńsọpéọjàò
tà?
What is it that the seller ofgbégbéleaves has
to sell that she complains that the market
is slow? (Said of people who have funda-
mental problems but complain only of the
symptoms.
63 This is a variant of 59.)
412. Kíniìbámúigúndé/ogravedotbelowd/ogravedotbelow-ọonídìrí?
What would take the vulture to the stall
of the hairdresser? (One should stay away
from places where one has no business.
Compare 409.)
413. Kínióyáàp/oacutedotbelownlórítóﬁṣusínátóńsúfèé
pé‘‘bíatińṣeniinúḿbíwọn’’?
What has the bachelor to feel so superior
about that while he is roasting yams, he is
whistling the song, ‘‘What one does ﬁlls
them with jealousy’’? (Said of people who
are arrogant even though they have no basis
for pride.)
414. Kínionígbáńṣetíaláwoòlèṣe?
What is the calabash owner doing that the
63. Gbégbéleaves are of little use to anyone. They
are reputed to have magical powers, though.
74 the good person


--- PAGE 88 ---
china plate owner cannot do? (Whatever
one can accomplish, those better placed or
better endowed can accomplish also.)
415. Kínioríńṣetíèjìkáòlèṣe?Èjìkáruẹrù
ógba/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowdúnrún;orítati/egravedotbelowníogúnlúgba.
What can the head do that the shoulder
cannot do? The shoulder carried a load and
earned 300 cowries; the head sold its own
for 220 cowries. (One should not be fool-
ish enough to think that the person who
has more power and standing than oneself
cannot accomplish what one has accom-
plished.)
416. Kíniw/oacutedotbelowntińṣeÀm/oacutedotbelowdùnÍlọrin?Ewúr/eacutedotbelow
ńj/eacutedotbelowb/eacutedotbelowè.
What use do the people of Ilorin have for
Ahmadu? Even goats are so named. (Said
to express the overabundance of some com-
modity being discussed.)
64
417. Kíjìpálaṣọ/ogravedotbelowlẹ;òfìlaṣọàgbà;àgbàtíòní
tòfìar/oacutedotbelowjúrakíjìpá.
Durable hand-woven cloth is the material
for shiftless people; loom-woven cloth is the
material for the elders; whichever elder can-
not aﬀord loom-woven cloth should strive
for durable hand-woven cloth. (If one can-
not have the perfect thing, one should strive
to have at least something.)
418. Kòrà,kòlówól/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow,óńwútutuníwájú
onítumpulu.
He does not buy, he has no money, yet he
sits sulkily before the seller of bean fritters.
(Said of people reluctant to accept the fact
that they cannot have what they wish.)
64. At the time Nigeria became independent in
1960, one of the most powerful politicians was Ahmadu
Bello. The people of Ilorin did not care much for him,
apparently, and one person there named his goat after
him.
419. Kòsíẹnitódùnm/oacutedotbelowàﬁoríẹni.
T h e r ei sn oo n ep l e a s e d[ b yo n e ’ ss u c c e s s ]
except one’s own head. (Few people genu-
inely wish that one should succeed.)
420. Kòsímilájọàjọòkún:ara/egravedotbelowlótànjẹ.
Without-me-in-an-assembly-the-assembly-
is-not-complete deceives only himself or
herself. (Whoever thinks he or she is indis-
pensable is self-deceived.)
421. KòsíohuntíṢàngólèṣekójàl/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowrùn.
There is nothing Ṣango can do to enable
himself to rage in a drought. (One cannot
transcend one’s nature.)
65
422. Kò-sí-nílékìíjagunẹnutì.
He-was-not-at-home never fails to prove his
valor with his mouth. (Said of a person who
vows that had he been around when some-
thing happened, he would have performed
wonders.)
423. Kó-tán-kó-tánlajáńláomi.
Swiftly-consumed-swiftly-consumed is the
way a dog laps up water. (Said of people who
attack good things with excessive greed.)
L
424. Labalábáﬁara/egravedotbeloww/eacutedotbelowyẹ,kòlèṣeìṣeẹyẹ.
The butterﬂy likens itself to a bird, but it
cannot do what a bird can do. (Attempts to
emulate those better endowed and qualiﬁed
than oneself always prove futile. Compare
the following entry.)
425. Lábúlábúfarawéaró,kòlèṣebíaró;
pòpòǹdófarawéàgbàdo.
Ash mixed with water likens itself to indigo
dye, but it cannot do what the dye can do;
65. Being the god of thunder, Ṣango can rage only
during the rainy season.
Onhumility 75


--- PAGE 89 ---
the large red bean likens itself to corn.66
(One should know better than to attempt
to overreach one’s capabilities. Compare the
preceding entry.)
426. Lágbájáìbáwàadiìjímèrè;ẹnitóbá
níwájúdioloyo?
Were So-and-So alive, he would transform
himself into a brown monkey; did the per-
son who preceded him ever transform him-
self into any kind of monkey? (One should
not make excessive claims when there is no
basis for them.)
67
427. Láká-ǹlákáòṣééﬁlàjà;ọmọeégúnòṣéé
gbéṣeré.
Al i m pi sn og r e a ta s s e tf o rap e r s o nw i s h -
i n gt os t o paﬁ g h t ;am a s q u e r a d e r ’ sc h i l di s
no easy playmate. (One should know one’s
limits and also what one would be ill advised
to attempt.)
428. Lásánk/oacutedotbelowlàńdéẹtù;óníẹnitórí/egravedotbelowḿbá
ẹtùmu.
One does not wear anẹtùc a pa sam a t t e r
of course; only certain people have heads
suited for such a cap.
68 (Not every person is
made for greatness.)
429. Lékèélékèéòyéẹyindúdú;funfunniw/oacutedotbelown
ńyéẹyinwọn.
Cattle egrets never lay black eggs; only white
eggs do they lay. (Ony certain types of be-
havior are suitable for people in certain
positions.)
66. In the traditional indigo dyeing process a mix-
ture of ash and water is used for ﬁxing the dye.Pòpòǹdó
is Canavalia(Papilonaceae); see Abraham 556.
67. The proverb in all probability refers to thealá-
rìnjócontests of itinerant performing masqueraders,
during which they claim to transform themselves into
animals and reptiles. Oloyois another name for the
brown monkey.
68. Ẹtùis a rich cloth cap that only the prosperous
wear.
M
430. Mát/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowoníle,mát/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowàlejò;
l/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowaraẹnilatińt/eacutedotbelow.
Save face with members of your household,
and save face with complete strangers, such
ap e r s o nl o s e sf a c ew i t hh i m s e l fo rh e r s e l f .
(A person too careful about his or her repu-
tation will end up losing regard for himself
or herself. Some situations call for doing
away with decorum.)
431. Màlúùòlèléríníwájúẹṣin.
A cow may not boast in the presence of a
horse. (One should acknowledge and defer
to those better able than oneself.)
432. Mànàmánáòṣéésuniṣu.
Lightning is no good for roasting yams.
(Many instances of boasting lack the sub-
stance to back them.)
433. ‘‘M`báwàl/Oacutedotbelowy/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowmàtisoẹṣin’’;àgùntàn-
anr/egravedotbelowáníyeníl/egravedotbelowyí.
‘‘Were I at /Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow I would own a horse by
now’’; he should have numerous sheep to
his name in this town. (What a person has
accomplished in his or her present circum-
stances is a good indication of what the per-
son has the potential to do in more favorable
circumstances.)
434. MélòólÈjìgbòtí/ogravedotbelowkan/egravedotbelowńj/eacutedotbelowAyé-gbogbo?
How large a community is Ejigbo that one
of its settlements is named Ayegbogbo [the
whole world]? (One should be modest in
one’s claims.)
435. Modàgbàmodàgó,aréọmọdéòtán
lójúùmi.
I have become old and wise, but childish
play has not ceased to appeal to me. (There
is something of the youth that lingers even
in age. Compare the following entry.)
76 the good person


--- PAGE 90 ---
436. Modàgbàtánèwéwùmí.
Having grown old, I miss youthfulness. (One
does not appreciate one’s youth until one
has lost it. Compare the preceding entry.)
437. ‘‘Modára,modára,’’àìdáraníńp/egravedotbelowkun/egravedotbelow.
‘‘I am beautiful, I am beautiful’’ has ugliness
as its conclusion. (Whoever is infatuated
with his or her attractiveness will end up
being despised by all.)
438. ‘‘Mogb/oacutedotbelowntán,mom/ogravedotbelowràntán’’kìíj/eacutedotbelowkí
agb/oacutedotbelownlóróbíoyin.
‘ ‘ Ia ma l l - w i s e ,Ia ma l l - k n o w i n g ’ ’k e p tt h e
wasp from having as much venom as the
bee. (Whoever will not listen to instruction
will learn nothing.
69 Compare the next four
entries.)
439. ‘‘Mom/Ogravedotbelowbàràmom/Ogravedotbelowfún’’tikìíj/eacutedotbelowkí
àwòkok/oacutedotbelow/ogravedotbelowp/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelownÍfá.
‘ ‘ Ia mv e r s e di n/Ogravedotbelowbàràand versed in /Ogravedotbelowfún,’’
the boast that discouragesàwòkofrom
teaching /ogravedotbelowp/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowIfá verses. (Disdain for ad-
vice or instruction leaves a person in igno-
rance. Compare the preceding and following
three entries.)
440. ‘‘Mom/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowgùn’’lẹṣinńdà.
‘‘I am an expert horseman’’ is usually the
one thrown by a horse. (Assuming that
one knows it all causes one grief. Compare
the preceding two and the following two
entries.)
441. ‘‘Mom/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowgún,mom/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowt/egravedotbelow’’niyán
ewùrà-áﬁńl/eacutedotbelowmọ.
‘‘I know how to pound and I know how to
marsh’’ is what causes pounded yam made
with wateryam to be lumpy. (Knowing it all
can be disastrous. Compare the preceding
three and the following entry.)
69. The idea is that the bee listened attentively to
instructions on how to pack venom in its sting, but the
wasp thought it knew it all.
442. ‘‘Mom/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowtán’’lOrò-óﬁńgbéọkùnrin.
‘‘I know it all’’ is the reason for Orò’s carry-
ing a man away. (Knowing it all leads to
disaster.
70 Compare the four preceding
entries.)
443. ‘‘Mom/ogravedotbeloww/ogravedotbelownara-àmi’’kìíṣ/egravedotbelowr/egravedotbelowk/eacutedotbelowèébú.
‘‘I am jealous of my dignity’’ does not hurl
insults at others. (A person who wishes to
maintain his or her dignity must not by his
or her actions invite insults.)
444. ‘‘Moyó’’ńj/eacutedotbelow‘‘moyó,’’‘‘mok/ogravedotbelow’’ńj/eacutedotbelow‘‘mo
k/ogravedotbelow’’;jẹunǹṣó,àgbà/ogravedotbelowkánjúwàni.
‘‘I am full’’ means ‘‘I am full’’; ‘‘I decline’’
means ‘‘I decline’’; eating with abandon, that
is the father of all greediness. (One should
not accept every invitation to the table.)
N
445. ‘‘Ngóògbaowó-òmiláraṣòkòtòyìí’’;ìdí
làgbàlagbàńṣísíl/egravedotbelow.
‘‘I will get my money’s worth out of these
trousers’’; the grown man only winds up ex-
posing his bare buttocks to the world. (One
should not insist on squeezing every last
ounce of use out of a perishable article.)
446. Níboloforúkọsítíòńj/eacutedotbelowLà/mgravebòròkí?
Where did you discard all other names and
pick for yourself the [unpleasant] name
Là/mgravebòròkí? (Where did you leave good
manners and pick up unbecoming and
unacceptable behavior?)
71
447. Nígbàtíàńtoọkàaòtotiẹm/oacutedotbelowsi.
When we were stacking the corn, we did
70. Even know-it-alls need to remember that a man
who is not a member of Orò’s cult runs the risk of being
k i l l e di fh ei n t r u d e si n t oi t sr i t e se v e na c c i d e n t a l l y .
7 1 .T h i sp r o v e r bi su s e dt oc h a s t i s ep e o p l ea n dt o
order them to snap out of their bad habits.
Onhumility 77


--- PAGE 91 ---
not stack some for the brown rat. (People
should keep their hands oﬀ other people’s
property unless they have been asked to help
themselves.)
448. Nígbàtíom/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowgùn,ẹṣinẹ-/eacutedotbelowṣeṣ/eacutedotbeloworó-
kún?
Since you claim to be a seasoned rider, why
has your horse gone lame? (An expert does
not produce ﬂawed goods.)
449. Nígbàwolàpòẹkùn-úndiìkáláf/oacutedotbelowmọdé?
Since when did a tiger-hide sack become a
thing a child uses to harvest okro? (People
should not presume to lay claim to things or
functions that are far beyond their station.)
450. Ńláńlálọmọabukéńdá:óní‘‘Ìyá,ìyá,
òunóp/ogravedotbelown.’’
The humpback’s child has presented a
formidable dilemma: he cries, ‘‘Mother,
mother, carry me on your back!’’ (A depen-
dent who demands of one what one cannot
p r o v i d ei si n t e n to ns h o w i n go n eu p . )
O
451. Ób/oacutedotbelowl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowiy/ogravedotbelowódòbu.
Salt loses its good quality and becomes like
saltpeter. (A person who has been written
oﬀ loses all regard.
72 See the next entry.)
452. Ób/oacutedotbelowl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowoṣùódàràn-m/oacutedotbelowjú.
The moon loses its esteem and shines all
night long. (A person who overstays his or
her welcome ceases to be valued. See the
previous entry.)
453. Odájúdánu,oòmọ /egravedotbelowsánm/eacutedotbelowsàn-án.
Your eyes ﬂinch not and your mouth is un-
72. When the Yoruba have written someone oﬀ as
irremediably worthless, they say,Ób/oacutedotbelowl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow/egravedotbelow(‘‘It has all
slipped from his or her hands’’).
stoppable, but you do not know nine times
nine. (Too much mouth often indicates too
little substance.)
454. Ódiàwùjọṣòkòtòkíládugbótómọara
r/egravedotbelowLábèṣè.
Not until the gathering of trousers will
Ládugbo know itself as a miscreant. (Some
people will not learn the truth about them-
selves until they are openly disgraced.)
455. Ódiọj/oacutedotbelowal/eacutedotbelowkábukétóm/ogravedotbelowpéikékìí
ṣọmọ.
Not until the end of days will the humpback
realize that a hump is not a child. (People
seldom learn wisdom until it is too late.)
456. Okòmọ/egravedotbelowwàlóńjẹà-jẹ-sùn.
You do not know what black-eyed peas are
like for dinner. (Addressed to a person who
is not mindful of the repercussions of his or
her behavior.)
73
457. Òńjàgb/ogravedotbelownrínèṣínl/oacutedotbelowb/egravedotbelow,oníotitótán.
You are reduced to eating last year’s ante-
lope in your stew, and yet you claim to have
attained the height of good fortune. (A
hard-up person who claims to be prosperous
deceives himself or herself.)
458. Oruládugbóòńrera;kínikásọf/eacutedotbelownitó
ruÒrìṣà-aYemọja?
Because you are carrying a huge pot, you
strut; what would one say to the person
carrying the divinity Yemoja? (Never assume
to be more important than you are, espe-
cially when there are really more important
people around.)
459. Ót/oacutedotbelowkíeégúnlénilókoàgbàdo,èwoniti
Pák/ogravedotbelowk/ogravedotbelowláàrinìlú?
It might be seemly for a masquerader to
73. Black-eyed peas eaten for dinner cause heart-
burn and great thirst.
78 the good person


--- PAGE 92 ---
chase one oﬀ a corn farm, but it is not
seemly for Pák/ogravedotbelowk/ogravedotbelow to chase one in the
middle of town.
74 ( Ap e r s o nw h oi si nn o
position to exercise authority over another
should not presume to do so.)
460. Óyẹẹnigbogbokódínwóaró,kòyẹ
at/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowlé.
It is ﬁtting for everybody to bargain to re-
duce the cost of dyeing clothes, but not the
bed wetter. (The person in desperate need of
a thing cannot aﬀord to be ﬁnicky.)
461. Óyẹẹnigbogbokósọpéiṣuòjiná,kòyẹ
alubàtá.
Everybody has a right to say the yams are
not well cooked, but not thebàtádrummer.
(People should not be too quick to complain
about conditions they helped to engineer.
75
Compare 459.)
462. Óyẹẹnigbogbokósọpé‘‘Ọl/oacutedotbelowruna-
ṣèkan-má-kù,’’kòyẹakúkó.
Everyone can justiﬁably say, ‘‘God, who has
left nothing undone,’’ but not a eunuch.
(People should not act as though they are
unaware of their ﬂaws.)
463. Odòkékerélalákàn-ántilèf/oacutedotbelowepo;bóbá
diàgàdà/mgravegbátán,odòagbéalákànlọ.
It is only in a small stream that the crab
can make its oil; when it becomes huge and
swift, the river sweeps the crab away. (When
times are easy, there is little one cannot
attempt.)
464. Òﬁnniyósọara/egravedotbelow;ìyàwótíńnaọmọ
ìyálé.
74. Pák/ogravedotbelowk/ogravedotbelow is a very minoreégún(masquerader),
as distinct from the major ones that strike terror into
people.
75. The idea is that there was insuﬃcient wood to
cook the yams because so much wood had been used to
make the bàtádrum.
The law will assert itself, [as in the case of]
a junior wife ﬂogging the child of the senior
wife. (Whoever transgresses should expect
more or less automatic repercussions.)
465. Oguntíolójúméjìírísániolójúkan-án
níòúnńlọjà.
The war that the two-eyed person saw and
ﬂed is the same the one-eyed person vows
he will join. (A comment on overreaching
people who attempt feats that have defeated
their betters.)
466. Ohunméjìlóyẹ/Egravedotbelowṣ/oacutedotbelow:/Egravedotbelowṣ/oacutedotbelowjà,óléogun;
/Egravedotbelowṣ/ogravedotbelowjàókúsógun.
Only two things are proper for a warrior:
the warrior goes to war and drives the enemy
oﬀ; the warrior goes to war and dies in
battle. (One should not act in a way that is
not proper or becoming.)
467. Ohuntíàńtàlàńjẹ;kìíṣe/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowoní-
kẹros/iacuteigravenì.
What one sells is what one eats; that does
not apply to the kerosene seller. (One should
be mindful of the peculiarities of one’s situa-
tion.)
468. Ohuntíeèrábálègbéníńpèníìgànnìkó.
Whatever the ant is able to carry is what it
says is its full measure. (One should match
one’s desires to what one can aﬀord.)
469. Ohuntíìr/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowṣetóﬁkánlápá,aláàńtèté
níkíw/oacutedotbelownj/eacutedotbelowkíòunóṣeè.
That which the cricket attempted and broke
at h i g h ,t h ealáàńtètéasks to be permitted
to attempt. (Some fools never learn from
others’ mistakes.)
76
470. Ohuntíkòtóokòókìíjẹàgbàníyà.
A thing that is not worth the least amount
of money should not prove a hardship for
76. Aláàńtètèi sat y p eo fc r i c k e t .
Onhumility 79


--- PAGE 93 ---
an elder. (One should not be defeated by
insigniﬁcant problems.)
471. Ohuntíwèréﬁńseara/egravedotbelow,óp/ogravedotbelowjuohuntó
ﬁńṣeọmọẹlòmírànlọ.
What the imbecile does to himself is far
worse than what he does to others. (Said
when a person intending to injure others in
fact does himself or herself greater injury.)
472. Ohuntóṣeéfagalàńfagasí;èwoni,
‘‘Ìwòyíànámotinaànaàmifága-fàga’’?
One boasts only about things proper to
boast about; whoever heard of the boast, ‘‘By
this time yesterday I had given my parent-
in-law the beating of his life’’? (One should
not cheerfully and boastfully embrace dis-
grace.)
473. Ohuntóyẹnilóyẹni;okùnọrùnòyẹ
adìẹ.
Whatever is becoming for a person is what
is becoming; a noose is not becoming for
a chicken.
77 (One should always conﬁne
one’s actions to those that are proper and
becoming.)
474. Ojúàlejòlatińjẹgbèsè;/egravedotbelowhìn-in/egravedotbelowlà
ńsanán.
It is in a visitor’s presence that one gets into
debt; it is in her absence that one repays the
debt. (One does not estimate how much
hospitality is costing until one’s visitor has
departed. Compare 3454.)
475. Ojúbabaara:a-w/oacutedotbelown-bí-ojú;a-ṣòró-dà-
bí-àgbà.
The eye, father of the body: nothing is as
valuable as the eye; nothing is as diﬃcult to
achieve as the status of elder. (What is most
precious is most diﬃcult to achieve.)
77. A tag to the proverb goesBóbáyẹ/eacutedotbelow,tẹnitíńfàá
ńk/oacutedotbelow?(‘‘Even if it is, what about the person pulling it?’’).
476. Ojúinák/oacutedotbelowlewùràńhurun.
It is not in the presence of the ﬂame that
water yam grows hair. (One dares not strut
when one’s bane is around. Compare 1743.)
477. Ojúkìíp/oacutedotbelownbaáléilékófọw/oacutedotbelowgbál/egravedotbelowilé/egravedotbelow.
A head of a household is never so hard up
that he sweeps his compound with his bare
hands. (However desperate one might be,
there are certain things one must not stoop
to do.)
478. Ojúkìíp/oacutedotbelownbabaláwokóbèrèẹbọàná.
An Ifá diviner-priest is never so hard up
that he asks for yesterday’s sacriﬁce. (One
should not permit hardship to lead one to
demeaning behavior.)
479. Ojúkìíp/oacutedotbelownẹdunkódẹniil/egravedotbelow;ìṣ/eacutedotbelowkìíṣ/eacutedotbelow
igúnkódiojúgbàadìẹ.
The colobus monkey is never so reduced
in circumstances that it becomes a land-
hugging creature; the vulture is never so
badly oﬀ that it becomes the equal of a
chicken. (No matter what one’s misfortune,
one should maintain one’s dignity.)
480. Ojúkìíp/oacutedotbelownòkú/ogravedotbelowrunkóníkíaráayé
gbaòun.
A dead person cannot be so desperate as
to appeal to a living person for deliverance.
(However bad one’s circumstances might be,
one should use good sense in determining
where to turn for help.)
481. Ojúkìíp/oacutedotbelownnikáfàbúròẹniṣaya.
One should not become so desperate that
one takes one’s younger sister as wife. (Des-
peration should not preempt propriety.)
482. Ojúkìípọnnikáfàkísàbora.
One should never be so benighted that one
covers oneself in rags. (Despite adverse cir-
cumstances, one should strive to maintain
one’s dignity.)
80 the good person


--- PAGE 94 ---
483. Ojúkìíp/oacutedotbelownnikáp/oacutedotbelownléhín.
One’s circumstances do not so deteriorate
that one becomes red in teeth. (Adverse
circumstances should not keep one from
attending to essential matters.)
484. Ojúòr/oacutedotbelowlárí:óbímọ/egravedotbelowósọ/oacutedotbelowníỌlání-
yọnu.
Ap e r s o no n l yn e w l ya c q u a i n t e dw i t h
wealth: he has a son and names him Ọlani-
yọnu.
78 (The nouveaux riches will always call
attention to themselves with their ostenta-
tious consumption.)
485. Ojúòtioníṣègùn,óníànaòunńkúlọ.
The medicine man lacks all shame, he an-
nounces that his parent-in-law is dying. (If
one cannot do what is expected, one should
at least not broadcast one’s shame.)
486. Ojútiagb/oacutedotbelown;agb/oacutedotbelownláfàkòléro.
Shame upon the wasp; the wasp has a nest
but no honey. (There is a limit to how much
one can emulate others.)
79
487. Òkétép/egravedotbelowlúọmọ/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowdiọgbọọgbasínúihò;
nígbàtíìyáńfehínpàkùr/oacutedotbelow,ọmọnáàńfehín
pap/egravedotbelowlú.
The giant bush rat and its child become
equals in their hole; the mother cracks palm
nuts with her teeth, and the child does the
same thing. (Too much familiarity makes
comrades of people who are quite distant
from each other in standing.)
488. Òkùnkùnòmẹni/ogravedotbeloww/ogravedotbelow;ódÍfáfún‘‘Ìw/oacutedotbelowtá
nìyẹn’’?
Darkness does not know who deserves def-
erence; it consulted the oracle Ifá for ‘‘Who
might you be?’’ (People who wander about
78. The name means ‘‘Wealth entails such head-
aches!’’
79. Using afàand èrofor hive (nest) and honey is
nonstandard Yoruba.
in darkness cannot expect to be treated with
deference. This is a variant of 511.)
489. Olóbìnrinkankìípagboìja.
A person who has only one wife does not
form a circle for a ﬁght. (A person who does
not have enough helping hands should not
embark on ventures that are too ambitious.)
490. Olójúkankìítàkìtìòró.
A one-eyed person does not attempt stand-
ing somersaults. (One should limit one’s
ambition to one’s capability.)
491. Olómelekìísọpéigiyódàálódel/oacutedotbelowla.
The omeledrummer does not vow that there
will be an earth-shaking performance on
the morrow. (If one has no say, one should
avoid making projections or promises.)
80
492. Olówójẹunj/eacutedotbelowj/eacutedotbelow;òtòṣìjẹuntìpà-tìjàn;
òtòṣìtíḿbáọl/oacutedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowrìn,akọojúlóńyá.
The rich man eats slowly and at leisure;
the poor person eats fast and with anxiety;
the poor man who keeps company with a
wealthy man is exceeding his station. (One
should keep to comrades whose station is
similar to one’s own.)
493. Olówóníḿbáọl/oacutedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowrìn;ẹgb/eacutedotbelowníḿbá
ẹgb/eacutedotbelowṣeré.
It is a rich person that keeps company with a
wealthy person; only people of equal stand-
ing play together. (One should associate with
one’s equals.)
494. Olówóníńjẹiyánẹgbàá.
It is a rich person that eats pounded yams
worth 2,000 cowries. (One’s level of con-
sumption reﬂects the depth of one’s pocket.)
495. Olóyèkékerékìíṣefáàáríníwájúọba.
A minor chief should not act garrulously in
80. The omele,the smallest drum in thedùndún
ensemble, is usually played by an apprentice drummer.
Onhumility 81


--- PAGE 95 ---
the presence of a king. (One should know
one’s station and act accordingly.)
496. Òní,ẹtújìnfìn,/ogravedotbelowla,ẹtújìnfìn;ẹtunìkan
lẹrantówànígbó?
Today, the antelope falls into the ditch;
tomorrow, the antelope falls into the ditch;
is the antelope the only animal in the for-
e s t ?( I fap e r s o ni st h eo n l yo n em i s f o r t u n e
always visits, there is probably something
the person is doing to invite it. See 1777.)
497. Oníbàj/eacutedotbelowòmọra;oníbàj/eacutedotbelowńlọsókoolèó
múobìnrinlọ;ọk/oacutedotbelowkóakọṣu,ìyàwókóewùrà.
The shameless person does not know what
is ﬁtting; the shameless person is oﬀ to raid
a farm, and he takes his wife along; the hus-
band steals staple yams, and the wife steals
water yams. (A man who involves his family
in his questionable ventures has sunk to the
lowest depths.)
498. Oníbàtákìíwọm/oacutedotbelowṣáláṣíkóní‘‘Lèmámù
ńk/oacutedotbelow?’’
The bàtádrummer does not enter a mosque
and ask, ‘‘Where is theimam?’’ (One should
know just where one is welcome and how to
behave there.)
81
499. Onífunraàlejòtíńtètèṣeonílép/egravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelow.
The excessively attentive visitor extends hos-
pitality greetings to the host. (One should
not assume other people’s functions.)
500. Oníg/egravedotbelowg/eacutedotbelowfìl/egravedotbelowk/egravedotbelowd/oacutedotbelowp/ogravedotbelow;oníl/egravedotbelowk/egravedotbelowìbágbowó,
kòr/oacutedotbelowrùnfìl/egravedotbelowk/egravedotbelowso.
The person with a goiter oﬀers a ridiculously
low price for beads; were the beads seller to
accept her oﬀer, she would have no neck to
string the beads around. (One can always
ﬁnd a ruse to get one out of embarrassing
situations.)
81. The bàtádrum and ensemble are associated with
traditional deities and their worship and are therefore
out of bounds in a mosque.
501. Oníléńjẹèsogbìngbindò;àlejò-óníkí
w/oacutedotbelownṣeòunl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowkan/egravedotbelowwà.
The host is eating the fruits of thegbìngbindò
tree; the visitor asks to be treated to some
black-eyed peas. (When one’s benefactor
is experiencing hardship, one should be
realistic in one’s requests of him.)
502. OníṢàngótójótíkògbọny/egravedotbelowrì:àbùkù-u
Ṣàngók/oacutedotbelow;àbùkùara/egravedotbelowni.
The Ṣango worshiper who dances and does
not shake his skirt: he does not disgrace
Ṣango but himself.
82 (A person who does
not live up to his potential disgraces only
himself. See the following entry.)
503. OníṢàngótójótíkòtàpá,àbùkùara/egravedotbelow.
The Ṣango worshiper who dances and does
not kick his legs disgraces himself. (A per-
son who skimps on what is expected of him
disgraces himself. See the preceding entry
and its note.)
504. On-íṣ/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowp/eacutedotbelow-igíbímọósọ/oacutedotbelowníAy/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelow-
kúnlé;ay/ogravedotbelowwolówàláraìṣ/eacutedotbelowp/eacutedotbelowigi?
The seller of twigs for ﬁrewood has a child
and names him Ay/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowkúnle [Joy-ﬁlls-this-
home]; what sort of joy is to be found in
ﬁrewood twigs? (One should not make too
much of nothing.)
505. Oǹpèníńfaọlá;òjípèkìífaọlá.
It is the person who does the summoning
that assumes airs; the person subject to sum-
mons does not assume airs. (One should
know one’s place, especially in the company
of more illustrious people.)
506. Oòrùn,kótìẹw/ogravedotbelowkámábàáỌl/oacutedotbelowj/oacutedotbelowwí.
Sun, go set so one does not blame the owner
of the day.
83 (Subordinates should not be-
82. Ṣàngo worshipers wear skirts, and good Ṣàngo
dancing requires skirt shaking.
83. Ọl/oacutedotbelowj/oacutedotbelow (‘‘Owner of the day’’) is another designa-
tion for God.
82 the good person


--- PAGE 96 ---
have in a manner that would bring their
superior to disrepute.)
507. Oríàgbà-áníyì,ósànjuoríàgbà-áf/oacutedotbelowlọ.
The-elderly-person’s-head-deserves-respect
is better than The-elderly-person’s-head-
is-damaged. (An elder who enjoys respect
is better oﬀ than one who is insulted by
others.
84 Compare 519.)
508. Oríawọlàḿbágbà.
It is on the hide that one ﬁnds the elder.85
(One should always live up to what others
expect.)
509. Orí-ikíníńyáàp/oacutedotbelowntóńsúfèé?Nítorípé
yógùn-ún-yánfúnra/egravedotbelowyónìkanj/eacutedotbelow?
What is the cause of the bachelor’s elation
that makes him whistle? That he will make
pounded yams for himself and eat it by him-
self? (A bachelor with no one to share his
life and his meals has nothing to be cheerful
about.)
510. Orogúnìyáẹ-/eacutedotbelowdáṣọfúnọoníkòbal/egravedotbelow;
mélòónìyáẹ-/eacutedotbelowdáfúnọtóﬁkú?
Your mother’s co-wife made a garment for
you, and you complain that it is not long
enough; how many did your mother make
for you before she died? (People dependent
on charity should be grateful rather than
diﬃcult to please.)
86
511. ‘‘Òruòmolówó’’nIfátíàńdáfún‘‘Ìwọta
nìyẹn?’’
‘‘The dark of night knows not who is a
wealthy person’’ is the oracle one delivers to
‘‘Who might that be?’’ (Nighttime wanderers
84. Oríẹ/eacutedotbelowf/oacutedotbelow!(‘‘Your head is split’’) is an insult.
85. Elders often sit on cowhides when they relax or
adjudicate disputes.
86. The proverb assumes that wives would not ordi-
narily extend generosity toward the children of their
co-wives.
should be prepared for indignities. This is a
variant of 488.)
512. Òtòlò-ójẹ,òtòlò-ómu,òtòlò-ófẹs/egravedotbelowwéẹs/egravedotbelow
erin.
The water buck ate, the water buck drank,
the water buck compared its limbs to an
elephant’s. (Satiation leads to excess.)
513. Oúnjẹọmọkékeréamáawọàgbànínú;
òrùkaọmọkékerénikìíwọágbál/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow.
A youth’s food can enter the stomach of an
elder; it is only a youth’s ring that cannot
slip onto an elder’s ﬁnger. (An elder may
take advantage of the youth in certain re-
spects, but in some others an elder must
respect his status.)
514. Owó/egravedotbelowyẹòsúẹni-ísan;t/ogravedotbelowrànniò
súnw/ogravedotbelown.
People have no diﬃculty paying the money
for glorious events; it is the money for
trouble that is unpleasant to pay. (The
troubles one goes into for honorable pur-
poses are really a pleasure; not so the trouble
to extricate oneself from problems.)
Ọ
515. Ọb/egravedotbelowkìígbéinúàgbàmì.
A stew does not slosh around once inside an
elder. (An elder should know how to keep
conﬁdences.)
516. /Ogravedotbelowbúnríkúọkọtìrànm/oacutedotbelow;óníọj/oacutedotbelowtíọkọ
òúntikúòunòﬁomikanara.
The ﬁlthy person takes advantage of her
husband’s death for blame; she says since
her husband died, she has not violated her
person with water. (Shiftless people will
l a t c ho nt oa n ye x c u s et os h i r kd u t i e s . )
517. /Ogravedotbelowgà-ǹ-gàlọmọ-/ogravedotbelowmińj/eacutedotbelow,ẹmápeọmọ-/ogravedotbelow
miníÒgò-ǹ-gòm/oacutedotbelow!Èwolorúkọrereníb/egravedotbelow?
My child’s name is /Ogravedotbelowgàǹgà; don’t you call
Onhumility 83


--- PAGE 97 ---
my child Ògòǹgò any more! Which of the
two is a good name? (A choice between two
bad things is no choice at all.)
518. /Ogravedotbelowg/egravedotbelowg/eacutedotbelowòl/eacutedotbelowwà;lásánlófarawéṣu.
The poisonous cassava has no attraction; it
resembles a yam only in vain. (No imitation
can be as good as the real thing.)
519. Ọj/oacutedotbelowàgbà-ákúsànjuọj/oacutedotbelowàgbà-át/eacutedotbelow.
The day an elder dies is far better than the
day an elder is disgraced. (Death is prefer-
able to disgrace. Compare 507.)
520. Ọj/oacutedotbelowkanlàḿbàj/eacutedotbelow,ọj/oacutedotbelowgbogbolarańtini.
O n l yo n ed a yb r i n g sd i s g r a c et oap e r s o n ;
the shame is felt every day. (The thoughtless
act of a moment mars one’s reputation for a
long time. See the following entry.)
521. Ọj/oacutedotbelowkanṣoṣolàńt/eacutedotbelow;ojoojúm/oacutedotbelowlojúńtini.
It takes only one day to disgrace oneself; the
shame is a daily aﬀair. (Fleeting indiscre-
tions have lasting eﬀects. See the preceding
entry.)
522. Ọj/oacutedotbelowtíalákàn-ántińṣepo,kòkúnorùbà.
In all the days the crab has been making oil,
it has not ﬁlled a pot. (Said of people who
have labored long but have nothing to show
for all their eﬀort.)
523. ‘‘Ọj/oacutedotbelowtímotiḿb/ogravedotbelowngòrírú/egravedotbelowrí’’:olúwa
/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowmọìw/ogravedotbelownara/egravedotbelowni.
‘‘In all the days I have walked this earth, I
have never seen the like’’: that person knows
h i sp l a c e .( I fo n ek n o w so n e ’ sp l a c e ,o n ew i l l
be spared humiliation.)
524. /Ogravedotbelowkánjúwààgbàníńsọara/egravedotbelowdèwe.
It is an avaricious elder that turns himself
into a child. (An elder who cannot control
his appetite asks to be treated like a child.)
525. /Ogravedotbelowkánjúwàalágbaàníńgarùnwoeégún.
It is an insatiable chief of the masqueraders’
cult that stands on tiptoe to watch a per-
forming masquerader. (It is unseemly to be
too greedy, especially when everything is at
one’s disposal anyway.)
526. Ọkùnrinkìíké,akọigikìíṣoje.
A man does not cry; hardwood does not
ooze sap. (Fortitude is the mark of a man.)
527. Ọlọgb/oacutedotbelownkanòtakókóomisáṣọ;/ogravedotbelowm/ogravedotbelowràn
kanòmọoyeerùp/egravedotbelowil/egravedotbelow.
No wise man ever ties water in a knot in
his cloth; no knowledgeable person can tell
the number of grains of sand on the earth.
(There are certain feats that are beyond even
the most accomplished of men.)
528. Ọlọgb/oacutedotbelownòtẹara/egravedotbelownÍfá;/ogravedotbelowm/ogravedotbelowrànòﬁara
/egravedotbelowjoyè;abẹtómúòlègb/eacutedotbelowèkùara/egravedotbelow.
The wise person does not consult the Ifá
oracle for himself; the knowledgeable person
does not install himself as chief; the sharp
knife does not carve its own handle. (The
strongest and wisest of men still would need
the service of other people at some time.)
529. Ọmọàì-jọb/egravedotbelow-rítíńjaeposáyà.
A child new to eating stews: he shows him-
self by dripping palm oil on his chest. (Up-
starts will betray themselves by their misuse
of their new-found fortune.)
530. Ọmọoníl/egravedotbelowát/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowj/eacutedotbelowj/eacutedotbelow.
The owner of the earth treads gently on it.
(Responsible people do not always do as
they can, but behave as is proper.)
531. Ọmọọba/OgravedotbelownàÌṣokùnńﬁehíngéejò,ọmọ
ọbakan-ánníòunkìíjẹ/eacutedotbelow;ìlúwolọmọọba
náà-átiwá?
The prince of /Ogravedotbelowna Ìṣokùn [a ward in Ilésà]
is sharing out snake meat with his teeth, and
another prince says he does not eat such a
thing; where did that prince come from? (If
your betters are reduced to an expedient,
84 the good person


--- PAGE 98 ---
you would be foolish to say it is beneath
you.)
532. Ọmọdédáw/oacutedotbelowtil/egravedotbelow,óníòúntó/ogravedotbelowbọ;bótó
/ogravedotbelowbọ,ótóg/egravedotbelowg/egravedotbelowàyà-ar/egravedotbelow?
A child rests his hand on the earth and
claims it is as big as a monkey [chimpanzee];
even if the child is as big as a monkey, is its
chest as big as the monkey’s? (Equality is
more than mere physical resemblance.)
533. Ọmọdéníẹ/eacutedotbelowtal/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow,óníkíÈṣùwáká
ṣeréowó;ẹ/eacutedotbelowta-áhatóÈṣùúsúepolá?
A child has 3 cowries in hand and chal-
lenges Èṣù to a game played for money; will
3 solitary cowries suﬃce for Èṣù to purchase
palm oil to lick?
87 (People who come into
some money for the ﬁrst time are wont to
overestimate their sudden worth.)
534. /Ogravedotbelowmùtígbàgbéìṣ/eacutedotbelow;alákọrígbàgbé/ogravedotbelowla.
The drunkard ignores his misery; the ill-
fated person forgets tomorrow. (Irrespon-
sible people often indulge themselves in-
stead of taking care of their pressing prob-
lems.)
535. /Ogravedotbelownà/ogravedotbelowfunògbaegungunẹja.
The throat cannot accommodate ﬁsh bones.
(Everybody and everything have some limi-
tation.)
536. /Ogravedotbelowrànòdunọmọẹṣin;amúìyá/egravedotbelowso,ó
ńjẹokokiri.
Problems make hardly any impression on
the foal of a horse; its mother is tied down,
but it grazes nonchalantly about. (Said of
people who show no concern for the aﬄic-
tions of those close to them.)
537. /Ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowb/ogravedotbelowtí-b/ogravedotbelowtíòyẹàgbàlagbà.
Speech like drunken babble does not beﬁt
87. Èṣù is the unpredictable god in the Yoruba
pantheon; his favorite food is palm oil.
a venerable person. (Responsible adults
should be very careful about what they say.)
538. /Ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowòdùnl/eacutedotbelownuìyáolè.
Speech is not pleasant in the mouth of the
mother of a thief. (There is little a miscreant
can say that will impress people.)
539. /Ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowwolówàl/eacutedotbelownualaṣọpíp/oacutedotbelown?
What sort of speech can there be in the
mouth of the person whose clothes are
brown from dirt? (People with blemishes
should keep a low proﬁle.)
540. /Ogravedotbelowsánp/oacutedotbelownoòṣán/egravedotbelowkọ;oòrúnkanàtàrío
òjẹàmàlà;àlejò-ówábàọníìy/egravedotbelowtàríoòrùn
oòríǹkanfúnun;oní‘‘N `j/eacutedotbelowngòníít/eacutedotbelowl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow
/egravedotbelowbáyìí’’?Oòt/iacuteigravet/eacutedotbelowl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowaraẹ,kátóṣ/egravedotbelowṣ/egravedotbelowwá
wípéoót/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowẹlòmíràntàbíoòníít/eacutedotbelow?
The sun rises and you do not eat corn meal;
the sun moves directly overhead and you do
not eat yam-ﬂour meal; a visitor arrives for
you when the sun is just past the overhead
position and you have nothing to entertain
him with; and you ask, ‘‘Am I not in dan-
ger of being disgraced in his eyes’’? Aren’t
you already disgraced in your own eyes?
Never mind whether you may be disgraced
in others’ eyes or not. (What one thinks
of oneself is every bit as important as what
others think of one.)
541. /Ogravedotbelowṣìnòlèmúàwòdìòkè;Bámidélél/ogravedotbelowṣín
lèmú.
The ﬁsh eagle cannot catch the kite ﬂying
on high; it can only catch Bamidele.
88 (Said
of people who will confront only weak-
lings rather than people who match them in
strength.)
88. Bámidéléis a male name. The proverb is prob-
ably based on the play between/ogravedotbelowṣín,the name for the
vulturine ﬁsh eagle, and Ọṣìn, a male name that is
sometimes used as a designation for a king. Bámidélé
(which means ‘‘Come home with me’’) indicates that
the possible prey is one that is readily at hand.
Onhumility 85


--- PAGE 99 ---
542. /Ogravedotbelowṣ/oacutedotbelowọl/oacutedotbelowṣ/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowòyẹni;ṣòkòtòàgbàb/ogravedotbelowòyẹ
ọmọèèyàn.
One never looks good in other people’s
ﬁnery; borrowed trousers do not ﬁt the
borrower. (One should not be a habitual
borrower.)
543. Ọw/oacutedotbelowàìdil/egravedotbelowníńyọkoríkolójúàna/egravedotbelow.
Idle hands are the ones obliged to remove
grass specks from their in-law’s eyes. (People
who are unemployed can expect to be asked
to perform all sorts of belittling tasks.)
544. /Ogravedotbeloww/oacutedotbelownlàńraògo,/ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowlàńra/ogravedotbelowbùn,
iyekíyelàńraìm/eacutedotbelowl/eacutedotbelow.
Honor is always bought dear, ﬁlthiness
cheap, and idleness at an indiﬀerent price.
(Nothing is more diﬃcult to come by than
honor.)
545. /Ogravedotbelowyájú-ubaáléníńpàdéìbòsíl/oacutedotbelownà.
I ti sar e c k l e s sh o m e o w n e rw h oi sm e tw i t h
alarms when he ventures outside. (A patri-
arch who misbehaves earns disgrace.)
P
546. Pamí-nkúobìnrínṣoríbẹmbẹs/oacutedotbelowkọ.
A masochistic woman hardens her head
against her husband. (Obstinacy only invites
harsh punishment.)
547. Pátápátáalágb/egravedotbelowdẹòjuiléàrọlọ.
The most one can expect of the blacksmith
is conﬁned to the smithy. (There is a limit to
a person’s bragging.)
548. P/egravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowlarẹwàńrìn;j/eacutedotbelowj/eacutedotbelowlọmọọl/oacutedotbelowjàńyan.
89
Carefully is the manner in which a beautiful
person walks; gently is the manner in which
89. Ọl/oacutedotbelowjà,literally ‘‘owner of the market,’’ is another
designation for the Yorubaọba(king), because the
market is customarily just outside the palace.
a prince steps. (Gently and carefully are the
best ways to take life.)
549. P/egravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelow-p/egravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelownijóàgbà;aragbogbolódi
àkísàtán.
An elderly person’s manner of dancing must
be very gentle, because the whole body
has become worn to a rag. (Elderly people
should not overexert themselves.)
550. P/egravedotbelowt/egravedotbelowp/eacutedotbelowt/egravedotbelowÌjèṣà,ótas/eacutedotbelownilárakòw/oacutedotbelown.
The mud of the Ìjèṣà: it splashes on one and
will not be washed oﬀ.
90 ( D i s g r a c ei sn o t
easily washed away. Compare 1877.)
S
551. Sanlàńrìn;ajéníḿmúnipák/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow.
Straight and upright is the way one would
walk; it is money that forces one to sneak
about. (When one is in debt, one’s freedom
of movement is compromised.)
552. Sesereńdág/oacutedotbelow/oacutedotbelowbú;oníkam/eacutedotbelowsàn-ánńgbé
ṣíbí.
The insigniﬁcant thing is attempting an
earth-shaking feat; the person with only
nine ﬁngers is lifting a spoon. (Said of a
person overreaching.)
553. Súnmọ/ogravedotbelowhún,súnm/oacutedotbelowìhín!Bíabákan
ògiriilé-ebabaẹni,ṣelàńdúrógbọin-gbọin.
Move away, move over here! When one
moves until one is against the walls of one’s
father’s house, one stands steadfast. (There
90. Most probably this is a riddle doing double
d u t ya sap r o v e r b .T h ea n s w e rt ot h er i d d l eP/egravedotbelowt/egravedotbelowp/eacutedotbelowt/egravedotbelow
/ogravedotbelownàÌjàyè,atasíniláramáw/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelown(‘‘The mud along Ìjàyè
way that splashes on one and cannot be removed’’) is
facial scariﬁcation: the permanent scars of marks cut
into the face during childhood. Each clan had its own
distinguishing pattern of scariﬁcation; members could
easily identify one another thereby when they chanced
to meet in strange lands.
86 the good person


--- PAGE 100 ---
must be a limit to how much one will back
down before enemies.)
Ṣ
554. Ṣàgbà-ṣàgbàònííséàgbàtítíláí.
The elderly person who acts his proper part
will always be respected as an elder. (If re-
sponsible people wish to be retain other
people’s respect, they must always act like
elders.)
555. Ṣágoḿbúgò,ólóṣẹnugbáṣ/oacutedotbelowr/oacutedotbelow.
The demijohn insults the bottle, saying the
latter has a long snout. (It is silly to pick a
blemish one shares as the basis for insult-
ing others; the pot should not call the kettle
black.)
556. Ṣàkìńṣebí/ogravedotbelowrá,egungunńṣebíẹran.
The tripe presents itself as fat; the bone
presents itself as meat. (One should not
pretend to be what one is not.)
557. Ṣálápor/eacutedotbelowòmọẹgb/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelownínúomi.
Ṣálápor/eacutedotbelow [a tiny ﬁsh] does not know its peer
inside water. (One should know who one’s
peers are and not overstep one’s bounds.)
558. Ṣebóotimọ,ẹl/eacutedotbelowwà-aṢàp/oacutedotbelown.
Moderate your preening and strutting, beau-
tiful woman of [the town of] Ṣàp/oacutedotbelown. (Do
not overreach, and do not be too full of
yourself.)
T
559. ‘‘Taníḿbẹníb/egravedotbelow?’’làgb/eacutedotbelowﬁńsánìbàǹt/eacutedotbelow
w/ogravedotbelowlú.
‘‘Who is there whose opinion matters?’’ is
the attitude that makes the farmer come into
town dressed only in a loincloth. (People
who make a spectacle of themselves show no
regard for others. Compare 3313.)
560. TanímọÒkolol/Oacutedotbelowy/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelow?
Who knows Òkolo in [the city of] /Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow?
91
(Said of people who are of no account but
act as though they matter.)
561. Taníńjájáním/oacutedotbelowṣáláṣí?
What would a dog be doing in a mosque?
(Said to tell oﬀ people who are not wanted
in a company. See the entry that follows and
also 4105.)
562. Taníńjẹuntájáńjùrù?
At whose dinner table is the dog wagging its
tail?
92 (Said to tell oﬀ people who make their
presence felt when they should rather make
themselves scarce. Compare the preceding
entry.)
563. T/egravedotbelowt/egravedotbelowkìít/eacutedotbelow.
Spinach is never disgraced.
93 (May one never
know disgrace.)
564. Tòlótòlómọẹnitóńyìnbọnìdísí.
The turkey knows toward whom it farts.
(People must be careful in choosing the
people they presume to approach with
familiarity. Compare 3399.)
W
565. Wèrèèèyànníńwípéirúòunòsí;irú/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelow
p/ogravedotbelowójuẹgbàágbèjelọ.
Only an imbecile asserts that there is none
like him or her; his or her like numbers
91. Òkolo is not a Yoruba personal name but one
used by the ethnic group Ijọ.
92. The Yoruba do not consider dogs to be preferred
company.
93. The play is on the syllablet/egravedotbelow,which occurs in
t/egravedotbelowt/egravedotbelow(spinach) and t/eacutedotbelow(to be disgraced).
Onhumility 87


--- PAGE 101 ---
more than millions. (No one is incompara-
ble.)
566. W/oacutedotbelownńpegb/eacutedotbelownàgb/eacutedotbelownàẹyẹàkókóńyọjú.
The call goes out for a carpenter, and the
woodpecker presents itself. (One should not
think too much of one’s capabilities.)
Y
567. ‘‘Yanàkàràfúnmiwákájìjọjẹ/eacutedotbelow’’:àìtó
èèyàn-ánránníṣ/eacutedotbelowníńj/eacutedotbelowb/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelow.
‘‘Go buy bean fritters for me so we can
eat them together’’: that spells uncertainty
about one’s right to send the person ad-
dressed on an errand. (People in authority
should not be tentative in asserting their
authority.)
568. Yíy/eacutedotbelowlàńy/eacutedotbelowÒkórósítíàńpèénígiobì;
obìtíìbásolórí/egravedotbelowníńyaabidún.
It is only a mark of respect when one calls
Òkóró a kola-nut tree; any kola nut that
might grow on his head would turn out
to be slimy. (People who enjoy the respect
of others should not make the mistake of
overestimating their importance.)
88 the good person


--- PAGE 102 ---
On perspicaciousness (good judgment,
perceptiveness), reasonableness, sagacity,
savoir faire, wisdom, and worldly wisdom
A
569. Abímọkògb/oacutedotbelown,aníkómáṣáàkú;kíní
ńpaọmọbíàìgb/oacutedotbelown?
A child lacks wisdom, and some say that
what is important is that the child does not
die; what kills more surely than lack of wis-
dom? (A foolish child is not much better
than a dead child.)
570. Ad/eacutedotbelowbọfúnigúnnugún,óníòunkòrú;
ad/eacutedotbelowbọfúnàkàlà,óníòunkòrú;ad/eacutedotbelowbọfún
ẹyẹlé,ẹyẹlégb/eacutedotbelowbọ,órúbọ.
A sacriﬁce was prescribed for the vulture,
but it refused to sacriﬁce; a sacriﬁce was
prescribed for the ground hornbill, but it
declined to sacriﬁce; a sacriﬁce was pre-
scribed for the pigeon, and it gathered the
prescribed materials and made the sacri-
ﬁce. (The vulture and the ground hornbill
were unfortunate in comparison with the
pigeon, because they did not carry out the
prescribed sacriﬁce.)
1
571. Afọw/oacutedotbelowmúajáolọ,aṣ/egravedotbelowṣ/egravedotbelowńﬁìkaméjì
pèé.
We grab a dog with the hands and it escapes;
t h e r e a f t e rw eb e c k o ni tw i t ht w oﬁ n g e r s .( I f
both hands cannot detain a dog, two ﬁngers
from a distance will not bring it back.)
1. The Yoruba name for pigeon,ẹyẹlé,means ‘‘house
bird.’’ The domestication of the pigeon gives it a higher
status than that enjoyed by other birds.
572. Afúnọl/oacutedotbelowb/egravedotbelowotamisi;ogb/oacutedotbelownjuọl/oacutedotbelowb/egravedotbelowlọ.
Y o ua r eg i v e ns o m es t e wa n dy o ua d dw a t e r ;
you must be wiser than the cook. (Adding
water is a means of stretching stew. A per-
son who thus stretches the stew he or she
is given would seem to know better than
the person who served it how much would
suﬃce for the meal.)
573. Akìíb/oacutedotbelowsínúomitánkámáasáfún
òtútù.
One does not enter into the water and then
run from the cold. (Precautions are useful
only before the event.)
574. AkìídáarónÍṣokùn;àlàlàńlò.
One does not engage in a dyeing trade
in Ìṣokùn; people there wear only white.
(Wherever one might be, one should respect
the manners and habits of the place.)
575. Akìídáẹrùikùnpaorí.
One does not weigh the head down with a
load that belongs to the belly. (Responsibili-
ties should rest where they belong.)
576. Akìíduoríolóríkíàwòdìgbétẹnilọ.
One does not ﬁght to save another person’s
h e a do n l yt oh a v eak i t ec a r r yo n e ’ so w n
away. (One should not save others at the
cost of one’s own safety.)


--- PAGE 103 ---
577. Akìídunilóyèkáf/ogravedotbelownàilé-eBaál/egravedotbelowhanni.
One does not compete with another for a
chieftaincy title and also show the competi-
tor the way to the king’s house. (A person
should be treated either as an adversary or
as an ally, not as both.)
578. Akìífáoríl/eacutedotbelowhìnolórí.
One does not shave a head in the absence of
the owner. (One does not settle a matter in
the absence of the person most concerned.)
579. Akìíﬁàgbà síl/egravedotbelowsinàgbà.
One does not leave one elder sitting to walk
another elder part of his way. (One should
not slight one person in order to humor
another.)
580. Akìíﬁàì -m/ogravedotbelow-w/egravedotbelowmòòkùn.
One does not dive under water without
knowing how to swim. (Never engage in
a project for which you lack the requisite
skills.)
581. Akìíﬁaraẹniṣe oògùnàl/ogravedotbelowkúnná.
One does not use oneself as an ingredient
in a medicine requiring that the ingredi-
ents be pulverized. (Self-preservation is a
compulsory project for all.)
582. Akìíﬁaṣọṣèdìdíyọwó.
One does not leave cloth in a bundle while
bargaining over it. (It is wise to know what
one is negotiating to buy.)
583. Akìíﬁejò sóríòrùlésùn.
One does not go to bed while a snake is on
the roof. (Never let down your guard while
danger still lurks. Compare 589.)
584. Akìíﬁ/egravedotbelowj/egravedotbelowìbálépatírà;alákotoòbíabo
ọmọ.
One does not smear blood [from a woman’s
deﬂowering] on a Muslim charm; a de-
virgined woman does not give birth to a
‘‘female’’ child.
2 (One must not do the for-
bidden if one does not expect trouble.)
585. Akìíﬁẹranikún gbọntiàgb/ogravedotbelownrínnù.
One does not brush oﬀ antelope meat with
squirrel meat. (Never prefer something of
little value to something of great value.)
586. Akìíﬁ/egravedotbelowt/egravedotbelowsíl/egravedotbelowpalàpálàpá.
One does not ignore leprosy to treat a rash.
(More serious problems deserve more im-
mediate attention.)
587. Akìíﬁidàpaìgbín.
One does not use a sword to kill a snail.
(Remedies should be commensurate with
the problem.)
588. Akìíﬁìgbín s/ogravedotbelowkòsórìṣà.
One does not throw a snail at a god. (Ser-
vice to the worthy should be performed with
decorum, not with insult.)
589. Akìíﬁiná sóríòrùlésùn.
One does not go to bed while there is a ﬁre
on one’s roof. (Better take care of problems
before relaxing. Compare 583.)
590. Akìíﬁìtìjúkárùn.
One does not because of shyness expose
oneself to a disease. (Never be too shy to
speak out on your own behalf.)
591. Akìíﬁìyáẹnídákúṣeré.
One does not as a joke say one’s mother
has collapsed. (Never triﬂe with serious
matters.)
592. Akìíﬁogundán/egravedotbelowṣ/oacutedotbelowwò.
One does not tease a warrior by saying there
2. Muslims are squeamish about blood from the
deﬂowering of a woman.Alákotohere refers to a pro-
miscuous woman, whose child one cannot expect to be
well behaved. A ‘‘female’’ child means a well-behaved
one (of either sex); a ‘‘male’’ child is not.
90 the good person


--- PAGE 104 ---
is a war [or an invasion]. (Do not play with
a loaded and primed gun.)
593. Akìíﬁohun s/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowbúra.
One does not hide something in one’s hand
and yet swear [that one knows nothing
about it]. (It is foolish to tempt fate; the dis-
honest person exposes himself or herself to
the possibility of discovery.)
594. Akìíﬁohun-olóhun tọrẹbíkòṣetẹni.
One does not make a gift of property that is
not one’s own. (Never be too free with other
people’s property.)
595. Akìíﬁokosinfúnìw/ogravedotbelowfà.
One does not hide the farm from the
pawned worker. (It does not make sense to
prevent a servant one has hired from doing
what one hired him to do.)
596. Akìíﬁo lóríogunṣeìfagun.
One does not position the commander of
the army at the rear of the column. (The best
foot is the one to put forward.)
597. Akìíﬁoníjàsíl/egravedotbelowkágbájúm/oacutedotbelowalápẹpẹ.
One does not leave the person one has a
quarrel with and face his lackey. (Focus
rather on your main problem, not a side-
show.)
598. Akìíﬁowóduo yè-ealágbára.
One does not rely on money to contest a
chieftaincy reserved for the strong. (Money
won’t buy everything.)
599. Akìíﬁọlájẹiy/ogravedotbelow.
One does not consume salt according to
o n e ’ sg r e a t n e s s .( T o om u c ho fag o o dt h i n g
can be dangerous.)
600. Akìíﬁ/ogravedotbelownàikùnhan/ogravedotbelowfun.
One does not show the throat the way to the
stomach. (Do not presume to know better
than the expert. See the following entry.)
601. Akìíﬁ/ogravedotbelownàodòhanikún.
One does not show the squirrel the way to
the river. (Telling someone what he or she
already knows is silly. See the preceding
entry.)
602. Akìíﬁ/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowsíl/egravedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelow/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow.
One does not ignore one matter to attend to
another matter. (Every obligation deserves
attention.)
603. Akìígbáẹnitóy/ogravedotbelowbẹmú.
One does not grab hold of a person who
has pulled a knife. (Prudence and caution
are imperative in dealing with dangerous
people.)
604. Akìígb/eacutedotbelowàwòrángàgàràkámáﬁọw/oacutedotbelowẹ
tinǹkan.
One does not carve a tall statue without
resting its hand on something. (Everybody
n e e d ss o m es u p p o r t . )
605. Akìígbéẹranerinléríkámáafẹs/egravedotbelowwa
ihòìr/egravedotbelow.
One does not carry elephant meat on one’s
head and dig cricket holes with one’s big toe.
(If one is blessed with plenty, one should
not keep chasing after triﬂes.)
606. Akìígbéodòjiyàn-anọṣ/eacutedotbelowhótàbíkòhó.
One does not sit by a river and argue
whether the soap will foam or will not foam.
(Where the claim can be put to the test,
verbal argument is foolish. Compare 4861.)
607. Akìígbé/ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowsọnùkátúnbèrè-ejàǹto.
One does not throw a toad away and inquire
after its young. (Commiseration after injury
is hypocritical.)
608. Akìígbójú-ufífòléadìẹàgàgà;akìí
gbójú-uyíyanléalágẹmọ.
One should not expect ﬂight from the ﬂight-
less chicken; one should not expect striding
Onperspicaciousness 91


--- PAGE 105 ---
from a chameleon. (To expect the impossible
is to delude oneself.)
609. Akìígb/oacutedotbelowẹj/oacutedotbelowẹnìkandáj/oacutedotbelow.
One does not deliver a verdict after hearing
only one side. (Justice requires impartiality
and a full hearing.)
610. Akìíjẹ‘‘Mof/eacutedotbelowr/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelow’’l/oacutedotbelowb/egravedotbelow.
One does not eat ‘‘I almost’’ in a stew.
3
(What one missed narrowly, one cannot
enjoy at all.)
611. Akìíkaigúnm/oacutedotbelowẹranjíjẹ.
One does not list vultures among edible
meats. (Certain things one does not stoop
to do.)
612. Akìíkailéòrìṣàkúnìlú.
One does not count a god’s grove as part of
the town. (Do not list questionable items as
part of your wealth.)
613. Akìíkaoyúninúkúnọmọil/egravedotbelow.
One does not count a fetus among living
children. (Never count your chickens before
they are hatched.)
614. Akìíkaọmọfúnòbí.
One does not enumerate children for the
parents. (Do not presume to know better
than those most intimately involved.)
615. Akìíkọọmọ-/oacutedotbelowbíkásọ/oacutedotbelowníÈwolódé?
One does not so resent having a child
that one names it What-is-this-that-has-
happened? (Childbirth is always a happy
event.)
616. Akìílékuméjìkámápòfo.
One does not chase two rats and avoid
3. The quoted element is short for ‘‘I almost hit the
prey I was aiming at.’’
coming up with nothing. (Never try to go in
two directions at once. See also 935.)
617. Akìíl/oacutedotbelowmọl/eacutedotbelowhinkọoúnjẹ.
One does not have children at one’s rear
and yet refuse food. (No amount of anger or
distress should keep one from looking after
one’s dependents.)
618. Akìímọọkọọmọkátúnmọàlè-er/egravedotbelow.
One does not acknowledge the husband
for one’s child and also acknowledge her
illicit lover. (Never betray trust or connive at
betraying it.)
619. Akìímúìbọntetere.
One does not hold a gun carelessly. (Always
be careful in handling dangerous matters.)
620. Akìímúokomúẹj/oacutedotbelowkí/ogravedotbelowkanmáy/egravedotbelow.
One does not opt to work on the farm and
also opt to go argue one’s case and avoid
neglecting one or the other. (One cannot do
two mind-absorbing tasks at once. Compare
623 and 645.)
621. Akìímúọmọoǹd/oacutedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowdè.
One does not chain the child of a person
w h oo ﬀ e r st o ol o wap r i c ef o ro n e ’ sw a r e s .( I t
is not a crime to make an oﬀer that might be
unacceptable.)
622. AkìímúọmọòṣìlọsíÌl/oacutedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow.
One does not take a child destined for
poverty to Ìl/oacutedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow.
4 (A person cannot tran-
scend his or her destiny.)
623. Akìímúlémókok/oacutedotbelowkanmáy/egravedotbelow.
One does not devote oneself to the home
and devote oneself to the farm and not wind
up neglecting one of them. (One cannot go
4. Ìl/oacutedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow is an Ìjèṣà township whose name translates
as ‘‘Town of Riches.’’
92 the good person


--- PAGE 106 ---
in two opposite directions at once. Compare
620 and 645.)
624. Akìíníẹgbàáníléwáẹgbàáròde.
One does not have 1,000 cowries (or six
pence) at home and go chasing abroad
for 1,000 cowries. (Only the promise of a
greater fortune should tempt one to neglect
what one already has.)
625. Akìípaasínwínilé,nítoríọj/oacutedotbelowtítòdeyó
bàáwásílé.
One does not kill the imbecile within one’s
home, because of the day when the one from
outside might visit. (One should cultivate
one’s own madness; one might need it to
combat others’ madness.)
626. Akìípaigún,akìíjẹigún,akìíﬁigún
bọrí.
One does not kill the vulture; one does not
eat the vulture; one does not oﬀer the vul-
ture as a sacriﬁce to one’s head. (Certain
behaviors are beyond the pale.)
627. Akìípékíòṣìkàṣeékáwòó.
One does not dare a wicked person to do his
worst. (Never tempt evil people to do their
evil.)
628. Akìípenilólèkámáagbéọmọẹranjó.
One does not suﬀer the reputation of being
a thief and yet go seeking to dance with kids
[baby goats]. (It is foolish to behave in ways
that will conﬁrm people’s evil opinion of
one.)
629. Akìírán/ogravedotbelowlẹwoojúọj/oacutedotbelowàár/ogravedotbelow.
One does not send a shirker to go see what
the morning looks like outside. (Never rely
on the advice of people who have a vested
interest in the matter being considered.)
630. Akìírenísunlọdàsíbú.
One does not collect water from a spring to
dump in the deep. (Do not rob the poor to
further enrich the wealthy.)
631. Akìíríadìẹníl/egravedotbelowkádaàgbàdofúnajá.
One does not see chickens about and throw
one’s corn to the dog. (Always direct help
where it will be appreciated and where it will
do some good.)
632. Akìíríàjẹkùorò.
No one ever sees the leavings of the god
Orò. (What must be consumed must be
completely consumed.)
633. Akìíríbàtáníl/egravedotbelowkáfẹnusíninjẹ.
One does not see abàtádrum on the ground
and use one’s mouth to mimic its sound.
(Too much talk about a problem is useless
when a practical solution has presented
itself. One should not make a person’s case
for him or her when that person is present.)
634. Akìíríewéníl/egravedotbelowkáfọw/oacutedotbelowfámí.
One does not see leaves lying about and
scoop up feces with one’s bare hand. (Take
advantage of whatever aids are available to
you.)
635. Akìíríẹnirannil/eacutedotbelowrùkáyọké.
One does not ﬁnd helpers willing to help
with one’s load and yet sprout a hump on
one’s back [from carrying too heavy a load].
(Always avail yourself of oﬀered help.)
636. Akìíríojúẹkùnkát/oacutedotbelowẹkùn.
One does not see the look on a leopard’s
face and then taunt the leopard. (It is foolish
to invite disaster needlessly on one’s own
head.)
637. Akìísáfúnàjíàkádìgbòlueégún.
One does not run from the herald of the
masquerader and collide with the masquer-
ader himself. (Never court a greater disaster
in an attempt to avert a minor one.)
Onperspicaciousness 93


--- PAGE 107 ---
638. Akìísinàlèkọjáodò;ohuntíńṣeọṣ/eacutedotbelowò
tóǹkan.
One does not walk one’s secret lover across
a river; the causes of huge disasters are
usually insigniﬁcant in themselves. (If
one is engaged in a dangerous venture,
one should not also cast discretion to the
wind.)
639. Akìísọpéabẹ/Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelowmú;nígbànáàniyó
sọpéb/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowniòunòt/iacuteigravepọn.
One does not tell an /Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow person that his
knife is sharp, for only then will he say he
has not even honed it yet. (Oﬀer no braggart
any opportunity to resume his bragging.
Compare 3480.)
640. Akìísọrọìk/ogravedotbelowk/ogravedotbelowlójúolófòófó.
One does not discuss secret matters in the
presence of a tattler. (Be careful with your
secrets.)
641. Akìísùnj/eacutedotbelowrìíìdí.
One cannot be asleep and also be able to
vouch for one’s anus. (Assert only those
things you know for certain.)
5
642. Akìíṣefáàárí/egravedotbelowṣ/eacutedotbelowdídìs/oacutedotbelowmọad/eacutedotbelowt/egravedotbelow.
One does not ﬂaunt one’s ability to make a
ﬁst in the face of a leper’s child. (Never make
fun of people because of their aﬄiction. See
also the following entry.)
643. Akìíṣefáàáríit/oacutedotbelowdídàs/oacutedotbelowmọa-kú-
wárápá.
One does not drool in jest in the presence
of the child of an epileptic. (Never make
fun of aﬄicted people by mimicking their
aﬄiction. Compare the preceding entry.)
644. Akìíṣooretánkálóṣòótìí.
One does not do a favor and then camp by
5. A sleeping person cannot be sure whether he
farted or not.
it. (Having done some good, do not hang
around to compel gratitude.)
645. Akìíṣòwòméjìk/eacutedotbelowranmájẹ/ogravedotbelowkan.
One does not engage in two trades without
having one consumed by goats. (One cannot
eﬀectively manage two enterprises at once.
Compare 620 and 623.)
646. Akìítiojúogunw/eacutedotbelowf/oacutedotbelown.
One does not wait until the heat of the
battle to start looking for palm-leaf midrib.
6
(Always make your preparations well ahead
of the event.)
647. Akìítiojúon-íka-m/eacutedotbelowsàn-ánkàá.
One does not count the ﬁngers of a person
who has only nine in his or her presence.
(One must be discreet in speaking about
other people’s ﬂaws and deformities.)
648. Akìítijúbábaáléiléjẹakátá;bóbá
mú,ìwọnáàamútìẹ.
One should not be too embarrassed to eat a
jackal with one’s host; as he helps himself,
one also helps oneself. (Never be too bash-
ful to adopt the ways of the people among
whom you ﬁnd yourself.)
7
649. Akìíwáaláṣọ-àlànís/ogravedotbelowelépo.
One should not look for a white-clad person
in the stall of palm-oil sellers. (One should
know the likely places to look for whatever
one seeks.)
650. Akìíwànínúìṣ/eacutedotbelowkáperintọrẹ.
One does not wallow in poverty and yet kill
an elephant for public distribution. (Always
live according to your circumstances.)
651. Akìíwíj/oacutedotbelowọwíwòkájàre.
One does not complain about being looked
6. Palm-leaf midrib is the material out of which
arrows are made.
7. A jackal is apparently no enticing food.
94 the good person


--- PAGE 108 ---
at and be vindicated. (One should not com-
plain that other people are doing what one
is also doing.)
652. Akìíyinọmọdélójúara/egravedotbelow;ìfàs/eacutedotbelowhìnní
ńkángun/egravedotbelow.
One does not praise a child in his presence;
only backsliding results. (Children should
not be praised too highly; they should
always be made aware that they can be even
better.)
653. Akúnl/egravedotbelowapàgbò,alubàtání‘‘ojúò
f/eacutedotbelowrakù’’;of/eacutedotbelowbáwọnṣúpóni?
We kneel and sacriﬁce a ram, and thebàtá
drummer shows reluctance to take his leave;
d o e sh ew i s ht oi n h e r i taw i f e ?
8 (One should
always know when to take one’s leave. See
1287. This is similar in import to 63.)
654. Alét/egravedotbelow/mgraveb/egravedotbelowl/egravedotbelowkunjìnnàbíẹnipékób/oacutedotbelowjù
sígbó.
One chases conspiracy away, as though
one would have it disappear into the bush.
(No one should want anything to do with
conspiracy.)
655. Àńf/ogravedotbelowtúnt/eacutedotbelowní,àńfòsìtúṣòkòtò,obìnrín
níakòbáòungb/oacutedotbelowtọmọ.
One spreads a mat with the right hand while
removing one’s pants with the left hand; yet
the woman complains that one is not help-
ing her quest for a child.
9 ( S o m ep e o p l ea r e
8. The kneeling and sacriﬁcing described here are
the ﬁnal activities in funeral obsequies. Thereafter, the
immediate survivors of the deceased turn to practi-
cal matters, such as distributing the dead man’s wives
among themselves for support; hired drummers are
certainly not welcome in such matters. The greetingojú
òf/eacutedotbelowrakù,meaning literally ‘‘the eyes do not [have not]
miss[ed] one another,’’ is spoken on leave-taking, but it
suggests that the person departing is really still present
in spirit.
9. The woman in question obviously has severe
incapable of recognizing and acknowledging
favors.)
656. Àńgbaòròmọadìẹl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowikú,óníwọnò
j/eacutedotbelowkíòunj/egravedotbelowláàtàn.
One struggles to save the chick from certain
death, and it complains that one is prevent-
ing it from foraging at the dump. (Chicks
foraging at the dump are easy prey for kites.)
657. Àńgbèjà/Ogravedotbelowjàá,/Ogravedotbelowjànítaníńjàl/eacutedotbelowhìnkùlé
òun?
We ﬁght in defense of /Ogravedotbelowjà, and /Ogravedotbelowjà asks who
is ﬁghting in his back yard.
10 (Some people
do not acknowledge or appreciate favors.)
658. Aníìrókòniyópaọmọdé,óbojú-w/egravedotbelowhìn;
òòj/oacutedotbelowníńjà?
One curses a child thatìrókòwill kill him,
and he glances to his rear; does the curse
take eﬀect immediately?
11 (The child obvi-
ously does not know that the fact that he
does not die immediately in no way invali-
dates the curse. Compare 1847.)
659. Aníkíolókùnrùnṣetó,óníòunòlèṣe
tó,tò,tó.
The invalid is asked to say,‘‘Tó,’’and he
complains that he cannot keep saying,‘‘Tó,
tò,tó.’’(He has expended more eﬀort in his
refusal than he would have in complying.)
12
660. Aník/oacutedotbelowmọmákùú,oníkòjọbàbákòjọ
ìyá.
We strive to keep a child from dying, and
you say he resembles neither the father nor
diﬃculty in reading intentions and is unappreciative to
boot.
10. Note the play on the syllablejà,w h i c ha saw o r d
means ‘‘ﬁght’’ and forms the main part of the name /Ogravedotbelowjà,
which can be taken to means ‘‘a person who ﬁghts.’’
11. The ìrókòtree is believed to house frightful
spirits.
12. The sound tósuggests something that requires
minimal eﬀort, especially in diction.
Onperspicaciousness 95


--- PAGE 109 ---
the mother. (The person addressed has his
or her priorities reversed.)
661. ‘‘Àńjùw/oacutedotbelown’’òṣééwíl/eacutedotbelowj/oacutedotbelow;ìjàìlaraòtán
b/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow.
‘‘We are driven by envy of them’’ is a bad
case to make; a quarrel spawned by jealousy
is not easy to settle. (Quarrels whose causes
cannot be openly admitted will not readily
end.)
662. Àńkìí,àńsàá,óníòunòmọẹnitókú;
aní,‘‘Alákàáẹgbàá,a-biṣu-w/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow-w/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow-lóko,
a-bàgbàdo-tàkì-tàkì-l/eacutedotbelowgàn’’;óní,‘‘Ọl/oacutedotbelowdẹló
kú,tàbíìnájà?’’
We recite someone’s praise names, we intone
h i sa t t r i b u t e s ,a n dap e r s o ns a y sh ed o e sn o t
know who died; we say, ‘‘He of the two hun-
dred granaries, he whose yams are plentiful
on the farm, he whose corn is abundant in
the ﬁelds,’’ and the person asks, ‘‘Is the dead
person a hunter or a trader?’’ (A person for
whom everything must be spelled out, a
person who cannot make deductions from
the most obvious hints, is daft indeed. See
the following entry.)
663. Àńkìí,àńsàá,óníòunòmọẹnitó
kú;óńgb/oacutedotbelow,‘‘Ikúm/eacutedotbelowrù,/Ogravedotbelowpàgá,a-biṣu-ú-ta-
bí-òdòdó,a-lábà-ọkà,a-roko-f/eacutedotbelowyẹ-jẹ’’;óní,
‘‘Àgb/egravedotbelowlókú,tàbí/ogravedotbelownájà?’’
We recite someone’s praise names, we intone
h i sa t t r i b u t e s ,a n dap e r s o ns a y sh ed o e sn o t
know who died; he hears, ‘‘Death takes a
renowned man, a titled man, whose yams
spread like petals, who possesses barns of
corn, whose ﬁelds are a bounty for birds,’’
and he asks, ‘‘Is the dead man a farmer or a
trader?’’ (This is a variant of the preceding
entry.)
664. Àńs/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowelégédé,obìnrínḿbèrèohuntíà
ńsọ,aní/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowọkùnrinni;bíabákóelégédéjọ,
taniyósèé?
We are discussing pumpkins; a woman asks
what we are discussing, and we respond
that it is men’s talk; after we have gathered
the pumpkins, who will cook them? (The
woman, certainly. There is no point in ex-
cluding her from a matter that will eventu-
ally involve her anyway.)
665. Àńs/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowobìnrin,aníkás/oacutedotbelowbàràkálọ
gbinbàràsódò;tanímáabánipaá?
We speak of women, and someone sug-
gests that we hedge our words and go plant
watermelon by the stream; who will help
in harvesting it? (This is a variant of the
preceding entry.)
13
666. Aríilójú,am/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowl/eacutedotbelownu;òṣòwòoṣẹkìí
p/oacutedotbelown-w/oacutedotbelow-lá.
One can tell by looking, and one can tell by
taste; a soap seller does not lick her ﬁngers.
(Soap is recognizable as soap, and anyone
who has ever tasted it knows that one does
not lick ﬁngers caked with soap. Each trade
has its don’ts. See 794.)
667. Atabàbà,afowó-obàbàrababa.
We sell guinea corn, and with the copper
coins we redeem the old man.
14 (With what
one has one seeks one’s goals. See the fol-
lowing entry.)
668. Atabàbàafowó-obàbàrabàbà.
We sell guinea corn, and with the guinea-
corn money we buy guinea corn. (This vari-
ant of the previous entry suggests that for
all one’s eﬀorts and exertions, one has not
signiﬁcantly altered one’s circumstances.)
13. The proverb features a play on the wordbàrà,
which is both the word for watermelon and an adjective
describing an evasive course.
14. The saying is more a play on the syllablesba-ba
(as to both the diﬀerent tones they can bear and their
diﬀerent meanings) than a real proverb.Bàbàmeans
guinea corn, and owó-o-bàbà(literally ‘‘guinea-corn
money’’) means copper coin, because guinea corn is
copper-colored.
96 the good person


--- PAGE 110 ---
669. Ààrẹńpè/oacutedotbelowòńdÍfá;bÍfábáfọọretíÀàr/eacutedotbelow
fọbińk/oacutedotbelow?
The Ààrẹsummons you and you consult the
oracle; what if the oracle says all will be well,
and the Ààrẹdecrees otherwise? (There is no
point in attempting to restrict the action of
an absolute authority.)
15
670. Àáyáb/oacutedotbelowsíl/egravedotbelow,ób/oacutedotbelowsílé.
The colobus monkey jumps to the ground;
it runs for home. (When danger lurks, the
wisest course is to run for safety.)
671. Àáyágb/oacutedotbelown,Ògúngb/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowsìgb/oacutedotbelown;bí
Ògúngb/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowtiḿb/egravedotbelowr/egravedotbelowniàáyáńtiro.
The colobus monkey is wily, but so is
Ogungbẹ; as Ogungbẹ crouches, so the
monkey tiptoes. (The prey that knows its
stalker’s tricks is safe.)
672. Àbáalágẹmọlòrìṣàńgbà.
The gods heed what chameleon proposes.
16
(One should heed the advice of trusted
friends and advisers.)
673. Àbákìídiòtít/oacutedotbelow;ojonikìíj/eacutedotbelowkádáa.
Plans do not automatically bear fruit; only
the fainthearted do not make plans. (Al-
though plans may never bear fruit, people
should still make them. Compare the follow-
ing entry.)
674. Àbáníńdiòtít/oacutedotbelow;ojonikìíj/eacutedotbelowkáda.
Attempts result in achievement; it is faint-
heartedness that keeps one from making an
15. The proverb came into being in the days of Ku-
runmí the Ààrẹ(military ruler) of Ìjaye in the 1820s. He
was so powerful and so feared that people believed even
oracles could not deﬂect him from any course he chose
to follow.
16. In Yoruba tradition the chameleon is a trusted
servant of the gods. In the myth of creation it was the
chameleon that was sent down to the newly formed
earth to determine whether it was ﬁrm enough yet for
habitation.
eﬀort. (Without striving, one accomplishes
nothing. Compare the preceding entry.)
675. Àbàtìàlàpà:abàátì,abáar/eacutedotbelow.
Unﬁnished, abandoned wall: unable to
master it, one befriends it. (One reconciles
oneself to matters one cannot control.)
676. A-bayé-j/eacutedotbelowkòṣééfìdí/ogravedotbelowrànhàn.
A treacherous person is not someone to tell
profound matters to. (One should keep one’s
secrets from treacherous people.)
677. Ab/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowòṣéégúnyán.
A needle cannot be used to make pounded
yams. (Some tools are inadequate for some
tasks.)
678. Ab/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowtówọnúòkunòṣééwá.
A needle that drops into the ocean deﬁes
ﬁnding. (Some tasks are hopelessly impos-
s i b l et oa c c o m p l i s h . )
679. Abiyamọ,kàgbowàrà;ọj/oacutedotbelowńlọ.
Nursing mother, make the herbal decoction
in good time; the day is waning. (Attend to
duties on time.)
680. Abiyamọkìírìnkóṣánw/oacutedotbelowahá.
A nursing mother does not venture away
from home without a cup. (She must be
prepared to feed the baby.)
17
681. Abiyam/oacutedotbelowpur/oacutedotbelowm/oacutedotbelowmọ-ọr/egravedotbelowjẹun.
The nursing mother lies against her child to
secure food. (One uses every ruse available
in the interest of one’s well-being.)
682. Abiyam/oacutedotbelowṣọw/oacutedotbelowkòtòluọmọ-ọr/egravedotbelow.
A nursing mother cups her palm to strike
her child. (Discretion is the better part of
discipline.)
17. Ahá,a cup cut out of a small calabash, is used in
force-feeding babies.
Onperspicaciousness 97


--- PAGE 111 ---
683. Àb/ogravedotbelowṣ/eacutedotbelowkìíṣeiṣ/eacutedotbelowòòj/oacutedotbelow;iṣ/eacutedotbelow-ẹbabaẹniní
ńgbanil/oacutedotbelowj/oacutedotbelowgan-an.
Spare-time work is no profession; it is an
assignment from one’s father that takes all of
one’s day. (One does not waste one’s time on
triﬂes or hobbies.)
684. Àbùkúnlayégbà.
The world accepts only adding on. (Supple-
ment rather than deplete.)
685. Adánilórófagbárak/oacutedotbelowni.
He who disappoints teaches one to be more
resourceful. (Once disappointed or injured,
one learns to be self-reliant.)
686. Ad/eacutedotbelowt/egravedotbelowògbọd/ogravedotbelowdúródeeléépín.
A leper must not wait for a bearer of abrasive
leaves [eépín].
18 (Know your weaknesses.)
687. Ad/eacutedotbelowt/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowníòúns/eacutedotbelow/ogravedotbelowrànkandeàwọnará
iléòun;óníbíòúnbálọsídàál/egravedotbelow,wọnòj/eacutedotbelowﬁ
kàn-ìn-kàn-ìnòunw/egravedotbelow.
The leper says that he trusts his relatives on
a certain matter; he says when he goes on a
journey, they would not dare use his sponge
to wash themselves. (People have a knack for
skirting dangerous or distasteful situations.)
688. Adìẹìrànàníńṣíwájúòkú.
It is the votive herald-chicken that precedes
a dead person.
19 (Matters must be attended
to in their proper sequence.)
689. Adìẹòlètiìwòyísunkúnehín.
A chicken cannot at this late date bemoan
i t sl a c ko ft e e t h .( E v e r y t h i n ga ti t sp r o p e r
time.)
18. Ficusasperifolia (see Abraham 161).
19. As part of Yoruba funerary rites, a chicken is
sacriﬁced to clear evil forces oﬀ the way of the de-
ceased’s spirit.
690. Adìẹòlórúnkúnẹj/oacutedotbelow.
A chicken has no knees for cases.20 (One
should steer clear of actionable behavior.)
691. Adì/eacutedotbelowríaláásáà,ópaìy/eacutedotbelowm/oacutedotbelow.
The chicken sees the snuﬀ seller and enfolds
its wings. (When one sees potential danger
approaching, one should take precautions.)
21
692. Adìẹ-odòòṣéébọìp/ogravedotbelownrí.
Waterfowl is no good as a sacriﬁce to
Ìp/ogravedotbelownrí.
22 (One should use only tools proper
to the task at hand.)
693. Àdógbaara/egravedotbelowt/eacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelow,kátóﬁoògùnsí?
Could the small gourd save itself, before we
put charms into it? (Do not seek protection
from a helpless person.)
23
694. A-fas/eacutedotbelow-gbèjòńtanara-ar/egravedotbelowjẹ.
He-who-would-collect-rainwater-in-a-sieve
deceives himself. (The shiftless person hurts
himself more than others.)
695. A-fàt/eacutedotbelowlẹw/oacutedotbelow-fannákìídúró.
He-who-carries-live-coals-in-his-palm does
not tarry. (A person who has a pressing
problem has no time for socializing.)
24
696. Àf/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowríkanòjukáríigbóńláb/oacutedotbelowsílọ;ẹbọ
kanòju/ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowèèyànlọ;‘‘Òrìṣágbémiléàtète’’
kanòjuoríẹṣinlọ.
20. It is customary for litigants in Yoruba courts
to state their cases on their knees. The proverb builds
on the fact that chickens have no knees and, therefore,
cannot kneel to state cases.
21. Snuﬀ sellers use chicken feathers to sweep the
snuﬀ from the grindstone.
22. Ìp/ogravedotbelownrí is a god for which the appropriate
sacriﬁce is a chicken.
23. Àdóis a tiny gourd in which people keep
charms, often serving as talismans.
24. Before the advent of matches, people who
wished to start a ﬁre took live coals from an established
ﬁre to start their own.
98 the good person


--- PAGE 112 ---
There is no disappearing trick better than
the availability of a dense forest to disappear
into; there is no sacriﬁce more eﬃcacious
than having many people on one’s side;
there is no ‘‘The gods have elevated me’’ that
is higher than the back of a horse. (Practical
and realistic moves are more reliable than
mysterious expectations.)
697. Af/eacutedotbelowf/eacutedotbelowńdaológììláàmú;oníy/egravedotbelowfunrọra.
The wind is making life diﬃcult for the seller
of liquid cornstarch; corn-ﬂour seller, you
had better watch out! (When even those
b e t t e rs i t u a t e da r ed e f e a t e d ,o n em u s tb e
prepared for tough times.)
698. A-ﬁ-ti/egravedotbelow-síl/egravedotbelow-gb/oacutedotbelow-tẹni-ẹl/eacutedotbelowni:/ogravedotbelowgànj/oacutedotbelowni
w/oacutedotbelownńsìnkú-ur/egravedotbelow.
He-who-neglects-his-own-aﬀairs-to-care-
for-others’-aﬀairs: it is in the middle of the
night that his burial is carried out. (Do not
sacriﬁce your self-interest to take care of
others.)
699. Àfòm/oacutedotbelowńṣeara-ar/egravedotbelow,óníòúnńṣeigi.
The creeper is destroying itself, but it thinks
it is destroying its host. (The host’s death
will also be the parasite’s death.)
700. Àgádágodoòﬁnúhanara-awọn.
Padlocks do not share their secrets with
one another. (Some secrets one should not
divulge to others.)
701. Àgùntànòjíníkùtùkùyùṣeẹnubọbọ.
A sheep does not wake in the morning and
droop its mouth. (One should not dawdle in
the morning.)
702. Àgbàòṣìkàńgbinìyàsíl/egravedotbelowdeọmọ-ọr/egravedotbelow.
A wicked elder sows suﬀering for his chil-
dren. (One’s character often aﬀects the for-
tunes of one’s children. Compare 1306 and
3307.)
703. Àgbàṣooremáwob/egravedotbelow.
Elder, do a favor and remove your eyes from
it. (Do not advertise your acts of kindness or
pointedly await acknowledgment of them.)
704. À-gbà-b/oacutedotbelowòditẹni.
A foster child does not become one’s own
child. (There is nothing like having one’s
own. Compare 2800.)
705. Àgbàdokìíṣeèèyàn;taníńríọmọl/eacutedotbelowhìn
eèsún?
The maize plant is not a human being; who
ever saw children on the back of elephant
grass? (One should not overestimate the
value of things.)
25
706. Àgbàkálabiyamọńgbàjám/oacutedotbelowọmọ-ọr/egravedotbelow.
It is completely and securely that a mother
[bearing her child on her back] supports
the child with a strip of cloth.
26 (One must
be thorough in discharging one’s responsi-
bility.)
707. Àgbàlagbàáṣenúkẹrẹndẹn;èyítómáaṣe
ḿbẹníkùn-unr/egravedotbelow.
An elder shows a smooth belly to the world,
b u tw h a th ew i l ld oi sk n o w nt oh i m .( B e
a person of thought and action, not of
words.)
27
25. When the maize plant develops fruits, the Yor-
uba say,‘‘Óyọọmọ,’’ literally, ‘‘It has sprouted a child.’’
The expression does not, however, mean that the people
believe the plant is human. Elephant grass is almost
identical to maize in size and looks, even though it
b e a r sn of r u i t .
26. After strapping her child to her back, a mother
prevents the child from sliding down by passing a strip
of cloth, /ogravedotbelowjá,under the child’s buttocks and around to
the mother’s front, there tying it snugly.
27. The proverb derives from the fact thatinú(or
ikùn) means both ‘‘mind’’ and ‘‘stomach.’’ The expres-
sion mọinú means ‘‘to know (someone’s) mind,’’ but
to see a person’s stomach is not to know the person’s
mind.
Onperspicaciousness 99


--- PAGE 113 ---
708. Àgb/egravedotbelowjẹòkoròníléńlá.
Pumpkin is never bitter in a big household.
(When one is in need, one cannot be too
choosy.)
28
709. A-gbé-/ogravedotbelow/ogravedotbelowd/egravedotbelowbíòfé,a-mọ-ara-í-rébíoódẹ;
ad/eacutedotbelowbọfúnòfé,òféòrú,agánrángb/eacutedotbelowbọ,ó
rúbọ;às/egravedotbelowhìnwáàs/egravedotbelowhìnb/ogravedotbelowòfédiará/Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow,
agánrándiaráoko;w/oacutedotbelownròpéòféògb/oacutedotbelown.
Òfé,dweller-in-the-corridor, forward as
oódẹ;a sacriﬁce was prescribed foròfé,but
he did not oﬀer it;agánránwent ahead and
oﬀered the sacriﬁce; in the endòfébecame
a citizen of Ọyọ, while agánránbecame a
dweller in the bush; and people thoughtòfé
was foolish.
29 (Never second-guess people
who are better informed than you are.)
710. Àgbìgbò,rọrafò,ọd/eacutedotbelowtidésóko;àgbìgbò
tíòbárọrafòáb/oacutedotbelowsápòọdẹ.
Big-headed bird àgbìgbò,ﬂy warily, for the
hunter has arrived in the forest; anyàgbìgbò
that does not ﬂy warily will wind up in the
hunter’s bag. (Conditions are hazardous; it
behooves everyone to take care.)
711. Àgbòdúdúkọjáodòódifunfun.
The black ram crosses the river and becomes
white.
30 (Propitious events can drastically
change a person’s fortunes for the better.)
712. Àgbokanlàńr/oacutedotbelowIfáadití.
It is with full voice volume that one recites
divination verses for the deaf. (One cannot
be too subtle with the daft.)
28. The size of the household, and the need to feed
the many mouths, makes even the pumpkin with its
slightly bitter taste acceptable food.
29. Òfé,oódẹ(odídẹ,odídẹr/eacutedotbelow), and agánránare all
types of parrots. Because agánránis considered favored
by the gods, it is usually sacriﬁced to them, whileòfé,
which is not so favored, is spared that fate.
30. This is also a riddle, to which the answer is soap.
The traditional soap is blackish in color.
713. Àgbọnkìíṣeoúnjẹẹyẹ.
Coconut is no food for birds. (Some things
and some people are immune to some types
of danger; one should not attempt the im-
possible.)
714. Ahúndùn;kòtóójẹfúnni.
Tortoise meat is delicious, but there is not
enough of it to make a meal. (One should
husband one’s resources wisely.)
715. Ahúnńreàjò,ógbéilé-er/egravedotbelowdání.
Tortoise embarks on a journey and takes
his house along.
31 (One’s dearest possessions
deserve the closest attention.)
716. Ahúnwọnúorù,ókuàtiyọ.
Tortoise has entered into a narrow-necked
pot; now, getting out is a problem. (One
should consider the possible consequences
of one’s actions before acting.)
717. Àìgb/oacutedotbelownniyópaIṣikan;aníìyáar/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowkú,
ónínígbàtíòúngb/oacutedotbelow,ṣeniòúnńdárò;bíyàá
ẹníbákúàáròlàńdá?
Foolishness will be the death of Iṣikan; he
is told that his mother has died, and he says
that when he heard the news, he sorely la-
mented the tragedy; if one’s mother dies, is
it lamentation that is called for? (The well-
bred person is always mindful of his or her
obligations.)
718. Àì-gb/oacutedotbelown-léwenià-dàgbà-di-wèrè.
Lack-of-wisdom-in-youth is imbecility in
adulthood. (The man turns out just as the
c h i l dw a s ;t h eg r o w np e r s o na c q u i r e sh i s
traits in childhood.)
719. Àì-m/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelow-gbé-kal/egravedotbelowleégúnﬁńgbaọtí.
It is ineptitude-in-setting-it-down that
31. The observation suggests that the animal is so
concerned about its possessions that it must carry its
house along on every journey.
100 the good person


--- PAGE 114 ---
makes the wine a spoil for theeégún[i.e.,
that causes the wine to be spilled]. (Inepti-
tude makes an impossible job of the easiest
tasks.)
32
720. Àì-mọw/oacutedotbelow-/oacutedotbelow-w/egravedotbelowniàì-bágbà-jẹ;ọmọtó
mọw/oacutedotbelow-/oacutedotbeloww/egravedotbelowábágbàjẹ.
Not-knowing-how-to-wash-one’s-hands is
not-eating-with-elders; a person who knows
how to wash his hands will eat with elders.
(To qualify to live in society, one must learn
the social graces.)
33
721. Àìpé,‘‘Tìrẹnìyí’’níḿbíayénínú.
Neglecting to say, ‘‘Here is yours’’ is what
incites the earth’s anger. (Failure to take ac-
count of people’s possible inﬂuence on one’s
aﬀairs incites their anger. As long as one
assumes humility, people will let one be.)
34
722. Àì-roko,àì-rodòtíńṣáp/eacutedotbelowfúneégúnjó.
Not-going-to-the-farm, not-going-to-the-
r i v e rc l a p sf o rm a s q u e r a d e r st od a n c e .( I ti s
an idler who makes music for masqueraders
to dance.)
723. Àì-s/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowníńmúẹnurùn.
It is abstention from speaking that makes
the mouth smell. (One should always say
one’s piece in a discussion.)
32. The Yoruba expression‘‘Eégúngbàá,’’ meaning
literally ‘‘Eégún[the incarnated spirit of the ancestors]
has appropriated it,’’ is a way of saying, ‘‘It is lost to
people.’’
33. Washing one’s hands before meals is both a
health requirement and a mark of social grace. It is a
minimum requirement for the privilege of joining the
elders at meals.
34. This belief is reﬂected in the practice of paying
homage to ayé(meaning literally ‘‘the world’’ but in
fact the people of the world) before embarking on any
venture; the gesture, people believe, will safeguard their
venture from ill will.
724. Ajáèṣínòmọdẹ.
A dog born a year ago does not know how
to hunt. (One learns from experience and
maturity.)
725. Ajálàbákí;èseòpẹranfúnnijẹ.
One should rather commend the dog; the
cat does not kill meat for one to eat. (Assign
commensurate values to your assets.)
726. Ajátieré-er/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowbádánilójúlàńdẹsí
ehoro.
It is a dog in whose speed one has faith that
one sics at a hare. (One entrusts important
tasks only to those one can trust. This is a
variant of 729 and 2433.)
727. Ajátíòlétíòṣé-éd/egravedotbelowgb/eacutedotbelow.
A dog without ears is no good for stalking
prey. (A person who cannot be instructed is
useless.)
728. Ajátógbéiy/ogravedotbelow,kíniyóﬁṣe?
A dog that swipes salt, what will it do with
it? (Do not expend your eﬀort on senseless
ventures.)
729. Ajátólèsárélàńdẹsíegbin.
It is a swift dog that one sends after a Kobe
antelope. (This is a variant of 726 and 2433.)
730. Ajàkàṣùòm/ogravedotbelowbíìyàn-ánmú.
The person who eats large helpings does not
care that there is a famine. (Greed knows no
thrift.)
731. Àjànàkúkúròl/eacutedotbelowranàńgọdè.
The elephant is not among the ranks of
animals one lies in ambush for. (The wise
person puts some distance between himself
and a formidable adversary.)
732. Àjànàkúòṣéérù.
The elephant is impossible to carry. (Some
tasks are impossible to accomplish.)
Onperspicaciousness 101


--- PAGE 115 ---
733. Àjàpáníkòsíountódàbíountíam/ogravedotbelow
/oacutedotbelowṣe;óníbíòúnbáńrìnlóko/egravedotbelowpà,/ogravedotbelowk/ogravedotbelow/ogravedotbelowkana
máab/oacutedotbelowsóunl/eacutedotbelownu.
Tortoise says there is nothing quite like what
one knows how to do; it says when it walks
through a peanut farm, peanuts keep pop-
ping one by one into its mouth. (When one
does what one is a true expert at doing, it
seems like performing magic.)
35
734. Àjàpáníọj/oacutedotbelowtíòúntijágb/oacutedotbelown-ọnòolọrùn
òtiwọòunm/oacutedotbelow.
Tortoise says that since the day it learned
the trick of saying yes, its neck has ceased to
shrink. (One who says yes to every request
avoids a great many arguments.
36 See 923
and 983.)
735. Àjàpáńyanlóko;aláìlóye-éníójọ
p/eacutedotbelowp/eacutedotbelowyẹ.
The tortoise struts on the farm; the senseless
person says it resembles a duck. (It is indeed
a fool who cannot discern the obvious.)
736. Àj/eacutedotbelowgbànitik/ogravedotbelowǹk/ogravedotbelow.
Croaking-in-relays is the mark of frogs. (It is
in the nature of sheep to follow and to lack
initiative.)
737. Àj/eacutedotbelowkùlàńmayo.
Remnant-leaving is the indicator of satia-
35. The point in this, as in the next proverb, is that
there is really no trick to what Tortoise does, only the
expected; what is important is that the animal knows
h o wt od oi t .
36. The explanation is that Tortoise was one in the
company of more powerful animals who, whenever
they had heavy loads to carry, sent for Tortoise, but that
animal always refused to oblige, whereupon they gave
it powerful blows on the head. At times, in order to
avoid such blows, Tortoise would carry the loads at the
expense of its weak neck. Finally it learned to say ‘‘Yes’’
to every request but to escape when the animals were
not looking. The moral is that one may agree to every
request, but one does not have to follow through.
tion. (How one lives will show how well oﬀ
one is.)
738. Àjẹkùlàgb/egravedotbelowńtà.
It is the leavings from his table that the
farmer sells. (One takes care of one’s own
needs before one disposes of the excess. See
4137.)
739. Àjẹsíl/egravedotbelow-ẹgbèsètíòj/eacutedotbelowkíẹgb/egravedotbelowfàtóóná.
Long-standing debt, that makes 1,200 cow-
ries insuﬃcient to spend. (Existing debts eat
new fortunes away.)
740. A-jí-má-b/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowjú:tíńﬁojúànáwòran.
A-person-who-rises-in-the-morning-
without-washing-his-face: one who sees
things with yesterday’s eyes. (A person who
does not keep his eyes peeled for develop-
ments is ever behind time.)
741. Àjímúkìítí.
The task one takes on upon waking in the
morning does not ﬂounder. (The task to
which one gives the highest priority does
not suﬀer.)
742. ÀjòkìídùnkódídẹmárèWó.
The journey is never so pleasant that the
parrot does not return to Ìwó.
37 (The so-
journer should never allow the pleasantness
of his or her sojourn to obliterate thoughts
of returning home. See the following entry.)
743. Àjòkìídùnkónílémárelé.
The journey is never so pleasant that the
traveler does not return home. (The traveler
should never forget his or her home. See the
previous entry.)
37. Parrots are associated with Ìwó, a town to
which they faithfully return after their seasonal migra-
tions—a relationship that recalls that of the swallows to
Capistrano.
102 the good person


--- PAGE 116 ---
744. Àjòjílójú,ṣùgb/oacutedotbelownkòﬁríran.
A stranger has eyes, but they do not see. (A
stranger’s eyes are blind to the intricacies of
his or her new surroundings.)
745. À-jókòó-àì-f/egravedotbelowhìntìbíẹnínàróni.
Sitting-without-leaning-the-back-against-
something is like standing. (Never do things
by half measures.)
746. A-ká-ìgbá-tà-ánáwóikú.
He-who-plucks-the-African-locust-bean-
tree-seeds-to-sell spends death’s money.
(Whoever engages in a dangerous venture
more than earns his or her pay.)
747. Àkám/oacutedotbelowẹkùn-únníyọnu.
A cornered leopard poses problems. (One
should be wary in deciding what prey to
stalk.)
748. Àkísàaṣọlaﬁńṣeòṣùká.
A rag is what one uses as a carrying pad.
(One’s most valuable possessions are not for
careless use.)
749. Àkóbal/egravedotbelow,óﬁgbogboarakígbe.
Àkohit the ground and cried out with its
whole body.
38 (A person who needs help
should not be coy in asking.)
750. Ak/ogravedotbelowpẹÌjàyèògb/oacutedotbelowti/egravedotbelow,óníogúnkóAgbo-
roode.
The palm-wine tapper of Ijaye, instead of
looking to his own aﬀairs, says Agboroode
has been destroyed by invaders. (The wise
person learns from others’ misfortunes
instead of gawking at them.)
751. Aláàárùkìíruẹṣin.
The porter cannot carry a horse. (Certain
tasks are impossible to accomplish.)
38. Àko,the dry leaf stem of a palmlike tree, makes
a resonant clatter when it falls to the ground.
752. Aláàjàágbéesókè,oní,‘‘Kóṣẹ!’’;om/ogravedotbelow
bíibilówítàbíire?
The wielder of the incantation rattle lifts it,
and you respond, ‘‘May it be so!’’; do you
know whether he has invoked good or evil?
(One should be certain about what is hap-
pening before one intervenes or becomes
involved.)
753. Alágbàf/ogravedotbelowkìíbáodòṣ/ogravedotbelowtá.
A washerman does not harbor a grudge with
the river. (One does not turn one’s back on
one’s means of livelihood.)
754. Alákata/mgravepòóṣebí/ogravedotbelowbọògb/oacutedotbelown;/ogravedotbelowb/oacutedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelown;
tinú/ogravedotbelowbọl/ogravedotbelowb/oacutedotbelowńṣe.
The person with the crossbow thinks that
the monkey is not clever; the monkey is
clever, but it is following its own strategy. (It
matters nothing to be derided as long as you
know what you are doing and why.)
755. Alákìísàníńt/oacutedotbelowjúab/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowtòuntòwú.
It is the owner of rags who makes sure that
needle and thread are available. (Each per-
son looks after his her own interests.)
756. Aláǹtakùn,bíyóòbáọjà,atakáọlára.
When the spider wants to engage an enemy,
it spins its web around it. (The attentive
person can detect signs of hostility before it
occurs. Also, one makes good preparations
before embarking on a venture.)
757. Aláǹtakùnúntakùnsíìṣasùn,ṣíbí
gbọludé.
The spider has spun its web in the saucepan;
the spoon takes a holiday. (In the absence
of the proper tools, one cannot fault the
laborer for being idle.)
758. Aláṣedànùtíńfajáṣọdẹẹja.
A wastrel uses a dog to stalk ﬁsh. (It is folly
to employ an impossible tool for a given
task.)
Onperspicaciousness 103


--- PAGE 117 ---
759. Àlejòbíòkétélàńﬁèkùr/oacutedotbelowl/ogravedotbelow.
It is a visitor like a giant rat to whom one
oﬀers palm nuts. (One should approach
other people as their stations dictate.)
760. Àlejòtóbèèrè/ogravedotbelownàkòníísọnù.
A stranger who asks the way will not get
lost. (One should be willing to admit one’s
ignorance and seek direction. Compare 73.)
761. Àlùkòòníohùnméjì;‘‘Ódilé’’lagbeńké.
The woodcock has but one statement:‘‘Ó
dilé’’[‘‘Time to head for home’’] is the cry
of the touraco. (One should know when the
time is ripe to start home.)
762. Àlùsìẹs/egravedotbelowtíńfakoríkow/ogravedotbelowlú.
Disaster-causing legs [that] drag weeds into
town. (A person who will bring disaster on
others behaves like the wayward foot that
drags weeds into town.)
763. Am/ogravedotbelownàèṣíkìíṣeam/ogravedotbelownàọdúnnìí.
The person who knew the way last year does
not necessarily know the way this year. (The
person whose knowledge does not grow
with the times soon becomes ignorant.)
764. Am/ogravedotbelowrànbini/Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow,bíobágbéketelérí,
wọnaníokolòńlọtàbíodò.
People-who-know-the-answer-yet-ask-the-
question, natives of /Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow, if they see you
carrying a water pot, ask whether you are on
your way to the farm or the stream. (If the
answer is plain to see, one does not ask the
question.)
765. Amùṣùààgb/egravedotbelowtíńgbinkókò.
A wastrel farmer [that] plants coco yams.
39
( I ti saw a s t r e lf a r m e rt h a tp l a n t sa ni n f e r i o r
crop.)
39. Coco yams,Colocasiaesculentum (Araceae), also
known as taro, are a variety of yams that the Yoruba
eat only for want of something better. Farmers would
rather plant a more favored variety.
766. Àpàèèyànòm/ogravedotbelowpéohuntóp/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowlètán.
A wastrel does not know that what is plen-
tiful can be used up. (A wastrel knows no
thrift.)
767. Àpà-áﬁọw/oacutedotbelowm/eacutedotbeloww/egravedotbelow/egravedotbelowwábọẹnu;àpà,
a-bìjẹun-w/ogravedotbelowmù-w/ogravedotbelowmù.
The wastrel puts all ten ﬁngers into his
mouth; wastrel, a-person-who-eats-with-
abandon. (A wastrel is immoderate in his
eating.)
768. Apajájẹ/eacutedotbelowní/egravedotbelowrùadìẹḿbaòun.
The-person-who-kills-and-eats-dogs claims
to be afraid of chickens. (A hardened crimi-
nal pretends to have scruples about mere
peccadilloes.)
769. Àpàkòm/ogravedotbelowrà,tíńgẹṣinlóríàpáta.
A-shiftless-person-who-knows-not-what-
things-cost rides a horse on rocks. (A person
w h oh a sn op a r ti np a y i n gf o rat h i n gi s
seldom careful in using it.)
770. A-p/eacutedotbelow-/eacutedotbelow-jẹkìíjẹìbàj/eacutedotbelow.
A person who waits patiently for a long
time before eating will not eat unwholesome
food. (Those who are patient will have the
best of things.)
771. Àpèm/oacutedotbelowralàńpeTèmídire.
It is in furtherance of one’s own fortune that
one calls the name Temidire. (Each person
must advance his or her own interests.)
40
772. Àp/oacutedotbelowndògíóṣàrò.
When a bachelor becomes old, he makes
his own cooking ﬁre. (One should make
provisions for the future in one’s youth.)
40. The name Temidire means ‘‘My aﬀairs have
prospered.’’ Although the name indicates that the
bearer is the fortunate one, the person who calls the
name says ‘‘My..., ’ ’t h e r e b yi n v o k i n gh i so rh e ro w n
good fortune.
104 the good person


--- PAGE 118 ---
773. Ara/egravedotbelowlara/egravedotbelow:ṣòkòtòọl/oacutedotbelowpàá.
A little bit of it is a little bit of it: the police-
man’s short pants. (Leave nothing to waste,
for one can always ﬁnd some use for the
smallest remnant.)
41
774. Arakìírọnikáṣ/eacutedotbelowgita.
If one has the wherewithal to live a life of
ease, one does not gather ﬁrewood for sale.
(One who has found success does not persist
in grubbing.)
775. Arakìítuẹnikáká,kíaraóronikoko,
kámáleèjíkàkàdÍfá.
One cannot be so much at ease, or so much
in pain, that one cannot wake early to con-
sult the oracle.
42 (Whatever one’s condition,
one does what one must do.)
776. Ará/ogravedotbelowrunòṣ/eacutedotbelowtíaṣọ.
Natives of heaven do not sew their hems.43
(The uninitiated do not know the customs
of a place.)
777. A-rìn-fàà-lójú-ak/eacutedotbelowgàn,a-yan-kàṣà-lójú-
abúni,abúniòlówóníléjuẹnu-ur/egravedotbelowlọ.
One-who-saunters-in-front-of-detractors,
one-who-struts-before-abusers: those who
abuse one have no money at home, only
their mouths. (One’s best course is to ignore
detractors and insulters; all they have is their
mouths.)
778. Arìngb/egravedotbelowr/egravedotbelowniyómùúoyèdélé;asáréteteò
róyèjẹ.
The person who walks casually is the one
41. Colonial policemen’s notoriously short uniform
pants gave rise to the suggestion or speculation that
they were made out of remnants.
42. This is a reference to the incumbency on the
priests of daily consultation with Ifá.
43. Ará/ogravedotbelowrunis the designation for masqueraders
who are supposed to be the incarnated spirits of dead
ancestors. Their costume is cloth shrouds, usually of
variegated strips that they do not bother to hem.
who will bear a title home; the person who
runs fast has no title to show for his eﬀorts.
(The spoils do not necessarily go to those
who exert themselves most. Compare 1357.)
779. À-ró-kanl/egravedotbelowlaṣọayaba;à-wà-kanl/egravedotbelowniti
yàrà.
Wrapping-from-waist-to-the-ﬂoor is the
style of the queen’s wrapper; digging-down-
to-the-deepest-bottom is the requirement of
the dry moat. (Whatever one has to do, one
must be thorough and not satisﬁed with half
measures.)
780. Arúgbóoǹdágbèsè:ónímélòóniòunóò
dúrósanníb/egravedotbelow?
T h eo l dp e r s o nw h oi n c u r sd e b t :h es a y s
how much of it will he be around to pay? (A
person whose days are numbered can aﬀord
to take on long-term obligations freely.)
781. A-sáré-lówóḿbẹl/oacutedotbelownàogun;A-p/ogravedotbelowṣ/egravedotbelowṣ/egravedotbelow
ḿbẹl/oacutedotbelownàèrò;Bó-p/eacutedotbelow-títí-ng-ó-làḿbẹlábà,ó
ńjẹ/egravedotbelowsuniṣu.
He-who-hurries-after-riches is on his way
to battle; He-who-has-in-abundance is oﬀ
on his travels; Sooner-or-later-I-will-be-
rich is back in his hut, eating roasted yams.
(Wealth comes to those who exert them-
selves, not to those who wait for it to ﬁnd
them.)
782. À-sìnkú-àì-jogún,òṣìníńtani.
Burying-the-dead-without-sharing-in-
the-inheritance leads one to poverty. (One
should have something to show for one’s
eﬀorts.)
783. Asínwínníòunótiinábọlé;w/oacutedotbelownníkó
mátiinábọlé;óníòunósáàtiinábọlé;w/oacutedotbelown
níbóbátinábọléàwọnósọ/oacutedotbelowsi;óníìyẹnk/egravedotbelow
ìkan.
The imbecile said he would torch the house;
he was asked not to torch the house; he said
he certainly would torch the house; he was
Onperspicaciousness 105


--- PAGE 119 ---
told that if he torched the house, he would
be thrown in it; he said, ‘‘That casts the mat-
ter in a diﬀerent light.’’ (Even an imbecile
becomes sane when his life is at stake.)
784. A-sọ-aré-dìjàníńj/egravedotbelowbiẹj/oacutedotbelow.
One-who-turns-play-into-a-ﬁght is always
guilty. (One should take a jest in the spirit of
jest.)
785. A-s/ogravedotbelowkò-sádìẹ-igba,òkòníńsọtíil/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowﬁ
ńṣú.
One-who-throws-stones-at-two-hundred-
chickens will be engaged in stone throwing
until nightfall. (Tackling a job with inade-
quate tools makes the job interminable.)
786. Àṣàyákìíj/eacutedotbelowkíọmọ/ogravedotbelowyàógb/oacutedotbelown.
Roughhousing keeps the young of the cane
rat from learning wisdom. (A person who
takes life as a jest does not learn to be wary.)
787. A-ṣe-kó-súni,ẹrú-uSégbá;óf/oacutedotbelowakèrègbè
tánólọsóde/Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelowlọgbaoníséwá;b/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowniẹgbàá
lowóonísé.
He-who-frustrates-one, Ségbà’s slave; he
broke a gourd and went to /Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow town to hire
a calabash stitcher; and a stitcher’s fee is six
pence.
44 (There is nothing one can do in the
face of ingrained folly.)
788. À-ṣe-síl/egravedotbelowlàb/ogravedotbelowwábá;ẹnitóṣusíl/egravedotbelowáb/ogravedotbelowwá
báeṣinṣin.
What-is-put-aside is what-is-there-to-ﬁnd;
he who puts excrement aside will return to
ﬁnd ﬂies. (One reaps what one sows.)
789. À-ṣ/egravedotbelowṣ/egravedotbelow-t/oacutedotbelow-ọtí-wòokùn-unbàǹt/eacutedotbelowjá;bía
bámuàmuyóńk/oacutedotbelow?
One taste of wine and the belt snaps; what
would happen in the event of drunken-
44. The name Ségbá (séigbá) here means ‘‘Calabash
stitcher’’ or, literally, ‘‘Stitch Calabash.’’
ness? (One should match the response to the
stimulus.)
790. Aṣiwèrèèèyànlòjòìgborońpa.
It is an imbecile who is soaked in the rain
in the middle of a town. (Only an imbecile
ignores a refuge when one is available.)
791. Aṣiwèrèèèyànníńgbèjàìlú-ur/egravedotbelow.
Only an imbecile gets into a ﬁght in defense
of his town. (A town’s cause is no business
of any one individual.)
792. A-ṣoore-jókòó-tì-í,bíaláìṣeni.
A-person-who-does-a-favor-and-squats-by-
it is like a-person-who-has-done-no-favor.
(One should not dwell on what favor one
has done.)
793. Aṣòroójàbíìjàọjà;onítìjúòníísá;ẹnití
ńnàánòníídáw/oacutedotbelowdúró.
Diﬃcult-to-ﬁght is the ﬁght of the market-
place; the self-conscious person will not
run, and the person beating him up will not
stop. (Too much concern with appearances
exposes one to occasional inconveniences.)
794. A-ṣòwò-ọṣẹkìípaowóńla.
A trader in soap does not make big money.
(One’s success cannot exceed one’s enter-
prise. See 666.)
795. Aṣọfunfunòunàbàw/oacutedotbelownkìír/eacutedotbelow.
White cloth and stains are not friends. (A
person of good breeding does not associate
with an ill-bred person.)
796. Aṣọìrókòòṣééﬁbora.
Cloth fashioned from the bark of theìrókò
tree cannot be wrapped around one’s body.
(Always use the proper material for the job
at hand.)
797. Aṣọtáabáríláraigún,tiigúnni.
Whatever cloth one ﬁnds on the vulture be-
106 the good person


--- PAGE 120 ---
longs to it. (The vulture may lack feathers,
but it does not borrow from other birds.
Compare 4355.)
798. A-ṣ/oacutedotbelow-/egravedotbelowhìnkùlébaara-ar/egravedotbelownínúj/eacutedotbelow;ohun
tówunilàńṣeníléẹni.
He-who-spies-on-others-from-behind-
their-walls upsets himself; one does as one
pleases in one’s home. (What one does in
the privacy of one’s home is nobody else’s
business.)
799. Àtàríìbáṣeìkòkòkágbéefún/ogravedotbelowtáy/egravedotbelowwò;
aníótif/oacutedotbelowyányán.
I fo n e ’ sh e a dw a sap o ta n do n eg a v ei tt oa n
enemy to inspect, he would say it was irre-
trievably broken. (An enemy is not one to
t r u s tw i t ho n e ’ sd e s t i n y . )
800. At/eacutedotbelowgùnòṣéégbé.
The wind is impossible to carry. (Certain
propositions are unrealizable.)
801. Àt/eacutedotbelowlẹw/oacutedotbelowòṣééﬁrúná.
The palm of the hand is not good for stok-
ing ﬁres. (One should not attempt diﬃcult
tasks without the proper resources.)
802. Atipoòmọerèé;óní,‘‘Bàbá,moréwé
funfunlóko.’’
Atipo does not recognize beans; he says,
‘ ‘ F a t h e r ,Is a ww h i t el e a v e so nt h ef a r m . ’ ’
(Ignorance is a curse.)
803. Àtònímòníòtóàtàn/oacutedotbelowmàn/oacutedotbelow.
All-day-long is no match for since-yesterday.
(The person who has endured since yester-
day takes precedence over the person who
has endured all day.)
804. A-tọrọ-ohun-gbogbo-l/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow-Ọl/oacutedotbelowrunkìí
kánjú.
The-seeker-of-all-things-from-God does not
yield to impatience. (The supplicant must be
patient for an answer.)
805. A-wí-fúnni-kó-tó-dáni,àgbàòmùjàni.
He-who-alerts-one-before-he-throws-one
is a past master of wrestling. (One would be
wise to avoid adversaries conﬁdent enough
to show their hands beforehand.)
806. À-wí-ìgb/oacutedotbelow,àf/ogravedotbelow-/ogravedotbelow-gb/oacutedotbelowtíńﬁàjèjéọw/oacutedotbelow
mumi.
He-who-will-not-listen-to-talk, he-who-
will-not-listen-to-counsel drinks water
with the bare hand. (The obstinate child
drinks with the bare hand, even though it is
unsatisfying.)
807. Àwít/eacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelowníńj/eacutedotbelowọm/oacutedotbelowgb/eacutedotbelownà;ọmọkìígb/eacutedotbelownà
lásán.
Previous-instruction enables a child to
understand coded speech; a child does
not naturally understand codes. (A clever
child reﬂects the instruction he or she has
received.)
808. Awoaláwolakìídál/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowmejì.
It is another person’s divination that one
does not repeat. (One might not put oneself
out for others, but will do so for oneself.)
809. Àwòdìòkètíńwoìkaraunk/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow,kíniyó
fìgbínṣe?
The hawk in the sky eyes the snail shell slyly;
what will it do with a snail? (One should not
waste time on a task one cannot master.)
810. Awọerinòṣééṣegángan.
The elephant’s hide cannot be used to fash-
ion a gángandrum. (Employ the proper
material for the task at hand.)
811. Awọẹl/eacutedotbelowd/egravedotbelowòṣééṣegb/egravedotbelowdu.
The hide of a pig is no use for making the
gb/egravedotbelowdudrum. (Certain materials are of no use
in some applications.)
812. Awọẹnuòṣééṣeìlù.
The skin of the mouth cannot be used to
Onperspicaciousness 107


--- PAGE 121 ---
fashion a drum.45 (Employ the proper ma-
terials for the task at hand.)
813. Àyànògbẹdùn.
The àyàntree does not accept an axe.46
(Certain approaches must be rejected as
improper.)
814. Àyangbẹẹjádùn;ṣùgb/oacutedotbelownkílaójẹk/eacutedotbelowjá
tóyan?
Dry smoked ﬁsh is delicious, but what is one
to eat before the ﬁsh is smoked? (Although
o n em u s tl o o kt ot h ef u t u r e ,o n em u s ta l s o
take care of the present.)
815. Ayéńlọ,àńt/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelow.
The world goes forth, and we follow. (One
lives according to what life confronts one
with.)
816. Ayéòṣé-ébálérí;w/oacutedotbelownlèṣeniléṣe.
The world is not a thing to exchange threats
with; it can inﬂict disaster. (Be wary in
dealing with the world.)
47
817. Ayéòṣé-éﬁnúhàn;bíol/oacutedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelown,ﬁsíkùn
ara-à/dotbelowrẹ.
The world does not deserve to be trusted; if
you have a store of wisdom, keep it in you.
(People of the world are not reliable; what-
ever wisdom one wishes to pass on should
be reserved for one’s own use.)
B
818. Baáléàìl/oacutedotbeloww/ogravedotbelowniàlejòàìl/oacutedotbeloww/ogravedotbelow.
48
An unsolicitous host makes for a visitor
45. The reference here is obviously to the cheeks.
46. The àyàntree is used for house posts and for
carving drums; it is the àyántree that is used for axe
and hoe handles.
47. ‘‘The world’’ here stands, of course, for people at
large.
48. The word baáléalso means both landlord and
husband.
with no deference. (The visitor responds
according to his reception.)
819. Baál/egravedotbelowàgb/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowníòunònínǹkan-ántà
l/oacutedotbelowrun,kíowóọkàòúnṣáàtipé.
The chief of farmers says he has nothing to
go to heaven to sell; all he cares about is fair
payment for his corn. (If one does not ask
for too much, one will not have to die to
get it.)
820. Baba-ìsìnkúòfọmọ-ọr/egravedotbelowsọfà;alábàáṣe
ńfọmọ-ọr/egravedotbelowkówó.
The executor does not pawn his child; his
helper pawns his own. (The obligated per-
son holds back, whereas the helper risks his
all.)
821. ‘‘Báyìílàńṣe’’níbìkan,èèw/ogravedotbelowibòmín-ìn.
‘‘This is what we do’’ in one place is taboo in
another. (Diﬀerent people, diﬀerent ways.)
822. Bíabábáaṣiwèrègbé ,aógbaodì
ọlọgb/oacutedotbelown;bíabábáewéiyáṣ/ogravedotbelowt/egravedotbelow,aóṣẹẹl /eacutedotbelowkọ.
If one lives with a maniac, one incurs the
enmity of the wise; if one shunsiyáleaves,
one oﬀends the corn-gruel seller. (Keeping
bad company alienates good people; to shun
a person is to shun that person’s friends.)
823. Bíabábáẹránwí,kábáẹrànwí.
As one castigates ẹrán,one should also
castigate ẹràn.
49 (If both sides in a dispute
deserve blame, one should apportion it
accordingly. Compare 826.)
824. Bíabáﬁọw/oacutedotbelow/ogravedotbelowtúnnaọmọ,àﬁọw/oacutedotbelowòsì
fàám/oacutedotbelowra.
If one whips a child with the right hand, one
embraces it with the left. (A child deserving
punishment yet deserves love.)
49. The entities ẹránand ẹrànare imaginary beings
which, as indicated by their names, are practically
interchangeable.
108 the good person


--- PAGE 122 ---
825. Bíabáj/egravedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowtán/egravedotbelowrínlàńrín;bíabáyó
tánorunníńkunni.
After a joke one gives way to laughter; after
satiation one gives way to sleep. (The action
should match the occasion. Compare 833.)
826. Bíabákìl/ogravedotbelowfólè,kákìl/ogravedotbelowfóníṣu/egravedotbelowbá/ogravedotbelownà.
As one warns the thief, one should also warn
the owner of the wayside yams. (The of-
fender and the tempter both deserve blame.
Compare 823.)
827. Bíabáním/ogravedotbelow,/ogravedotbelowm/ogravedotbelowrànam/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelow.
If one says ‘‘Know,’’ the knowledgeable will
k n o wi t .( T h ep e r c e p t i v ep e r s o nc a nd e t e c t
meaning in the slightest of signs.)
828. Bíabáńsunkún,àmáaríran.
While one weeps, one can still see. (However
accommodating one is, one should never
take leave of one’s good judgment.)
829. Bíabáránniníṣ/eacutedotbelowẹrú,àﬁj/eacutedotbelowtọmọ.
If one is sent on an errand like a slave, one
carries it out like a freeborn. (The well-
bred person removes the ﬂaws in a message
sent through him, or a task given him to
perform.)
830. Bíabárántíọj/oacutedotbelowkanìbálé,kárántíọj/oacutedotbelow
kanìkúnl/egravedotbelowabiyamọ,kárántíkanab/eacutedotbelowtíńtani
lára.
If one remembers the day of [the loss of]
virginity, one should also remember the
day of a woman’s delivery, and one should
remember the vagina that smarts. (As one
takes one’s pleasures, one should be mindful
of the pains that make them possible.)
831. Bíabáríèké,àṣebíèèyànrereni;às/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow
ságb/ogravedotbelownajò.
When one sees a devious person, one mis-
takes him for a good person; one talks into
a basket and it leaks. (It is easy to mistake a
bad person for a good one and to place trust
in that person.)
832. Bíabáríòwúr/ogravedotbelow,al/eacutedotbelowńk/oacutedotbelow?
Although one has seen the morning, what
about nighttime? (Nobody should be judged
until he or she has reached the end of his or
her days.)
833. Bíabás/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowtán,ẹrínlàńrín;bíabáyó
tánorunníńkunni.
W h e no n ei sd o n ed i s c u s s i n gam a t t e r ,o n e
laughs; when one is satiated, sleep claims
one. (When a matter has been taken care of,
one turns one’s attention in the appropriate
direction. Compare 825.)
834. Bíabáṣeohunńlá,àﬁèpègbaaraẹni
là.
If one has committed a great oﬀense, one
frees oneself by swearing [innocence]. (One’s
greatest duty is self-preservation.)
835. Bíabátaaráiléẹnil/oacutedotbelowp/ogravedotbelow,akìíríirà
l/oacutedotbeloww/ogravedotbelown-/oacutedotbelownm/oacutedotbelow.
If one sells a member of one’s household
cheap, one will not be able to buy him back
at a great value. (Once one has besmirched
the name of a person one is close to, one
cannot later wipe it clean.)
836. Bíakòbágbé/ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowsọsínúomigbí-
gbóná,kátúngbéesọsítútù,kìímọèyító
sàn.
If one does not throw a toad into hot water
and then throw it into cold water, it does not
know which is better. (It takes a change in
circumstances to make one appreciate good
fortune.)
837. Bíakòbágb/oacutedotbelownjuàparòokoẹnilọ,akìí
paá.
If one is not more clever than the partridge
on one’s farm, one cannot kill it. (To suc-
ceed, one must be more clever than one’s
adversary.)
838. Bíakòbárádànán,àfòòb/egravedotbelowṣẹbọ.
If one cannot ﬁnd a [full-sized] bat, one
Onperspicaciousness 109


--- PAGE 123 ---
sacriﬁces a [smaller] house bat. (One makes
do with what one can ﬁnd. See also the next
entry.)
839. Bíakòbárígúnaòg bọd/ogravedotbelowṣebọ;bíaòbá
ríàkàlàaòg bọd/ogravedotbelowṣorò.
If we cannot ﬁnd a vulture, we may not oﬀer
a sacriﬁce; if we cannot ﬁnd a ground horn-
bill, we may not carry out a ritual. (Nothing
can be accomplished in the absence of the
requisite materials. Compare the previous
entry.)
840. Bíakòbátoríiṣujẹepo,àtoríepojẹṣu.
If one does not eat oil because of yams, one
will eat yams because of oil. (If one does
not perform a duty because one likes it,
one performs it because it is the right thing
to do.)
841. Bíakòbímọrí,akòhar/oacutedotbelowmọl/eacutedotbelowhìnadìẹ?
If one has never had a child, has one not
seen chicks ﬂocking after chickens? (Chil-
dren are no novelty to anyone.)
842. Bíakòránnis/oacutedotbelowjà,ọjàkìíránnisílé.
If one does not send a message to the mar-
ket, the market does not send a message to
one at home. (Without making an eﬀort,
one cannot expect rewards.)
843. Bíakòṣeọdẹrí,akòlèmọẹs/egravedotbelow-ẹkò-lọ-
ib/egravedotbelowun.
If one has never hunted, one would not
know the tracks of ‘‘it-did-not-go-that-way.’’
(One is an ignoramus in a trade that is not
one’s own.)
844. Bíal/eacutedotbelowbál/eacutedotbelow,àﬁọmọayòfúnayò.
When night comes, one gives theayòseeds
to ayò.
50 (When the time comes, one puts an
end to whatever one is doing.)
50. Ayòis a game played with the smooth, hard
of the Helopteleagrandis (Ulmaceae) tree (see Abra-
845. Bíal/eacutedotbelowbál/eacutedotbelow,bọnnọ-b/oacutedotbelownn/oacutedotbelowar/egravedotbeloww/egravedotbelowsì.
When night falls, bọnnọ-b/oacutedotbelownn/oacutedotbelowgoes limp.51
(There must be an end to every struggle and
every exertion.)
846. Bíal/eacutedotbelowkòl/eacutedotbelow,òòb/egravedotbelowkìífò.
If night does not fall, the house bat does not
ﬂy. (All actions must await their auspicious
moments.)
847. Bíapáòkáàràbà,apálèkáegbòìdí-ir/egravedotbelow.
If the arms cannot encompass the silk-
cotton tree, they may encompass its root. (If
o n ei sn om a t c hf o rt h ef a t h e r ,o n em a yb e
more than a match for the child.)
848. Bíàrùnbúburúbáw/ogravedotbelowlú,oògùnbúburú
laﬁńwòó.
If a terrible epidemic descends on a town, it
is confronted with a terrible medicine. (One
matches the medicine to the disease.)
849. Bíeégúnóbàáwọl/egravedotbelow,oròníńṣe.
A masquerader who wishes to disappear into
the ground cries ‘‘Orò!’’(A person intending
to do something extraordinary should give
prior warning.)
850. Bíẹl/eacutedotbelowr/egravedotbelowk/eacutedotbelowrégérégébároẹj/oacutedotbelow-ọtir/egravedotbelowtán,
kórántípéẹl/eacutedotbelowr/egravedotbelowk/eacutedotbelowm/eacutedotbelowkíárírò.
After the person with smooth cheeks has
stated his or her case, he or she should re-
member that the person with blemished
cheeks will have something to say. (The per-
son who looks good owing to the eﬀorts of
his or her subordinates should remember
that they also deserve some credit.)
851. Bíerébíeré,àlàbọrùn-únd/egravedotbelowwù.
Like play, like play, the makeshift cape be-
ham 84), using a board with twelve scooped holes. It is
popular in many parts of the continent.
51. Bọnnọ-b/oacutedotbelownn/oacutedotbelowis another name for the tree
ayùnr/eacutedotbelow,whose leaves droop when night falls. The term
could also apply to a person noted for restlessness.
110 the good person


--- PAGE 124 ---
came a dress. (Imperceptibly, a stop-gap
arrangement has become the status quo.)
852. Bíigíbáwóluigi,tòkèlàńk/oacutedotbelowgbé.
If trees fall atop one another, one removes
the topmost one ﬁrst. (One should attend to
aﬀairs according to their urgency.)
853. Bíikúnbájẹ,bíikúnbámu,ikúnawo
oòrùnal/eacutedotbelow.
When the squirrel has eaten, when the
squirrel has drunk, the squirrel looks at the
setting sun. (Whatever one does, one should
mind the passing of time.)
854. Bíil/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowbálaná,/ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowáfògunigi.
If the earth catches ﬁre, the toad will hop on
a tree. (If your position becomes untenable,
seek refuge elsewhere.)
855. Bíilúbádásíméjì,tọba/ogravedotbelowrúnlàńṣe.
If the town is split in two, one does the will
of the heavenly king. (If there is a division in
one’s group, one takes the side God would
favor.)
856. Bíiṣ/eacutedotbelowkòp/eacutedotbelowẹni,akìíp/eacutedotbelowiṣ/eacutedotbelow.
If a task does not delay one, one does not
drag it out. (Tasks that are easy should be
ﬁnished promptly.)
857. Bíkòbát/iacuteigraverẹìjà,akìílàá.
I faﬁ g h ti sn o ty e ts p e n t ,o n ed o e sn o ti n t e r -
vene to end it. (One cannot end a ﬁght that
is not yet over.)
858. Bíkókóbádáni,akìíjẹoríìmàdò;bía
bájẹoríìmàdò,akìílọsíàwùjọpóńpó;bía
bálọsíàwùjọpóńpó,ìw/ogravedotbelownaraẹnilàńm/ogravedotbelow.
If one is tripped by a protruding object,
one should not eat a warthog’s head; if one
eats a warthog’s head, one should not go
to a gathering of cudgels; if one goes to a
gathering of cudgels, one should know one’s
place and act accordingly. (If unforeseen
circumstances force one to engage in risky
behavior, one should be that much more
careful.)
859. Bínǹkánbátánníl/egravedotbelow,ọmọẹbọab/oacutedotbelowsíjó,
àwọntówàníb/egravedotbelowamúraàtilọ.
At the conclusion of a ceremony the acolyte
commences to dance, and the onlookers
prepare to make their exit. (One should
not hang around after one’s business is
done.)
860. ‘‘Bíobájángóso/oacutedotbelow’’;kókóyówà
láàárín-inr/egravedotbelow.
‘‘If you break I will retie you’’; there will be
a knot in it. (Something repaired is seldom
the same as something unspoilt.)
861. Bíokògb/oacutedotbelowÈgùn,okògb/oacutedotbeloww/ogravedotbelowy/ogravedotbelow-w/ogravedotbelowy/ogravedotbelow?
If you do not understand Ègùn, do you not
recognize signs that someone is speaking?
(One may not understand what a person
says, but one will be able to tell that the
person is speaking.)
862. BíomáaṣeayaOlúgb/oacutedotbelownṣeayaOlúgb/oacutedotbelown;
bíomáaṣeayaArẹsàṣeayaArẹsà,kíoyéé
pák/ogravedotbelowk/ogravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowgb/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowògiri;ẹnitíyóṣeayaOlúf/egravedotbelowa
kógbáwálé.
If you will be a wife to theOlúgb/oacutedotbelown,b eaw i f e
to him; if you will be a wife to theArẹsà,
be a wife to him and stop sneaking around
hugging walls; a person who would be the
wife of the Olúf/egravedotbelowmust gather her aﬀairs into
the house.
52 (Once one has chosen a course,
one should commit oneself completely to it.)
863. Bíobìnrinòbágbéilétóméjì,kìímọèyí
tósàn.
If a woman has not lived in at least two
homes, she never knows which is better.
52. The persons named are titled people, whose
wives would therefore be expected to be above re-
proach.
Onperspicaciousness 111


--- PAGE 125 ---
( U n l e s so n eh a st a s t e ds o m ea d v e r s i t y ,o n e
does not appreciate good fortune.)
864. Bíojúbám/oacutedotbelow,olówòagbówò;/ogravedotbelowrànwúa
gbék/eacutedotbelowk/eacutedotbelow;ajagunagbéapata;àgb/egravedotbelowajítòun
tòrúk/oacutedotbelow;ọmọọdẹajítapótọrán;ajíwẹṣẹabá
odòomilọ.
When day breaks, the trader takes up his
trade; the cotton spinner picks up the
spindle; the warrior grabs his shield; the
farmer gets up with his hoe; the son of
the hunter arises with his quiver and his
bows; he-who-wakes-and-washes-with-soap
makes his way to the river. (When morn-
ing comes, everybody should embark on
something useful.)
865. Bíojúbárí/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow,awòófín.
When the eyes come upon a matter, they
must look hard and well. (Imperfect under-
standing causes diﬃculties.)
866. Bíojúọmọdéòtóìtàn,abáàwígb/oacutedotbelow.
If a youth’s eyes do not witness a story, they
should be good for hearsay. (If one does not
witness something, one learns from those
who did.)
867. Bíolósùn-únbálọosùn,ara-ar/egravedotbelowníńﬁ
dánwò.
When the camwood-powder seller grinds
the powder, she tests it on her own body.
(One tries a remedy on oneself before oﬀer-
ing it to others.)
868. Bíòrìṣábámúẹl/eacutedotbelowhìn,kíabukémáa
múrasíl/egravedotbelow.
If the gods take a person with a protruding
back, the humpback should make ready. (If
a person like you suﬀers a certain fate, you
too are at risk.)
869. Bíòwebíòwelàńlùlùògìdìgbó;olọgb/oacutedotbelown
níńjóo;/ogravedotbelowm/ogravedotbelowrànníńsìím/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelow.
Like proverbs, like proverbs one plays the
ògìdìgbómusic; only the wise can dance to
it, and only the knowledgeable know it.
53
(Only the wise can follow subtle discourses.)
870. BíòwebíòwenIfáńs/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow.
Like proverbs, like proverbs are the pro-
nouncements of [the oracle god] Ifá. (The
most profound speech is indirect and
subtle.)
871. Bí/ogravedotbelowbùnòmọèrè,amọojúowó.
If the ﬁlthy person does not know proﬁt, he
should know his capital. (If a person can-
not improve a matter, he should at least not
worsen it.)
872. Bíọkùnrínréjò,tóbìrínpaá,àníkéjò
máṣáàlọ.
If a man sees a snake, and a woman kills
it, what matters is that the snake does not
escape. (One should not be a stickler about
roles.)
873. Bíọlọgb/oacutedotbelownbáńﬁwèrèseiṣu,/ogravedotbelowm/ogravedotbelowràna
máaﬁgègéyànán.
If a wise person is cooking yams in an insane
way, a knowing person picks them up with
stakes. (If a person tries to mislead you, ﬁnd
your own direction.)
874. BíỌl/oacutedotbelowrun-únbátif/ogravedotbelowtáẹnihanni,kòlè
panim/oacutedotbelow.
Once God has revealed your enemy, that
enemy can no longer kill you. (Knowledge
neutralizes dangers.)
875. Bíọm/oacutedotbelowbájágb/oacutedotbelown-ọnkíké,ìyá-ar/egravedotbelowa
jágb/oacutedotbelown-ọnrír/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelow.
If a child learns the trick of crying, the
mother learns the trick of consoling him or
her. (One must be ready to adapt to cope
with any situation. See the next entry also.)
53. Ògìdìgbóis the royal ceremonial music of /Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow.
112 the good person


--- PAGE 126 ---
876. Bíọm/oacutedotbelowbájágb/oacutedotbelown-ọnkíkú,ìyá/egravedotbelowa
jágb/oacutedotbelown-ọnsísin.
If a child learns the trick of dying, his
mother should learn the trick of burying.
(One should learn to meet wiles with wiles.
See also the preceding entry.)
877. Bíọm/oacutedotbelowbáyó,aﬁkùnhanbaba.
W h e nac h i l di sf u l l ,h es h o w sh i ss t o m a c h
to his father. (When one accomplishes one’s
goals, one feels like celebrating. Also, one
should show appreciation to one’s benefac-
tor.)
878. Bíọmọdébádúp/eacutedotbeloworeàná,arítònígbà.
If a child expresses gratitude for yesterday’s
favor, he will receive today’s. (The grateful
person encourages others to do him more
favors. Compare 3467.)
879. Bíọmọdébáḿb/eacutedotbelowigi,àgbàlagbàamáa
woibitíyówòósí.
If a youth is felling a tree, an elder will be
considering where it will fall. (Unlike the
youth, the elder is mindful of consequences.)
880. Bíọmọdébámọayò,ẹyọl aóﬁpaá.
If a child is an adeptayòplayer, one de-
feats him with single seeds. (A precocious
child may be almost but not quite as accom-
plished as an adult.)
881. Bíọmọdébáṣubúawoiwájú;bíàgbábá
ṣubúawo/egravedotbelowhìn.
When a youth falls, he looks ahead; when
an elder falls, he looks behind. (The youth is
mindful of what his superiors think of him;
the elder is mindful of what the young think
of him. Compare 3365.)
882. Bíọmọdékọiyánàná,ìtànlaópa
fúnun.
If a child refuses yesterday’s pounded yams,
it is stories one treats the child to. (A person
who boycotts a meal or some entitlement
simply deprives himself or herself of some
beneﬁts.)
883. Bíọmọdéòbáríokobabaẹlòmíràn,aní
kòsíokobabaẹnitótótibabaòun.
If a youth has never seen another person’s
father’s farm, he says nobody’s father’s farm
is as large as his father’s. (Until one has seen
other people’s great accomplishments, one is
overly impressed by one’s own.)
884. Bí/ogravedotbelowránbáp/eacutedotbelowníl/egravedotbelow,gbígb/oacutedotbelownníńgb/oacutedotbelown.
If a problem remains long enough, it be-
comes clever. (If one keeps at it long enough,
one will ﬁnd the solution for any problem.)
885. Bíọw/oacutedotbelowòbáṣeéṣán,àkáalérí.
If the arms cannot be swung, one carries
them on one’s head. (If one cannot do as
one would, one does what one can.)
886. Bísòbìyàyóbàádegbò,olúgambelàáwí
fún.
If guinea worm is becoming an ulcer, one
should inform olúgambe.
54 ( W h e nap r o b -
lem arises, one must consult those who can
solve it.)
887. Bítúlàsíbádiméjì,/ogravedotbelowkanlàḿmú.
When emergencies number two, one con-
centrates on one. (Concentrate on one
problem at a time.)
888. ‘‘Bùnminíṣukan’’kìíṣáájú‘‘Ẹkúoko
òo.’’
‘‘Give me one yam’’ does not precede ‘‘Greet-
ings to you on the farm.’’ (One does not ask
a favor of or transact any business with any
person without ﬁrst exchanging pleasantries.
Compare 1249.)
54. A medicine for treating guinea worm.
Onperspicaciousness 113


--- PAGE 127 ---
D
889. Dà-á-síl/egravedotbelow-ká-tun-pín,ogúnij/oacutedotbelowun,aòpín
inre.
The recent throw-it-all-on-the-ﬂoor-that-
we-may-redistribute-it inheritance was
not well distributed the ﬁrst time around.
(Whatever needs to be done again must not
have been done well the ﬁrst time.)
890. Dídìníḿmúabẹmú.
It is wrapping that makes a knife sharp.
(Only by taking great care of them does one
keep one’s possessions in good shape.)
891. Dí/egravedotbelow-dí/egravedotbelownimúẹl/eacutedotbelowd/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowﬁńwọgbà.
It is bit by bit that the nose of the pig enters
the fence. (A small problem, if not attended
to, becomes unmanageable.)
892. DÍfá-dÍfáòfIfáṣeré.
The diviner does not take Ifá lightly. (One
should not be careless about one’s liveli-
hood.)
893. Dùgb/egravedotbelow-dùgb/egravedotbelowkìíﬁẹyin-inr/egravedotbelowsíl/egravedotbelow.
The egg-bearing spider never leaves its eggs
behind. (One does not turn one’s back on
one’s treasure.)
894. Dúróokíkà;bíoòdúrókíkà,ìkàaba
tìrẹj/eacutedotbelow.
Stop and say hello to the wicked; if you do
not say hello to the wicked, the wicked will
ﬁnd problems for you. (One’s best defense
against wicked people is ingratiation.)
E
895. Ebińpamíọl/oacutedotbelowṣẹńkiri;ìgbàtíngòwẹnú
ngóṣew/egravedotbelowde?
I am hungry, and the soap seller hawks her
wares; when I have not washed my inside,
how can I wash my outside? (One must
order one’s priorities sensibly.)
896. EbiòpàJèṣàólóunòj/egravedotbelowkọ/Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow;ebípa
ọmọObòkunójẹori.
The Ijeṣa person is not hungry, and he re-
jects corn loaf prepared by an /Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow person;
when hunger gripped the son of Obokun
[an apellation for Ijeṣa people], he ateori
[the /Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow name for corn loaf]. (It is when
one is not desperate that one is choosy.)
897. Ebiòpàm/ogravedotbelowleóníòunòjẹàáyá;ebípa
Súlèój/ogravedotbelowbọ.
The Muslim is not hungry, and he vows he
will not eat a red colobus monkey; hunger
gripped Suleiman, and he ate a monkey. (A
desperate person is seldom ﬁnicky.)
898. Eégún/Egravedotbelowgbá,/Egravedotbelowgbáníńf/ogravedotbelow.
The /Egravedotbelowgbá masquerader must needs speak
/Egravedotbelowgbá.
55 (One should speak to others in a
manner that is ﬁtting and that will facilitate
one’s business with them.)
899. Eégúntíyógbenilàńdáṣọfún;òrìṣàtí
yógbenilàńsìn;biigíbágbèmímàkóobì
màbọigi.
It is the masquerader that succors one that
one makes shrouds for; it is the god that
succors one that one worships; if a tree suc-
cors me, I will take kola nuts and worship
the tree. (One should conﬁne one’s eﬀorts
to proﬁtable ventures and one’s service to
appreciative people.)
900. EégúntíyóṣebíiLébé,Lébéniyódà;èyí
tíyótàkìtìbíOlúfolé,òfurugbàdàniyótaá.
The masquerader that will perform like Lébé
must become like Lébé;
56 the one that will
somersault like Olúfolé [meaning ‘‘Great-
One-Jumps-a-House’’] must perform his
feat in the open spaces. (One must prepare
oneself and gather one’s resources before
one attempts momentous tasks.)
55. /Egravedotbelowgbá is another designation for the people of
Ab/eacutedotbelowòkúta and their language.
56. An alárìnjó(itinerant dancer) type.
114 the good person


--- PAGE 128 ---
901. Ejò-óríihòtóháóków/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelow;ìyá-ar/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelow
l/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowàtifàáyọ?
A snake sees a tight hole and crawls into it;
has its mother hands to pull it out? (One
had better be certain to be able to extricate
oneself before venturing into tight spots.)
902. Elékurukìíkirilóko.
The seller of steamed ground beans does
not hawk her wares on a farm. (One wastes
time attempting to sell things to those who
produce them.)
903. Èlólàńraadìẹòkókó,tíàńgbaọmọ-ọr/egravedotbelow
sìn?
How much does a hen cost that one would
contract to raise chicks for the owner?
57
(Certain obligations are not worth the
trouble.)
904. Èmi-ò-níí-f/eacutedotbelow-obìnrin-t/eacutedotbelownìkan-ńf/eacutedotbelow,
olúwar/egravedotbelowònííf/eacutedotbelowobìnrinni.
I-will-court-no-woman-being-courted-by-
another-man will court no woman at all.
(A person who wants exclusive rights to a
woman—or anything—will look for a long
time and in vain.)
905. Èmi-ò-níí-ṣu-imí-le-imí,olúwar/egravedotbelowórìn
jìnnàààtàn.
I-will-not-defecate-on-existing-excrement
will walk a good distance into the bush.
(People who are too ﬁnicky will pay in eﬀort
and delay for their habits.)
906. Èpèlaﬁńwoèpèsàn.
Curses are the antidote for curses. (One
matches the remedy to the aﬄiction.)
907. Epolóṣeéjẹṣu;àkàs/ogravedotbelowlóṣeégunàká;
obìnríndùn-únbásùnjuọkùnrinlọ.
I ti sp a l mo i lt h a tg o e sb e s tw i t hy a m s ;i t
57. People sometimes agreed to raise domestic ani-
mals for other people in the hope of sharing in the
oﬀspring.
is a ladder that is best for climbing grana-
ries; a woman is more pleasant to make love
to than a man.
58 (Certain things are ﬁt for
certain purposes; not just anything will do
anytime.)
908. Epolojúọb/egravedotbelow.
Palm oil is the countenance of stew.
59 (One
should be particularly attentive to that one
ingredient or thing whose absence mars the
entire project.)
909. Erélàńfọmọayòṣe.
All one does with ayòseeds is play. (One
should take time for pleasure when one
may.)
910. Èròkìímọibùs/ogravedotbelowk/oacutedotbelowrùnów/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelow.
A wayfarer does not know the location of
the rest stop and yet has his neck crushed
from the weight of a heavy load.
60 (One
should measure one’s exertions to suit one’s
capacity.)
911. Ètel/egravedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelown;ìm/ogravedotbelowrànlàbúrò;bí-a-ó-ti-ṣe
l/egravedotbelowkẹtawọn.
Intention is the eldest; contemplation is the
next; and plan of action is the third. (First
there is the goal, then a contemplation of it,
and ﬁnally a plan for attaining it.)
912. Ètòlòﬁnkìn-ín-nílóde/ogravedotbelowrun.
Order is the ﬁrst law in heaven. (Whatever
o n ed o e s ,o n em u s tb eo r d e r l y . )
913. Ewúr/eacutedotbelowòṣe-eﬁṣuṣ/oacutedotbelow.
A goat is not a wise choice as the guard over
yams. (Do not entrust your aﬀairs to your
enemy.)
58. The proverb obviously speaks from a man’s
point of view.
59. The Yoruba believe that the more palm oil goes
in, the better the stew.
60. The neck may be crushed because loads are
often carried on the head.
Onperspicaciousness 115


--- PAGE 129 ---
914. Èyítóyẹaráiwájú,èrò/egravedotbelowhìnﬁyèsíl/egravedotbelow.
[To] what turned out favorably for those
going ahead, you coming behind, pay close
attention. (Learn from the examples of
others.)
Ẹ
915. /Egravedotbelowb/egravedotbelowlàḿbẹòṣìkàpékótúnìlú-ur/egravedotbelowṣe.
One can only remonstrate with a wicked
person to urge him or her to improve his or
her town. (Gentle pleas are the only likely
means of getting contrary people to do what
is right.)
916. Ẹbọdí/egravedotbelow,oògùndí/egravedotbelow,níńgbaaláìkúlà.
A little sacriﬁce, a little medicine, is what
keeps the one who does not die alive. (One
should not place all one’s faith in a single
solution to a problem.)
917. Ẹbọẹnìkanlàńﬁẹnìkanrú.
It is a sacriﬁce on behalf of only one person
that demands only one person as oﬀering.
(Extraordinary problems demand extraordi-
nary solutions.)
918. /Egravedotbelow/egravedotbelowkanlejòńyánni.
One gets bitten by a snake only once. (The
same disaster does not befall one more
than once; after the ﬁrst time one learns to
avoid it.)
919. /Egravedotbelowf/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowd/egravedotbelowf/egravedotbelowiyán;apaláw/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowkọbaáléiléní
/egravedotbelowńpèunbí?
The teasing involves pounded yam; the corn
loaf is unwrapped, and the father of the
household asks, ‘‘Did someone call me?’’ (A
person who wants something badly will not
let a little teasing put him or her oﬀ taking
it. See the next entry.)
920. /Egravedotbelowf/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowd/egravedotbelowf/egravedotbelowiyán;òbáàgbémilul/egravedotbelowngó
bàáọjẹun.
The teasing involves pounded yam; even if
you throw me on the ground, I will eat with
you. (No amount of teasing will stop me
from doing what I have in mind. Compare
the preceding entry.)
921. Ẹgb/eacutedotbelowẹnikìíw/oacutedotbelownláyékáwáalọs/oacutedotbelowrun.
One does not, upon failing to ﬁnd suit-
able company in this world, go looking in
heaven. (If one cannot ﬁnd what one wants,
one should learn to do without it.)
922. Ẹj/oacutedotbelowa-f/eacutedotbelowni-lóbìnrinlàńwí;akìíwíj/oacutedotbelow
a-f/eacutedotbelowni-l/oacutedotbelowmọ.
One may complain about a person who
courts one’s wife but not about a person
who courts one’s daughter. (One should not
pursue causes without good grounds.)
923. Ẹl/eacutedotbelowd/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowníọj/oacutedotbelowtíòúntijágb/oacutedotbelown-ọnhùn,ọj/oacutedotbelow
náàni/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowòtinìunláram/oacutedotbelow.
T h ep i gs a y ss i n c et h ed a yi tl e a r n e dt or e p l y
to every statement with a grunt it has not
got into any trouble. (A person who says
nothing seldom gets in trouble. This is a
variant of 734 and 983.)
924. Ẹl/eacutedotbelowj/oacutedotbelowṣaèyítówùúwí.
The person with complaints pursues the
most pressing ones. (One should concen-
trate on one’s most pressing problems.)
925. Ẹl/eacutedotbelownu-útóórísá.
An overly loquacious person is someone to
ﬂee from. (Be wary of loquacious people.)
926. Ẹniàńwòkìíwòran.
T h ep e r s o np e o p l eh a v eg a t h e r e dt ow a t c h
should not himself or herself be a spectator.
(One should not ignore one’s problems to
dwell on those of others.)
927. Ẹniaóògbéòkú-ur/egravedotbelowsin,akìísọpéó
ńrùnpani.
One does not complain that a corpse one
116 the good person


--- PAGE 130 ---
will have to bury stinks. (One should not
r u nd o w nap e r s o no rt h i n gt h a tw i l le v e n t u -
ally devolve to one’s care.)
928. Ẹniapékówááwok/ogravedotbelowbì:óníkínìyí
k/oacutedotbelowbi-k/ogravedotbelowbi?
T h ep e r s o ni n v i t e dt ot a k eal o o ka tt h e
throne-room extension exclaims, ‘‘What
a maze of apartments!’’
61 (One should not
waste one’s breath expressing the obvious.)
929. Ẹniawífúnkogb/oacutedotbelow;ẹniaf/ogravedotbelowfúnkógbà;
èyítíògb/oacutedotbelowyóﬁl/egravedotbelowbora.
Whomever people speak to should listen;
whomever people instruct should accept
instruction; the one who does not listen will
be covered by the earth. (Refusal to heed
advice can be deadly.)
930. Ẹniàìgb/oacutedotbelownpalóp/ogravedotbelow;ẹniọgb/oacutedotbelownpaòtó
ǹkan.
People killed by folly are innumerable;
p e o p l ek i l l e db yw i s d o ma r ef e w .( F e wt h i n g s
kill more surely than folly.)
931. Ẹníbáríkunnímúọl/oacutedotbelowjàníńfọn/oacutedotbelown.
Whoever sees mucus in the nose of the king
is the one who cleans it. (Tactless or indis-
creet people usually rue their bad judgment.
Compare 962.)
932. Ẹníbátóẹni-ígbàlàńképè.
One appeals only to those capable of help-
ing. (Do not seek the aid of feckless people.)
933. Ẹníduara-ar/egravedotbelowlóyèApènà:kótójẹẹran
/ogravedotbelowf/eacutedotbelow,ód/ogravedotbelowrun.
Whoever deprives himself of the title of
Apènà will wait until he dies before tasting
61. The k/ogravedotbelowbìis an extension of the palace used
for audiences, or for other purposes of state, or as a
veranda; its approaches are necessarily mazelike, a fact
to be taken for granted.
free meat.62 (If one does not grab opportuni-
ties when they present themselves, one is in
for a diﬃcult life.)
934. Ẹnígb/oacutedotbelownjunilọníńtẹninÍfá.
It is someone wiser than oneself who con-
sults the oracle. (Take advice only from
those qualiﬁed to oﬀer it.)
935. Ẹnílékuméjìápòfo.
W h o e v e rc h a s e sa f t e rt w or a t sw i l lc a t c h
neither. (One who pursues two or more ob-
jectives at once is likely to achieve neither.
Compare 616.)
936. Ẹnímáakéìbòsíápababa-ar/egravedotbelowjẹ.
Whoever wishes to raise an alarm will have
to murder his father. (Whoever acts with-
out cause will have to justify his action by
manufacturing a cause.)
937. Ẹnírúbọòrìṣà-ágb/oacutedotbelowd/ogravedotbelowrútièèyànkí
ẹbọ-/oacutedotbelowtógbà.
Whoever oﬀers a sacriﬁce to a deity must
also oﬀer a sacriﬁce to humans in order
for the sacriﬁce to be eﬃcacious. (One
can please the gods and yet run afoul of
humans.)
938. Ẹnitíabáﬁorí-ir/egravedotbelowf/oacutedotbelowàgbọnònííjẹ
níb/egravedotbelow.
The person on whose head a coconut is bro-
ken will not share in eating it. (Whoever
takes foolhardy risks in pursuit of an end
seldom lives to enjoy it.)
939. Ẹnitíabáḿbánájàlàńwò,akìíwo
ariwoọjà.
One pays attention to the person with whom
one is bargaining, not to the commotion of
62. Apènàis the title of the second-ranking member
of the powerful Ògbóni cult. The holder leads the pro-
cession in funerary rites and is free to enter and eat in
any house.
Onperspicaciousness 117


--- PAGE 131 ---
the marketplace. (One should keep mind on
one’s business and leave extraneous matters
aside.)
940. Ẹnitíawífúnkógb/oacutedotbelow;ẹnitíkògb/oacutedotbelow,
tara-ar/egravedotbelowniyódà.
Let the person one advises pay heed; the
heedless person places himself at risk.
(Those who refuse instruction lay the foun-
dation for their own ruin.)
941. Ẹnití/egravedotbelowgúngúnl/eacutedotbelows/egravedotbelowníńṣelákáǹlákát/egravedotbelowlé
aláb/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelow.
I ti st h ep e r s o nw i t hat h o r ni nh i sf o o tw h o
limps to the person with a needle. (The per-
son in need of help should make some eﬀort
in his own behalf and not expect the helper
to make all the necessary eﬀort.)
942. Ẹnitíkògb/oacutedotbelownlààw/egravedotbelowńgbò.
Only the unwise hunger while fasting. (The
resourceful person can ﬁnd a way around
any diﬃculty.)
943. Ẹnitíkòmọiṣ/eacutedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowj/eacutedotbelowníńpààràl/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowmejì.
It is a person who does not know how to
carry out instructions that is forced to repeat
his or her eﬀorts. (One saves time and eﬀort
by doing things right the ﬁrst time.)
944. Ẹnitíkòmọọbaníńfọbaṣeré.
Only a person who does not know the king
triﬂes with the king. (The wise person recog-
nizes potential danger and avoids it.)
945. Ẹnitíólèjàniyóòkúnl/egravedotbelowkal/eacutedotbelow.
It is the incorrigible ﬁghter who has to re-
main on his or her knees until nightfall.
(The person who cannot stay out of a ﬁght
will spend his or her time incessantly stating
cases.)
946. ẸnitíyóbọÒgún,yóraọjà-atir/egravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowt/ogravedotbelow.
The person who will worship Ògun will
keep his or her market purchases separate
from those of others. (If one’s priorities are
incompatible with those of others, one parts
company with them.)
947. Ẹnitíyófòyób/egravedotbelowr/egravedotbelow.
The person who will leap must ﬁrst crouch.
(One must make adequate preparations for
any project.)
948. Ẹnitíyómu/egravedotbelowkọfòrò,yóbàáọmọẹl/eacutedotbelowkọ
ṣeré.
Whoever wishes to eat steaming corn pap
will play with the child of the seller. (One
must ingratiate oneself with the person from
whom one expects a favor. This is a variant
of the next entry.)
949. Ẹnitíyómu/egravedotbelowkọ/ogravedotbelowf/eacutedotbelowyóbàáọmọẹl/eacutedotbelowkọ
ṣeré.
T h ep e r s o nw h ow i s h e st oe a tf r e ec o r np a p
will play with the seller’s child. (Nothing
comes free. Compare the preceding entry.)
950. Ẹnitíyóṣòwòàlè,ẹní-ir/egravedotbelowníńká;ẹnití
yóṣòwò-oṢàngó,ààjà-ar/egravedotbelowníńrà.
Whoever chooses concubinage as a practice
m u s tp r o v i d eh e r s e l fw i t has l e e p i n gm a t ;
whoever chooses Ṣàngò’s trade [one to do
with metal] must purchase his magical rattle.
(One prepares according to what is proper
for one’s chosen trade.)
951. Ẹnitíyóyàánilówó,tíkòníísinni,ohùn
ẹnu-ur/egravedotbelowlatiḿm/ogravedotbelow.
The person who will lend money and will
not keep pestering one for repayment, one
can tell from the tone of his or her voice.
(The way people talk is a good indication of
their character.)
952. Ẹnitóbádaomisíwájúátẹil/egravedotbelowtútù.
W h o e v e rt h r o w sw a t e ra h e a dw i l ls t e po n
cool earth. (The future will look kindly on
those who look well to the future. Compare
1360.)
118 the good person


--- PAGE 132 ---
953. Ẹnitóbáﬁojùànáwòkú,ẹbọraab/oacutedotbelowọ
láṣọ.
Whoever looks at the dead with yesterday’s
eyes will be stripped naked by the spirits.
(One behaves toward people according to
the heights they have attained, not according
to the way they used to be.)
63
954. Ẹnitóbámáajẹ/ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowajẹèyítól/eacutedotbelowyin.
If one must eat a toad, one should eat one
with eggs. (If one must suﬀer, one might as
well do so with panache.)
955. Ẹnitóbámáaluòṣùgbóaluńlá;kékeré
ẹgb/egravedotbelowfà,ńláẹgb/egravedotbelowfà.
Whoever will smite a secret-cult priest had
better smite an important one: for a lowly
one, 1,200 cowries in ﬁnes; for an important
one, 1,200 cowries. (If the penalty for a small
oﬀense is the same as that for a grievous one,
one might as well throw all caution to the
wind.)
956. Ẹnitóbámáamú/ogravedotbelowbọaṣebí/ogravedotbelowbọ.
W h o e v e rw i s h e st oc a t c ham o n k e ym u s ta c t
l i k eam o n k e y .( T os u c c e e da g a i n s ta na d v e r -
sary, or with a person one desires, one must
suit one’s approach to the other’s ways.)
957. Ẹnitóbámọìdí/ogravedotbelowrànt/eacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelowníḿbuàbùjá
èké.
It is a person who has prior knowledge of
the facts of a matter that can foil a devi-
ous person’s attempts to skirt them. (Prior
knowledge is the surest weapon against lies.)
958. Ẹnitóbáníigbà-álò,bíigbà-ábájá,kó
dúrósoó.
If one must use a tree-climbing rope and it
breaks, one must pause to repair it. (One
63. The dead are believed to acquire powers beyond
those possessed by the living; one would earn a dead
person’s displeasure, therefore, by continuing to regard
him or her as though still among the living.
must make time to attend to necessary
chores.)
959. Ẹnitóbáp/eacutedotbelowlóríimí,eṣinṣinkéṣinṣinyó
òbáaníb/egravedotbelow.
Whoever prolongs his or her defecating will
be visited by a host of ﬂies. (Nothing good
c o m e so fd a w d l i n go v e rw h a to n em u s td o . )
960. ẸnitóbárántíEfuji,kómáﬁoreṣeẹṣin.
Whoever remembers Efuji should show no
kindness to any horse.
64 (Remember those
who have caused you injury and remember
to show them no favor.)
961. Ẹnitóbárántíọj/oacutedotbelowníńṣeọmọòkúp/egravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelow;
taníj/eacutedotbelowṣeọmọeégúnlóore?
Those who gratefully remember past favors
extend compassion to the survivors of the
deceased; who would rather show compas-
s i o nt ot h ec h i l do fam a s q u e r a d e r ?( W h e n
a good person dies, the survivors inherit the
good will of those who remember him or
her well.)
962. Ẹnitóbásọpéẹs/egravedotbeloweégúnńhànníńwá
ab/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowlọ.
Whoever announces that the legs of the mas-
querader are showing is the one who goes
in search of a needle. (Some sights the eyes
must not acknowledge seeing.
65 Compare
931.)
963. Ẹnitóbáyáìw/ogravedotbelowfàẹgbàá,tòuntir/egravedotbelowníńlọ
atakúnná.
Whoever hires a pawn for only sixpence will
join the pawn in grinding pepper. (What-
ever comes too cheaply is sure to work
unsatisfactorily. Compare 4523.)
64. Efuji is a legendary /Egravedotbelowgbá woman who died from
being thrown by a horse.
65. It is taboo for any part of a masquerader’s body
to show. If one notices any part showing, it would be
wise to keep the fact to oneself.
Onperspicaciousness 119


--- PAGE 133 ---
964. Ẹnitódùbúl/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowṣeoògùnìjàkadìtán.
The person who remains prone has per-
fected the charm for wrestling. (The wise
person forestalls problems.)
965. Ẹnitóﬁirundúdúṣeré,yóﬁfunfunsin
ẹniẹl/eacutedotbelowni.
Whoever plays around with his or her black
hair will serve others with his or her white
hair. (If one wastes one’s youth, one spends
one’s old age struggling for a living.)
966. Ẹnitóﬁowó-or/egravedotbelowraẹṣin,kònííj/eacutedotbelowkóṣe
àrìnj/eacutedotbelow.
Whoever paid his or her own money for a
horse will not let it be sacriﬁced for a good
luck charm. (One guards one’s treasures
jealously.)
967. Ẹnitógbajúm/ogravedotbelowtíkòmọèèyàn-ánkí,
òunòbúr/eacutedotbelowwàẹgb/eacutedotbelowra.
The dandy who does not know how to
extend greetings to people is no diﬀerent
from a boor. (Good looks without the social
graces amount to nothing.)
968. Ẹnitómáat/eacutedotbelowòkú/ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelow,yónìíiléògbóni
tir/egravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowt/ogravedotbelow.
W h o e v e rw i s h e st ol a yad e a dt o a di ns t a t e
will have to build his own cult shrine sepa-
rately. (Whoever wishes to do the absurd
should not expect the cooperation or ap-
proval of others.)
969. Ẹnitómáayánil/eacutedotbelowwù,tiọrùn-unr/egravedotbelowlà
ńwò.
If a person oﬀers to lend one a dress, con-
sider what he or she has on. (One should be
discriminating about those from whom to
accept favors.)
970. Ẹnitómikùkùté,ara-ar/egravedotbelowníńmì.
The person who shakes a tree stump shakes
himself. (Whoever takes on an invincible
adversary fashions his or her own defeat.)
971. Ẹnitómọẹtuníńkìíní‘‘òbèjé,ẹl/eacutedotbelows/egravedotbelow
ọw/ogravedotbelow.’’
It is someone who knows the duiker inti-
mately who can recite its praise, ‘‘spindle-
legged duiker.’’ (Only those deeply involved
in a profession are versed in its jargon.)
66
972. Ẹnitóńṣáp/eacutedotbelowfúnwèrèjó,òunàtiwèrè
/ogravedotbelowkan-ùn.
T h ep e r s o nw h oc l a p sf o ram a dp e r s o nt o
dance to is no diﬀerent from the mad per-
son. (Whoever joins the imbecile’s games is
himself or herself an imbecile.)
973. Ẹnitópak/eacutedotbelowt/eacutedotbelowk/eacutedotbelowt/eacutedotbelowyórukáyáẹrù.
The person who kills the donkey will carry
a heavy burden. (Whoever is careless with
his or her resources will pay dearly in the
future.)
974. Ẹnitóránṣ/eacutedotbelowsíorò-ób/egravedotbeloww/egravedotbelowfúnàìsùn.
Whoever sends for Orò is contracting for
sleeplessness.
67 (Whoever deliberately pro-
vokes trouble should be prepared for a
diﬃcult time.)
975. ẸnitóreÌbàdántíkòdéiléOlúy/ogravedotbelowlé,oko
igilólọ.
Whoever goes to Ibadan and does not visit
Oluyọle’s house has merely gone wood
gathering.
68 (Whoever misses the principal
sight of any place might as well not have
v i s i t e dt h ep l a c ea ta l l . )
976. Ẹnitórúbọtíkògbaèèw/ogravedotbelow,bíẹnitóﬁ
owóẹbọṣòfòni.
66. It is one of the expectations of the hunting pro-
fession that hunters know the conventional praises of
the animals they encounter in their trade. The quoted
phrase comes from the hunters’ praise for the duiker.
See Babalọla 88–91; Abraham 199.
67. Orò, the secret cult forbidden to women, is
much feared by all.
68. Olúy/ogravedotbelowlé was an illustrious king of Ibadan in the
1830s.
120 the good person


--- PAGE 134 ---
The person who makes a sacriﬁce but does
not follow the prescribed taboos is just like
someone who throws away the money for
the sacriﬁce. (A person who knows the
remedy but does not apply it is as badly
oﬀ as the person who does not know the
remedy at all.)
977. Ẹnitósọẹl/eacutedotbelowd/egravedotbelowlékùr/oacutedotbelow,oúnjẹlófúnun.
The person who throws palm nuts at a pig
gives food to it. (One does not douse a ﬁre
by throwing oil on it.)
978. Ẹnitótoríòtútùﬁọmọríodóyánáò
gbọd/ogravedotbelowretía-ti-jẹyán.
Whoever because of cold weather uses the
p e s t l ea sk i n d l i n gt ow a r mh i m s e l fo rh e r -
self must not expect to eat pounded yams.
(One should not jeopardize one’s long-
term interests by indulging in immediate
gratiﬁcations.)
979. Ẹnuàìm/eacutedotbelownu,ètèàìmétè,níḿmú/ogravedotbelowràn
bá/egravedotbelowr/egravedotbelowk/eacutedotbelow.
A mouth that will not stay shut, lips that
will not stay closed are what bring trouble to
the cheeks. (The words that the mouth and
lips allow to escape usually bring the slap to
the cheek; a person who cannot keep his or
her mouth shut often lands in trouble.)
980. Ẹnuehoroògbaìjánu.
A rabbit’s mouth does not accept a leash.
(Do not adopt an inappropriate remedy for
a problem.)
981. /Egravedotbelowr/egravedotbelowk/eacutedotbelowniilé/egravedotbelowrín.
The cheeks are the home of laughter. (Suit
the means to the project.)
982. /Egravedotbelowrùbíbàníḿmúnipeàj/eacutedotbelowníaráire.
It is fear that makes one call witches the
good people. (It is wise to curry the favor of
fearful or malicious people.)
983. Ẹrù-uhòokìíwọnil/oacutedotbelowrùn.
‘‘I agree’’ is not a load that causes one’s neck
to shrink. (Saying one agrees, even when
one does not, spares one a great deal of
headache. Compare 734.)
984. /Egravedotbelowsínalát/ogravedotbelowsíòsíl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowòkóbó.
The ridiculing of the person with gonor-
rhea does not belong with the eunuch. (Do
not ridicule a person whose condition is no
worse than yours.)
985. Ẹyẹigbókìímọfífò/ogravedotbelowdàn.
The bird of the forest does not know how to
ﬂy in the grassland. (In a strange environ-
ment, one becomes a dunce.)
986. Ẹyẹńwáàtifò,w/oacutedotbelowńsọòkòsíi.
A bird is preparing for ﬂight, and people
throw stones at it. (One needs little encour-
agement to do what one is determined to do
anyway; being forced to do what one wishes
to do anyway is no punishment.)
F
987. FiìjàfúnỌl/oacutedotbelowrunjà;fọw/oacutedotbelowlérán.
Leave the ﬁghting to God; sit back and
watch. (Leave those who have injured one to
God’s judgment and punishment.)
988. Fimí-pam/oacutedotbelow-kí-npa-/oacutedotbelowlàrùnńj/eacutedotbelow.
Hide-me-and-I-will-kill-you is the name a
disease answers to. (A concealed disease is a
deadly thing.)
Gb
989. ‘‘Gbaọmọfúnmikínrèdí’’;bíìdíòbá
ṣe-érekágb/oacutedotbelowmọf/oacutedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowmọ.
‘‘Hold my child for me so I may wiggle my
buttocks’’; if one cannot wiggle one’s but-
tocks, one should return the child to its
Onperspicaciousness 121


--- PAGE 135 ---
mother.69 (One should not place oneself
in diﬃculty in order to help others out of
diﬃculty.)
990. Gbogboẹrankoìgb/eacutedotbelowpé,wọnníàwọnó
ﬁìkokòṣeaṣípa;nígbàtógb/oacutedotbelowinú/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowdùn;
ṣùgb/oacutedotbelownnígbàtóṣeóbús/eacutedotbelowkún;w/oacutedotbelownníkíló
dé?Óníbóyáw/oacutedotbelownlètún/ogravedotbelowrànnáàròkíw/oacutedotbelown
níkìíṣeb/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowm/oacutedotbelow.
All the animals of the forest assembled and
decided to make Hyena their secretary;
Hyena was happy, but a short while later it
burst into tears. Asked what the matter was,
it said perhaps they might reconsider and
reverse themselves. (Some people can be re-
lied upon to ﬁnd the sad aspect of the most
fortunate event. This is a variant of a prov-
erb with Tortoise as the named character.)
I
991. Ìbéèrèkìíj/eacutedotbelowkíẹnióṣìnà;ẹnitíkòlè
béèrèníńp/oacutedotbelownara/egravedotbelowlójú.
Asking [directions] keeps one from losing
one’s way; the person who refuses to ask is
responsible for his or her own diﬃculties.
(One should not be too obstinate or too
proud to seek help when one needs it.)
992. Ibitíabáńgbélatińgbàwìn;à-rà-àì-
sanniòsunw/ogravedotbelown.
One’s home is a legitimate place to buy
things on credit; what is bad is avoiding pay-
ment. (There is nothing wrong in seeking
favors from those close to one; what is bad is
not returning favors.)
993. Ibitíagbéeposíakìísọòkòsíb/egravedotbelow.
One does not throw rocks at the place where
one has one’s palm oil stored. (One should
69. When Yoruba women dance, they like to wiggle
their buttocks, a feat that is diﬃcult when they have
children strapped to their backs, as is the custom.
always protect one’s base or where one’s best
interests lie.)
994. Ibitíàńgbélàńṣe;bíabádéìlúad/eacutedotbelowt/egravedotbelowà
diìkúùkù.
One should live according to the customs
and fashions of the place one ﬁnds oneself
in; if one lands in the city of lepers, one
should make a ﬁst [i.e., conceal one’s ﬁn-
gers]. (While in Rome, do as the Romans
do.)
995. Ibitíatigùn,ib/egravedotbelowlatińr/ogravedotbelow.
Where one began one’s climb, there one
eﬀects one’s descent. (One must not shift
the problems originating in one context to
another, unrelated context.)
996. Ibitíatińjẹunbíikunbíikun,akìí
s/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowbíik/egravedotbelowl/egravedotbelowb/egravedotbelowbíik/egravedotbelowl/egravedotbelowb/egravedotbelowníb/egravedotbelow.
Where one is eating food like mucus, one
should not speak of matters like phlegm.
(One must be careful not to bring up matters
that are too sensitive for present company.)
997. Ibitíomáasùnlot/eacutedotbelowọmọsí.
It is precisely where you will eventually
have to sleep that you have laid down your
child to sleep. (Said of a person deceiving
himself or herself in the futile hope that
a transparent ruse will work to his or her
advantage.)
998. Ibitíòjò-ótińpaigúnb/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowjìnnà;taní
ránigúnníṣ/eacutedotbelow?
The vulture has endured the drenching rain
from a great distance, but who sent the vul-
ture on an errand? (If one’s choices land one
in diﬃculty, one should not blame others.)
999. Ibitíòjò-óbáọj/oacutedotbelowníńpaásí.
Wherever the rain catches up with the day,
there it drenches it. (One should do what
one has to do as the opportunities present
themselves.)
122 the good person


--- PAGE 136 ---
1000. Ibitíoníy/ogravedotbelownm/ogravedotbelowntìíṣubúsí,ib/egravedotbelowlótitàá
tán.
Wherever the y/ogravedotbelownm/ogravedotbelowntì[food made from
beniseed] seller falls, there she has sold all
her wares.
70 (It makes no sense to dwell on
unrecoverable disasters.)
1001. Ibitíoyíngbéńhó,tíàdóńhó,ìfunò
dák/eacutedotbelowlásán.
As the bees hum and the small calabash con-
taining charms hums, the intestine does not
keep silent.
71 (No matter what other people’s
preoccupations are, one should not ignore
one’s own problems.)
1002. Ìdíòwòniòwòógbétà.
I ti sa ti t sh o m eb a s et h a tac o m p a n yo rt r a d e
prospers. (One would be wise to protect
one’s base.)
1003. Igúnṣooreópálórí,àkàlà-áṣooreóyọ
g/egravedotbelowg/egravedotbelow;nítoríọj/oacutedotbelowmìírànkẹniómáṣeooreb/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelow
m/oacutedotbelow.
The vulture did others a favor and became
bald in return; the hornbill did others a
favor and developed a goiter in return.
72 (In
the future, one should not do those kinds of
favors.)
1004. Igúnnugúnòtoríabẹpárí.
The vulture did not go bald for fear of the
70. Y/ogravedotbelownm/ogravedotbelowntìcannot be scooped up after it has
spilled on the ground. The seller taking some to the
market hopes to sell it all, but if she falls along the
way and spills it, she is left with nothing to sell, just as
though she has sold it all.
71. The stomach will rumble to announce its hun-
ger, even as the bees busily attack and the medicine
man busily consults his charms.
72. According to a folktale, Vulture agreed to take
sacriﬁces to heaven on behalf of the other creatures
when there was a great drought. The sacriﬁces were
accepted, and torrential rain began to fall while Vulture
was still on its way back. When it arrived back on earth,
no one would oﬀer it shelter from the rain, which beat
it so severely that it became bald.
razor. (One’s actions are not determined by
one’s fear of any person.)
1005. Ìgbàaralàḿbúra.
One swears when it is time to swear. (Every-
thing in its proper time.)
1006. Igbálàńpa,akìípaàwo.
It is a calabash that one cuts decorative
patterns on; one does not cut patterns on
china plates. (What is appropriate treat-
ment for one thing may be inappropriate for
another.)
1007. Ìgbàòjòńlọ,ìgbà/egravedotbelowrùnńlọ,aníkádí
isàekukóle;ìgbàwolaóòtówápekunáà?
The rainy season passes, the dry season
passes, and the suggestion is that the rat’s
burrow be sealed up tight; when will the
time be ripe to kill the rat? (One must do
what needs to be done while there is still
time rather than resort to transparent tem-
porizing ruses.)
1008. Ìgbàtíabádókolàár/ogravedotbelowẹni.
The time of one’s arrival on the farm is one’s
dawn. (People must not be slaves of time but
use time to their own advantage. Compare
the following entry.)
1009. Ìgbàtíabár/eacutedotbelownilòwúr/ogravedotbelowẹni.
Whenever one ﬁrst sees a person, that is
that person’s morning. (One does what one
has to do when it is convenient to do it.
Compare the preceding entry.)
1010. Igbátógbédèlàḿpèlóṣùw/ogravedotbelown.
It is a calabash that understands one’s lan-
guage that one describes as a measure.
73
73. Traders in such things as grains or ﬂour use
calabashes as measures, and they resort to dexterous
tricks to control just how much the measure will hold
from transaction to transaction: that is, a good measure
responds to the owner’s wishes.
Onperspicaciousness 123


--- PAGE 137 ---
(One places one’s conﬁdence only in those
of the same mind.)
1011. Ìgbínìbámám/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowj/egravedotbelowìbátikúsíjù.
Had the snail been careless in its foraging,
it would have died in the bush. (However
disadvantaged one might be, one could still
thrive if one took life easy. Compare the
following entry.)
1012. Ìgbínìbámám/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowj/egravedotbelowkòtóokòó.
Had the snail been careless in its foraging,
it would not [have grown large enough to]
be worth 20 cowries. (With caution, one can
oﬀset the eﬀects of any handicap. Compare
the previous entry.)
1013. Ìgbínkìípil/egravedotbelowaró,àfèìmòjòkìípil/egravedotbelow
àràn.
The snail never embarks on a dyeing trade,
and the spotted grass mouse never digs for
àràn.(One should stick to habits that are
proper for oneself.)
74
1014. Igbólẹrankońgbé.
The forest is the home for animals to live in.
(Everything in its proper place.)
1015. Ìgb/ogravedotbelownw/oacutedotbelowtikékeréyọké.
The elbow develops a hump right from its
youth. (Said of a precocious person.)
75
1016. Ìjàníńpaonítìjú;ogunníḿpaalá-
gbára.
A street ﬁght is the death of a bashful per-
son; warring is the death of a strong man.
(One should not court danger or disaster
simply to avoid losing face.)
74. Àrànis an insect that the ﬁeld rat eats, but not
the spotted grass mouse.
75. The point of the elbow compares to the hump-
back’s aﬄiction, which is here construed as properly an
aﬄiction of old age. The elbow, however, always has the
point, even when it is quite young.
1017. Ijóníḿb/oacutedotbelowṣọ,ìjàníḿb/oacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowwù.
It is dance that strips one of one’s cloth; it is
a ﬁght that takes oﬀ one’s shirt. (Diﬀerent
situations call for diﬀerent responses.)
1018. Ikúdúpaẹṣinàńy/ogravedotbelow;óḿb/ogravedotbelowwápaọmọ
èèyàn.
An abandoned well kills a horse and we re-
joice; it will in time kill a human being. (We
should take other people’s misfortunes as a
reminder that we are not immune to such
misfortunes.)
1019. Iléajálàńwáìwolọ?
Is a dog’s house the place to go in search of
horns? (One should not bark up the wrong
tree.)
1020. Iléolóńjẹlàńd/egravedotbelowbìtìàyàsí.
It is in the home of a person who has food
that one sets one’s chest like a trap. (People
usually position themselves where they
imagine there is something to gain.)
1021. Il/egravedotbelownìjòkòńjókòódeìdí.
It is on the ground that the stool sits to await
the buttocks. (One should maintain one’s
place and not, for example, go out of the
h o u s et or e c e i v eav i s i t o r . )
1022. Ìl/egravedotbelowk/egravedotbelowàmúyọ,akìísinkádìítán.
One does not string decorative beads all
around one’s waist. (One should not deploy
all one’s resources at once.)
76
1023. Ìlorolàńw/ogravedotbelowkátówọlé.
One enters the porch ﬁrst before one enters
the house. (Everything in its proper order.)
1024. Ìlọ-/oacutedotbelowyá;oníbodèAtàdí,w/oacutedotbelownkóonílé,
w/oacutedotbelowngbàálóbìnrin,/ogravedotbelowp/egravedotbelowl/egravedotbelowtóníòunóﬁwádìí
/ogravedotbelowràn,ajágbée,ọmọ/egravedotbelowtóléajálátigba/ogravedotbelowp/egravedotbelowl/egravedotbelow,
76. Ìl/egravedotbelowk/egravedotbelowàmúyọare highlighting beads interspersed
with others, not made into whole strings by themselves.
124 the good person


--- PAGE 138 ---
óyísíkàǹga;oníbodèAtàdíwádáhùnóní,
‘‘Ìlọ-/oacutedotbelowyá.’’
It is time to get out of here; the gatekeeper
of Atadi, his home was burglarized; his wife
was taken from him; the divining string he
was going to use to investigate matters was
snatched by a dog; his son who ran after the
dog to retrieve the divining string fell into
a well. The gatekeeper of Atadi then spoke
up and said, ‘‘It is time to get out of here.’’
( W h e nap l a c eb e c o m e st o oh o tf o rap e r -
son, he or she should know it is time to get
out.)
1025. Ináèsìsìkìíjónil/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowmejì.
The ﬁre of the stinging tragia plant does not
burn a person twice. (One should learn a
lesson from the ﬁrst bad experience.)
1026. Inákúkúniyóbaọb/egravedotbelowaráokoj/eacutedotbelow.
Too much ﬁre will ruin the stew of a bush-
man. (An ignorant person’s ignorance
will ruin whatever venture he or she em-
barks on.)
1027. Inátóńléríomiákùsọnù.
The ﬁre that challenges water will die oﬀ.
( I ti sf o o l h a r d yt ot a k eo nap o w e ro n ei sn o
match for.)
1028. Ìpàṣántíaﬁnaìyáléḿbẹláàjàfún
ìyàwó.
The whip used on the senior wife is resting
on the rafters waiting for the new wife. (Do
not assume that the misfortune that befell
those who went before will pass you over.)
1029. Ìròr/eacutedotbelowòle-èjàómúlétiagb/oacutedotbelown.
Ìròr/eacutedotbelowcannot ﬁght, so it makes its home close
to the wasp’s.
77 (If one is weak, one should
befriend the strong.)
77. Ìròr/eacutedotbelowdenotes ﬂedglings, but in this case it is
apparently some kind of ﬂying insect.
1030. Isóinú/egravedotbelowkú,à-rá-m/oacutedotbelowra.
The fart within a masquerader’s shroud [is]
something to be endured. (The insult one
cannot escape from, one has to endure.)
1031. Ìṣeǹṣeewúr/eacutedotbelow,kágùntànﬁyèsíi.
The fate that has befallen the goat, the sheep
should bear in mind. (One should learn
from the fates of others.)
1032. Iṣútaiṣuòta,/ogravedotbelowk/ogravedotbelow/ogravedotbelowkanlàńwúṣulébè.
Whether the yams are large or not, it is one
by one that they are extracted from the heap.
(There is no task so small or insigniﬁcant
that it does not deserve care and attention.)
1033. Ìtóròtósolókotíkòf/egravedotbelowhìntì,af/eacutedotbelowf/eacutedotbelowokoní
ńtúu.
The lemon plant that grows in the bush and
does not support itself against something
will be uprooted by the forest breeze. (A
weak person who has no support will fall
victim to puny forces.)
1034. Ìwò-oọlọgb/oacutedotbelownòjọtiaṣiwèrè.
The way a wise person looks at things is dif-
ferent from the way an imbecile does. (A
wise person considers matters in a more
rational way than an imbecile does.)
1035. Ìyàwómiòsunw/ogravedotbelow;nítoríọmọnimoṣe
f/eacutedotbelowẹ;ẹnimélòólaówìífúntán?
‘‘My wife is not good looking, but I married
her for the sake of children’’; to how many
people will one give that explanation? (One
should not embark on the endless and futile
task of justifying one’s decisions to others.)
1036. Ìyàwósọ/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowkantán:óníìyáléòun
a-bẹnu-funfun-bí-ègbodò.
The junior wife has said what will be her
last; she said the senior wife’s mouth is as
white as the new yam. (Said of people who
have done the unthinkable. Compare the
following entry.)
Onperspicaciousness 125


--- PAGE 139 ---
1037. Ìyàwóṣe/ogravedotbelowrànkantán;ọkọ/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowṣe/ogravedotbelowràn-
annkò-jẹ-m/oacutedotbelow.
The wife has done the unpardonable; her
husband has adopted an I-will-not-eat-any-
longer attitude. (Said of people who have
caused unpardonable oﬀense. Compare the
preceding entry.)
J
1038. ‘‘Jáiléẹkímbáẹk/oacutedotbelowọ’’;ìt/eacutedotbelowèèkànkanní
ńfúnni.
‘‘Unroof your house and I will help you re-
roof it’’ usually gives one only one bundle of
thatching grass. (One relies on other people’s
promise of help only at one’s own risk.)
1039. Jùrù-f/egravedotbelowf/egravedotbelowjùrù-f/egravedotbelowf/egravedotbelow,ewúr/eacutedotbelowwọiléàpọn
jùrù-f/egravedotbelowf/egravedotbelow;kílàp/oacutedotbelownríjẹtíyókùsíl/egravedotbelowféwúr/eacutedotbelow?
Busily wagging its tail, busily wagging its
tail, a goat enters a bachelor’s house busily
wagging its tail; what does a bachelor have
to eat whose leftover the goat can have?
(One wastes time expecting largesse from a
destitute person.)
K
1040. Kàkàkíọmọdépàgbàláyò,àgbàaﬁ
ọgb/oacutedotbelownàgbàgbée.
Instead of permitting defeat by a child in a
game, an elder should resort to elderly wiles.
(An elder should save face and protect his
standing by all means available.)
1041. Kékeréegbòníńgbaewéiyá;àgbàegbò
níńgba/egravedotbelowgb/egravedotbelowsì;tilé-wà-t/ogravedotbelownà-wáegbòníńgba
ìgànaṣọ.
A small sore calls for the balsam tree leaf;
a big sore takes an/egravedotbelowgb/egravedotbelowsìleaf; a huge ulcer
calls for a whole bolt of cloth. (Remedies
must ﬁt the complaint.)
1042. Kéré-kérélekuńjawọ;dí/egravedotbelow-dí/egravedotbelowleèràḿb/oacutedotbelow
ìy/eacutedotbelow.
Bit by bit the rat consumes the leather;
gently, gently the ant sloughs its skin. (Use
caution in all enterprises.)
1043. Kìíj/eacutedotbelowkíetíẹnidikìíj/eacutedotbelowkíinúẹnidùn.
Whatever keeps one from being deaf to cer-
tain things keeps one from being happy.
(Learn to turn a deaf ear to certain things
for the sake of your peace of mind.)
1044. Kìíṣegbogboẹnitíńṣe‘‘ẸniỌl/oacutedotbelowrún
bùnóbùnmi’’làńfúnnínǹkan.
It is not to every person who says ‘‘Whoever
has received some bounty from God should
give to me’’ that one gives alms. (One should
be judicious as to those to whom one shows
kindness.)
1045. Kíniàńw/ogravedotbelownínú-uṣòkòtòm/eacutedotbelowta/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowdún-
rún?
What is there to wear in a pair of trousers
bought at three for 300 cowries, or three a
penny? (Much ado about a worthless thing.)
1046. Kínifìlàyóṣelóríògógó?Ataniyóṣi.
What would a cap be doing atop theògógó
m u s h r o o m ?P e p p e rw i l lr e m o v ei t .( S u p e r -
ﬂuous adornments make no sense when one
goes to battle or engages in strenuous work.)
1047. Kíniìyáaláṣọńtàtóyọẹgbal/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow?
Ewúr/eacutedotbelowńjẹwúlìnì?
What does the cloth-selling woman have
to sell that she carries a whip in her hand?
Do goats eat woolen fabrics? (One should
not engage in meaningless or unnecessary
activities.)
1048. Kík/oacutedotbelownimím/ogravedotbelow,òweàjàpá.
Learning is knowing: Àjàpà’s proverb.
78 (T o
know, one must learn.)
78. The anecdote connected with this proverb states
that once Àjàpá (Tortoise and Trickster) made a basket
so speedily that people asked in astonishment how it
was done and Àjàpá responded with the proverb.
126 the good person


--- PAGE 140 ---
1049. Kòsíaláásáàtíńtaìgbokú;gbogbowọn
níńtaoyin.
There is no snuﬀ seller who will advertise
her ware as awful; they all say they are selling
honey. (Everybody presents himself or her-
self in the best light. Compare the following
entry.)
1050. Kòsíalámàlàtíńsọpétòunòyi;alá-
dàlúnìkanlósòót/oacutedotbelow.
There is no yam-ﬂower meal seller who
will advertise her ware as ﬂuﬀy; theàdàlú
seller alone speaks the truth.
79 (One puts the
best face on one’s own aﬀairs. Compare the
preceding entry.)
1051. Kòsíẹnitíkòmọọgb/oacutedotbelown-ọnkáfẹran
s/eacutedotbelownukáwáatì.
There is nobody who does not know the
trick of putting meat in the mouth and
making it disappear. (Nobody is a complete
fool.)
1052. Kókólók/oacutedotbelowk/oacutedotbelowdéorí,tàbíorílók/oacutedotbelowk/oacutedotbelowdé
kókó?
Was it the lump that ﬁrst got to the head, or
the head that ﬁrst got to the lump? (A chas-
tisement for someone attempting to reverse
the order of precedence.)
1053. Kóǹkólóyo:èyítónítèmi.
A rather small thing: this is enough for me.
(However small it is [usually a child], one is
glad to have it.)
1054. Kóró-kórólàńdáIfáadití.
Very loud is the way one consults Ifá for a
deaf person. (One should match one’s ac-
tions to the circumstances. Or, one should
err on the side of repetitiousness in caution-
ing an obstinate person.)
79. Àdàlúis a meal made with black-eyed peas.
A number of condiments go into it: hence the name,
which means something like ‘‘a concoction of various
ingredients.’’
1055. ‘‘Kùb/egravedotbelowr/egravedotbelow,károkoìpére.’’Óníèyítíòún
lọòunòìb/ogravedotbelow.
‘‘Kubẹrẹ, let us go to the bush where small
snails are picked.’’ He said the last such
trip he went on, he has not returned from.
(When one has not recovered from the con-
sequences of a venture, one is not ready to
embark on another.)
L
1056. Lójúòpè,bí-ik/oacutedotbelowlọgb/oacutedotbelowndàbí/ogravedotbelowlẹ.
As far as the dunce is concerned, the wise
person should be shiftless. (The worthless
person always wishes others were equally
worthless.)
M
1057. ‘‘Máaj/eacutedotbelowǹṣó’’l/ogravedotbelowyáﬁńjuẹm/oacutedotbelowlọ.
‘‘Go on feeding’’ is what makes the cane rat
fatter than the Tullberg’s rat.
80 (Excessive
consideration for others can be disadvanta-
geous.)
1058. ‘‘Màákóẹrú,màákóẹrù’’làḿbálọ
sógun;/ogravedotbelownàlẹnìkẹtaḿbáni.
‘ ‘ Iw i l lc a p t u r es l a v e sa n dIw i l lc a p t u r el o o t ’ ’
are what one has in mind on departure for
a war; the third comes upon one only along
the way.
81 (Too often one is so preoccupied
with the good aspects of a proposition that
the bad aspects sneak up on one.)
1059. Màjèṣíndóbòàk/oacutedotbelowk/oacutedotbelow,ósáréyọokósíta,
óníOlúwa-áṣeun.
The tender youth has sex for the ﬁrst time
ever, pulls out his penis prematurely, and
80. The Tullberg’s rat is supposed to have told the
cane rat to eat ﬁrst of their common food. The latter fed
rather well, leaving little for the former to eat.
81. The third thing that surprises the soldier along
the way is death.
Onperspicaciousness 127


--- PAGE 141 ---
says ‘‘God be praised!’’ (A novice knows not
how to relish good things.)
1060. Mójú-kúròniléayégbà;gbogbo/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowk/oacutedotbelow
lóṣéébínúsí.
Judicious forbearance is the wise approach
to the world; not every matter deserves
anger. (The best way to live is to ignore petty
annoyances.)
N
1061. Níìlútíaòtif/eacutedotbelowẹyẹlé,adìẹyóòṣ/ogravedotbeloww/oacutedotbelown
níb/egravedotbelow.
In a town that does not welcome pigeons,
chickens will be very scarce. (Onerous things
will not be countenanced where easy obliga-
tions are not.
82 See the following variant.)
1062. Níìlútíaòtif/eacutedotbelowẹyẹlé,tíaòf/eacutedotbelowadìẹ,irú
ẹyẹwoníyóòjíwọnlójúorun?
In a town that does not tolerate pigeons and
does not tolerate chickens, what sort of bird
will awaken them from sleep? (A person
who will not be pleased by anything will
simply have to do without everything. See
also 1061.)
1063. NíinúIfániFá-túm/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowwà.
It is within Ifá that one ﬁnds Fátúm/ogravedotbelow.
83
(Every problem bears the seeds to its own
solution.)
1064. ‘‘Níbológbéwà?’’nìyájúẹkùn.
‘‘Where is it?’’ is a great insult to the leopard.
(One should be smart enough to hide one’s
ignorance about things one should know.)
84
82. The logic is that chickens are far easier to care
for than pigeons.
83. Fátúm/ogravedotbelow is a proper name that means ‘‘Ifá [the
Oracle] interprets.’’
84. The leopard is so self-important that it will take
oﬀense if anybody should ask where it was, or which it
was, among other animals.
1065. Nígbàtíọw/oacutedotbelowòtíìgb/oacutedotbelownlojúńṣepin.
It is when the hands have not learned wis-
dom that the eyes ooze matter. (A wise per-
son will know how to manage and conceal
his shortcomings.)
1066. Nítoríaditílòjóﬁńṣú;nítoríaf/oacutedotbelowjúlóṣe
ńkù.
It is for the beneﬁt of deaf people that rain
clouds gather; it is for the beneﬁt of the
blind that thunder rumbles. (The wise per-
son should be able to read portents and take
precautions.)
1067. Nítoríèèyànlaṣeńníọw/oacutedotbelow/ogravedotbelowtún;òsìlà
bálò.
It is on account of people that one has a
right hand; one could do with only a left
hand otherwise. (One must learn the grace
that is appropriate for decent company.)
85
1068. Nítorí-ikálèríbigbéelaṣeńṣeọyàn
sódó.
It is in order to have a means of lifting it that
one carves breasts [handles] on the mor-
tar. (One should anticipate problems and
prepare solutions for them.)
O
1069. Ódikan-nu-rinkan-nu-rin,agogo
Ògúntólú.
All one hears is noise without pattern, like
that of Ògúntólú’s bell. (The statements
being made are senseless.)
86
85. People eat with with the right hand and use
only the left hand for dirty jobs. The left hand has
consequently come to be associated with ﬁlthiness, dis-
respect, and so forth. One would not, for example, oﬀer
something with the left hand to a person one respects.
86. The reference to Ògúntólú, a proper name, is
obscure.
128 the good person


--- PAGE 142 ---
1070. Of/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowjoyèonío-òní-íjà.
You aspire to taking a chieftaincy title, and
you say you will not get into a ﬁght. (It is
self-deceit to wish for something without
being prepared for the struggle that getting
it demands.)
1071. Oﬁawọẹkùnṣẹbọàìkú;ẹkùnìbámá
kùúìwọìbárawọ/egravedotbelowṣoògùn?
You use a leopard’s skin as an ingredient for
medicine to hold oﬀ death; had the leop-
ard not died, would you have had access to
its hide for the medicine? (One should not
chase impossible dreams.)
1072. OjónÍf/oacutedotbelownIf/oacutedotbelowntú;ojólÉjìgbòÈjìgbó
fàyabíaṣọ;owádéÌlá/Ogravedotbelowràngúnòńkàndí;
gbogboìlúòrìṣàniw/oacutedotbelownníkíomáabàj/eacutedotbelowkiri?
You danced at Íf/oacutedotbelown town and Íf/oacutedotbelown became
desolate; you danced at Èjìgbò and Èjìgbò
was split asunder like a rag; now you came
to Ìlá /Ogravedotbelowràngún and you commenced to
wiggle your buttocks; were you given a mis-
sion to ruin all towns associated with gods?
87
(A person who has the reputation for caus-
ing disasters should not be given freedom of
action anywhere.)
1073. Okòbáìṣínmáwo ,oòbáì rókòmul/egravedotbelow;
ab/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowẹ-/eacutedotbelowb/oacutedotbelowsómioníoóyọ/oacutedotbelow.
You made no secret pact with minnows, and
you entered into no covenant with theìrókò
tree, yet when your needle dropped into the
stream, you proposed to retrieve it. (Unless
one has superhuman powers, one should
not attempt the impossible. The following
two entries are variants.)
1074. Okòbáòkunmáwo,oòbá/ogravedotbelowsàmul/egravedotbelow;
ab/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowẹ-/eacutedotbelowb/oacutedotbelowsódòoníoóyọ/oacutedotbelow.
You made no secret pact with the lagoon,
and you entered into no covenant with the
87. All the towns mentioned are associated with
important gods and cults.
ocean, yet when your needle dropped into
the stream, you proposed to retrieve it.
(Unless one has extraordinary means, one
should not attempt the impossible. This
and the following entry are variants of the
foregoing one.)
1075. OkòbáỌyamáwo,oòbá Ògúnmul/egravedotbelow;
ab/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowẹ-/eacutedotbelowb/oacutedotbelowsódòoníoóyọ/oacutedotbelow.
You made no secret pact with Ọya, and you
made no covenant with Ògún,
88 yet your
neddle dropped into the river and you pro-
posed to ﬁnd it. (One should not embark on
missions for which one has not made ade-
quate preparations. Compare the preceding
two entries.)
1076. Okòluòmìránlóru,òńlùúl/oacutedotbelowsàn-án.
You did not hit the giant at night, but you
hit him in daylight. (One should court
trouble only if and when one has some
cover.)
1077. Okòwọbàtànínú/egravedotbelowgúnòńsáré;o
lágbáramàlúù?
You wear no shoes on the thorny path and
yet you are running; do you have a cow’s
[hoof] power? (Unless one is well fortiﬁed,
one should not court danger.)
1078. Okò-ìmúẹrú,oníÀdón iòótàá
fún.
You have not captured a slave, but you are
already saying you will sell him or her only
to an Àdò [Benin City] person. (One should
not use a commodity before one has it.)
1079. Oló-of/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowjọbaonío-ònìíṣÒgbóni,o-ò
nííp/eacutedotbelowlóyè.
You propose to become a king, but you
refuse to join the Ògbóni society; you will
not last long on the throne. (Whoever
88. Ọya is the goddess of rivers and seas, and Ògún
is the god of metals.
Onperspicaciousness 129


--- PAGE 143 ---
wishes to prosper must observe the condi-
tions for prosperity.)89
1080. Òḿbẹoníṣègùn ,oòbẹasínwín;bí
oníṣègùn-únṣetíasínwínògbàńk/oacutedotbelow?
You are pleading with the medicine man
but not with the demented person; what if
the medicine man produces the medicine
and the demented person refuses it? (When
t w os t e p sa r er e q u i r e dt oa c c o m p l i s hap u r -
pose, one should not take one and slight the
other.)
1081. ‘‘Óḿb/ogravedotbelow,óḿb/ogravedotbelow!’’laﬁńd/eacutedotbelowrùbaọmọdé;
bóbádétán/egravedotbelowrùatán.
‘‘It’s coming! It’s coming!’’ is what one says
to frighten a child; after it has arrived it loses
all its terror. (Looming problems often cause
consternation out of all proportion to their
real damaging force. Compare 3268.)
1082. Oníkíará/ogravedotbelowrunṣeoorefúnọ,b/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowniorí
ẹnitíeégúnńlé,tófál/oacutedotbelowb/egravedotbelowlá.
Y o up r a yt ot h eb e i n gf r o mh e a v e nt og r a n t
you a boon, yet you can see the person who
is being chased by the masquerader and
whose stew the masquerader has consumed.
(One should not expect to receive better
t r e a t m e n tf r o map e r s o nw h oi sk n o w nt ob e
vicious to others.)
90
1083. Óńtiiléb/ogravedotbelowkòra/egravedotbelowgbẹ;ódéokotánóní
/egravedotbelowgbẹnioníkú/egravedotbelowkọ.
Leaving home, he did not purchase dried
meat; after arriving on the farm, he says
dried meat is the indispensable thing to eat
corn loaf with. (One should make provisions
against one’s future needs.)
89. Aspirants to chieftaincy titles often engage in
bitter competition.
90. The detail about the egúngúneating the poor
person’s stew suggests that the person praying to him
as a being from heaven should have realized that the
stew-eating ﬁgure was no heavenly being.
1084. Oríetíad/eacutedotbelowt/egravedotbelowoﬁsanokòó;kònípọntó
ni,tàbíkòr/egravedotbelowd/egravedotbelowd/egravedotbelowt/oacutedotbelow?
You see a leper’s ears and you value them
at 20 cowries; do they lack suﬃcient thick-
ness or are they not red enough? (Said of
someone who applies the wrong value to
things.)
1085. Oríẹs/egravedotbelow-ẹwèrèoòbùú ṣoògùn;níbolo
timáarítọlọgb/oacutedotbelown?
You see the footprint of an imbecile and
you do not take soil from it to make a
charm; where will you ﬁnd the footprint of
aw i s ep e r s o n ?
91 (One should take advan-
tage of the weak and vulnerable, because
one will not be able to take advantage of the
strong.)
1086. Oroj/oacutedotbelowláàár/ogravedotbelowoòjàre,ódal/eacutedotbelowoník/oacutedotbelowba
dúrógb/oacutedotbelowtẹnuẹ;ohuntóowíláàár/ogravedotbelownáàk/oacutedotbelow
lomáawílál/eacutedotbelow?
You state your case in the morning and are
not vindicated, yet at nightfall you plead
with the king to delay a bit and listen to
what you have to say; isn’t what you have to
say in the evening the same thing you said
in the morning? (Repeated stating will not
make a bad case a good one.)
1087. Osáfúnikú,ob/oacutedotbelowsíàk/ogravedotbelowidà.
You run from death and seek refuge in a
scabbard. (Said of a person who has got into
a worse predicament than the one he or she
was ﬂeeing from.)
1088. ‘‘Óṣemírí’’;ògbóadì/eacutedotbelowríàwòdìsá.
‘ ‘ Ih a v ee x p e r i e n c e di tb e f o r e ’ ’ ;ag r o w n
chicken ﬂees at the sight of a kite. (One
learns to run from danger once one has
recognized it as such.)
91. Soil taken from a person’s footprints is supposed
to be a particularly good ingredient for making potent
and usually evil charms against that person.
130 the good person


--- PAGE 144 ---
1089. Ótiojúorunwáóńfọẹnà;óní‘‘ẹj/eacutedotbelowká
máajiním/eacutedotbelowmu-m/eacutedotbelowmu.’’
He woke up from sleep and spoke in scram-
bled language; he said, ‘‘Let us wake it in
moos.’’ (An ignorant person will always
make stupid suggestions. See 1848.)
1090. Owàláyé,mowàláàye,òḿbimíbí
/ogravedotbelowrúnṣerí.
You are on earth [alive] and I am on earth,
and yet you ask me what heaven is like.
(Said of a person seeking information from
someone in no better position to know than
the seeker.)
1091. Óyẹkíeégúnmọẹnitómúàgbòso.
It is proper that the masquerader know who
tethered the ram. (One should acknowledge
those who have done one some favor.)
92
1092. Obìnrinògbéibitómáar/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowrùn.
A woman never remains where her well-
being rests. (Women seldom know until it is
too late which home would best suit them.)
1093. Òbòòṣééṣeàlejò.
The vagina is not a thing for showing hos-
pitality. (Good things are not good for all
purposes.)
1094. Odídẹr/eacutedotbelowdawo,ìkóìdí/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowd/ogravedotbelowgb/egravedotbelowrì.
The parrot becomes fully initiated into the
secrets; his tail feather becomes a noniniti-
ate. (The person being propped up achieves
great glory, but his backer loses his stand-
ing.)
93
1095. Odóiyánòj/eacutedotbelowgún/egravedotbelowlú;odó/egravedotbelowlúòj/eacutedotbelow
gúnyán;àtẹtá-aﬁńpàtẹìl/egravedotbelowk/egravedotbelow,aòj/eacutedotbelowﬁpàtẹ
/ogravedotbelowrúnlá.
92. The tethered ram would be an oﬀering to the
masquerader.
93. The parrot’s colorful tail feather (ìkó)i st h e
bird’s main attraction, the chief reason why it is valued.
The mortar used for pounding yams will not
do for pounding indigo leaves; the mortar
for pounding indigo leaves will not do for
yams; the tray on which beads are displayed
for sale will not do for displaying dried okro.
(Each object has its proper uses.)
1096. Òdúkìíṣeàìm/ogravedotbelowolóko.
The òdúvegetable is not something the
farmer does not know. (An indication that a
matter under discussion is not such a secret
after all.)
1097. Ogúnkìíp/ogravedotbelowkápínfúnaládùúgbò.
The inheritance is never so abundant that
one shares it with neighbors. (However
abundantly one is blessed, one should man-
age one’s resources wisely.)
1098. Ogúnmbókòó?Òweaṣiwèrè.
Twenty or a score? An imbecile’s puzzle.
(Trust an imbecile to pose stupid questions.)
1099. Ohùnàgbà:bíkòtaìgún,ataèbù.
An elder’s voice: if it does not yield yams
ready for pounding [for food], it will yield
yam seedlings ready for planting. (There
is some value in whatever comes out of an
elder’s mouth.)
1100. Ohuntíabápàdéòjọohuntíarít/eacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelow.
That which one comes upon is nothing to
c o m p a r ew i t hw h a to n eh a sa l w a y sh a d .( N o
new friend or ﬁnd can be as valuable as the
one you have had for some time.)
1101. Ohuntíanilaﬁńk/eacutedotbelowọmọẹni.
It is what one has that one uses to spoil one’s
child. (One should not go beyond one’s
means simply to make a good impression on
others.)
1102. Ohuntíaòríríl èèw/ogravedotbelowojú.
It is something one has never seen before
that is taboo for the eyes. (Whatever one has
Onperspicaciousness 131


--- PAGE 145 ---
encountered before cannot be too much to
accommodate.)
1103. Ohuntíaṣeníléànaẹni,‘‘Ojúńtìmí’’
kúròníb/egravedotbelow.
What one does in the home of one’s parents-
in-law leaves no room for ‘‘I am bashful.’’
(One must not be reticent in doing whatever
o n em u s td o . )
94
1104. Ohuntíkòj/eacutedotbelowkáṣọpéméjìniòj/eacutedotbelowkódú.
The same thing that keeps one from having
more than one item of clothing also keeps
that one from getting blackened by dirt.
(Misfortune teaches fortitude; scarcity
teaches thrift. Compare 1106.)
1105. Ohuntíkòj/eacutedotbelowkíokop/ogravedotbelowniòj/eacutedotbelowkóm/oacutedotbelow.
Whatever limits the size of a farm is the
same thing that makes it overgrown with
weeds. (A basic defect will manifest itself
in sundry ways. The sentiment here is the
opposite of that of the preceding proverb.)
1106. Ohuntóf/oacutedotbelownilójúlóńjúwe/ogravedotbelownàfúnni.
Whatever deprives one of sight is the same
thing that shows one the way. (Misfortune
teaches those it aﬄicts how to cope with it.
Compare 1104.)
1107. Ohuntójọounlaﬁńwéohun;èpo/egravedotbelowpà
lójọìt/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowlírí.
It is what resembles a thing that one com-
pares it with; peanut shells are most like
the nest of the rodent/egravedotbelowlírí.(One should ob-
serve propriety in dealing with respectable
people.)
1108. Ohuntóníòunóòb/eacutedotbelownilórí,bóbáṣíni
nífìlà,kádúp/eacutedotbelow.
94. The necessity to impress parents-in-law often
mandates behavior one would not contemplate else-
where and in other circumstances.
If a thing that vows to decapitate one only
knocks oﬀ one’s hat, one should be thank-
ful. (If misfortune turns out to be far milder
than expected, one should give thanks.
Compare the following entry.)
1109. Ohuntóníòunóòṣenil/eacutedotbelowrú,tówáṣeni
níw/ogravedotbelowfà,kágbàá.
If whatever promised to make one a slave
only makes one a pawn, one should accept
one’s fate. (One should gratefully accept a
fate that turns out more merciful than it
might have been. Compare the preceding
entry.)
1110. Ohun-a-lè-ṣe,tóforísọàpòòwú;w/oacutedotbelown
níṣebóríyangíníl/egravedotbelow,óní‘‘Ohunabálèṣelà
ńlérísí.’’
Ohunalèṣe dashes his head against a sack of
cotton wool; people asked if he did not see
the rock nearby; he replied, ‘‘One should
vow to do only what one can safely accom-
plish.’’ (Attempt only feats that will cause no
headache.)
95
1111. Òjòòìdáaníkòtótàná.
It has not yet stopped raining, and some
observe that todays’s rainfall is not as much
as yesterday’s. (One should not arrive at
conclusions until one has all the facts.)
1112. Òjòwúòjágèlè;koorolólèjá.
The jealous woman does not snatch her
headgear oﬀ; all she can do is threaten a
ﬁght. (Some people are all mouth and no
action.)
96
95. The name Ohunalèṣe (Ohun-a-lè-ṣe) means
‘‘That which one can accomplish.’’
96. When a woman makes ready for a ﬁght, she
removes her headgear and ties it around her waist. A
woman who merely crowds her adversary (jákoorosíi )
i sn o tr e a d yt oﬁ g h t .
132 the good person


--- PAGE 146 ---
1113. Òjòwúòl/eacutedotbelowranláyà.
The jealous woman lacks ﬂesh on her chest.
(Excessive jealousy eats up the jealous.)
1114. Ojúàwolàwóﬁńgbaọb/egravedotbelow.
It is on its face that a plate accepts soup.
(One should not delegate matters crucial to
oneself to others.)
1115. Ojúkanlàdáńní.
A cutlass has only one edge. (One should
concentrate on one matter at a time.)
1116. Ojúkìíp/oacutedotbelownnikáﬁp/oacutedotbelownl/egravedotbelow.
One should not because of one’s suﬀer-
ing try honing one’s eyes on the ground.
97
(Diﬃculties should not lead one to foolish
behavior.)
1117. Ojúkìíp/oacutedotbelownnikámuìṣápá;òùngbẹkìí
gbẹnikámu/egravedotbelowj/egravedotbelow.
One is never so desperate that one drinks
red sorrel juice; one is never so thirsty that
one drinks blood. (Desperation must never
push one beyond the bounds of acceptable
behavior.)
1118. Ojúkìítiàgbàlóru;jagunalóṣòó
góńgó.
An elderly person does not become embar-
rassed under cover of darkness; the stalwart
squats nonchalantly.
98 (One can do whatever
one pleases when no eyes are watching.)
1119. Ojúkìítieégúnkómám/ogravedotbelownàìgbàl/egravedotbelow.
A masquerader is never so shamed that
he cannot ﬁnd his way to the secret grove.
97. The phraseojúpíp/oacutedotbelown,from which the proverbs
in this series are formulated, means ‘‘red eyes,’’ suppos-
edly the sign of suﬀering. P/oacutedotbelowncan mean both ‘‘to be
red’’ and ‘‘to hone.’’ Hence the wordplay in this proverb.
98. A reference to squatting in a roadside bush at
night to defecate.
(One cannot become so shamed abroad that
one cannot return to the embrace of one’s
home.)
1120. Ojúlaﬁḿmọàísíepo;ẹnulaﬁḿmọ
àìsíy/ogravedotbelow;ọb/egravedotbelowtíòbáléponínúòkèèrèlatiḿm/ogravedotbelow
/oacutedotbelow.
It is with the eyes that one tells the absence
of palm oil; it is with the mouth that one de-
termines the absence of salt; if a stew lacks
oil, it is the eyes that will tell. (In some mat-
ters the evidence of the eyes is enough to
reveal all one needs to know.)
1121. Ojútór/ogravedotbelowniror/eacutedotbelowńsọ.
Pimples attack only faces that are delicate.
(Other people always take advantage of
gentle people.)
1122. ‘‘Òkèìhínòj/eacutedotbelowkárít/ogravedotbelowún’’òṣéépalówe
níléànaẹni.
‘‘The nearer hill kept me from seeing the
farther one’’ is not a proverb to use in one’s
parents-in-law’s home. (There are some
obligations one cannot sidestep with ﬂippant
excuses.)
1123. Okóilékìíjọobìnrinlójú,àﬁbóbádó
tìta.
The penis at home never impresses the
woman, unless she fucks one outside the
home. (One hardly ever appreciates what
one has until one has ﬂirted with, and has
been disappointed by, alternatives.)
1124. Okokìíj/eacutedotbelowtibabaàtitọmọkómánìí
àlà.
Farms do not, by virtue of belonging to a
father and his son, lack boundaries. (Even
close relatives may beneﬁt from good
fences.)
1125. Okomím/oacutedotbelowṣe-éro;/ogravedotbelownàmím/oacutedotbelowdùn-ún
t/ogravedotbelow;gbogboìyàwódùn-úngbàbálé;aṣọìgbà-á
ṣe-éyọ.
Onperspicaciousness 133


--- PAGE 147 ---
A clean farm is a pleasure to weed; a clean-
swept path is a pleasure to tread; all new
wives are a pleasure to deﬂower; the new
fashionable cloth of the season is a pleasure
to wear. (Everybody loves performing the
most pleasant of chores.)
1126. Okotorobo-ótùy/eacutedotbelowsíl/egravedotbelowọmọtitúnńgbejó;
óníórọòunl/oacutedotbelowrùnlòúntuú?
Okotorobo, a bird, casts away a feather, and
a young chick picks it up to dance with; the
one who shed the feathers asks, would I have
discarded it if it was not a nuisance? (One
should be careful before taking over things
that others have rejected.)
1127. Okotorobo-óyéẹyinsíl/egravedotbelow,àdàbàńgarùn
woẹyinẹl/eacutedotbelowyin.
Okotorobo the bird lays an egg, and the
turtledove stretches its neck to inspect the
egg that does not belong to it. (One should
mind one’s own business.)
1128. Òkúẹrankìítiajálójú.
A dog is never too squeamish to eat a car-
cass. (If one’s means are limited, one cannot
be too choosy.)
1129. Olètógbéfèrèọbaòróhungbé.
The thief who stole the king’s bugle could
ﬁnd nothing to steal. (There can be no
rational explanation for acts of utter sense-
lessness.)
1130. Olétójíkàkàkí:níboniyótifọn/oacutedotbelown?
A thief who stole a bugle: where will he
blow it? (One should not waste one’s eﬀorts
chasing something one can never use.
99
Compare 1766.)
1131. Olóhunkìíríohun/egravedotbelowkópèélórò.
The owner will not see what he owns and
99. A kàkàkíbugle was used exclusively to an-
nounce the presence of a king.
call it a fearful abomination. (One cannot be
afraid of what one owns.)
1132. Olóhun-úndolè;‘‘Gbàbùj/eacutedotbelow’’dolóhun.
The owner becomes a thief; ‘‘Take this and
eat’’ becomes the owner. (The tables are
turned: the rightful owner is displaced by a
usurper.)
1133. Olóògùnníńṣebía-láigb/oacutedotbelow-m/ogravedotbelowràn;bí
ogunóbàáw/ogravedotbelowlúọlọgb/oacutedotbelownlàńf/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowl/ogravedotbelow.
The medicine man behaves like a person
impervious to wise counsel; if war threatens
a town, the person to consult for counsel is
the sage. (Trust in wisdom rather than in
magical charms.)
1134. Olórìṣàtódakiriyó:ọj/oacutedotbelowtógb/oacutedotbelowdùrùorí
ijólẹs/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowkánsí.
The idol worshiper who became a Christian:
the day he ﬁrst heard the organ play, he lost
his legs dancing. (Old habits die hard.)
100
1135. Olòṣìọmọníńfọw/oacutedotbelowòsìjúweilé-ebaba-a
/egravedotbelow.
It is a worthless child that points the way to
his father’s house with his left-hand ﬁngers.
(One should show proper regard for one’s
own patrimony.)
1136. Olóúnjẹ-/eacutedotbelowtó-óbákú.
Someone who has food is worth dying with.
(Food is a good enough reason to cast one’s
lot with another person.)
1137. Olówelaláṣ/egravedotbelow/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow.
A person who knows proverbs has the last
word in a dispute. (There is no authority
like proverbial authority.)
100. Traditional worship is done to drumming
and dancing, whereas the music in church is not for
dancing.
134 the good person


--- PAGE 148 ---
1138. Olówóáwá;aláwìnáwá;ìlútíàńgbé
lagbéńgbàwìn;à-rà-àì-sanniòsúnw/ogravedotbelown.
Those who have money will come, and those
who will buy on credit will come; it is in
one’s town that one buys on credit; failure
to pay up eventually is what is bad. (There is
nothing bad about buying on credit as long
as one eventually pays.)
1139. Olówópèlùoòjó;ọj/oacutedotbelowwolomáarówó
petìẹ?
A rich person engages a dance band and you
do not dance; when will you have the money
to hire your own band? (One should take
advantage of every opportunity to supply
one’s deﬁciencies.)
1140. Òmùg/ogravedotbelowèèyànníḿbóbìnrinmul/egravedotbelow;ọj/oacutedotbelow
tóbìnrínbámawolawóbàj/eacutedotbelow.
Only a foolish person enters into a secret
pact with a woman; the day a woman knows
a cult mystery is the day it is exploded.
(Never trust a woman.)
1141. Òmùg/ogravedotbelowníńgbéígunnu;ọlọgb/oacutedotbelownní
ńgbowó.
It is the fool that wears the Nupe masquer-
ade;
101 it is the wise person that collects the
monetary gifts. (The wise person chooses
the most proﬁtable option available.)
1142. Oníg/egravedotbelowg/eacutedotbelowfìl/egravedotbelowk/egravedotbelowd/oacutedotbelowp/ogravedotbelow;adámúﬁsàáràsan
ẹgb/egravedotbelowta.
T h eg o i t e r e dp e r s o ns e t sal o wp r i c eo n
beads; the person with a blocked nose re-
pays 6,000 cowries with alms. (One usually
sets little value on what one cannot use.)
1143. Oníginíńﬁgi/egravedotbelowd/oacutedotbelowp/ogravedotbelow.
It is the ﬁrewood seller who sets a low price
for his wares. (People take their cue from
the owner of a thing in placing a value on it.
Compare the following entry.)
101. On Nupe people, see note 15 to 1371.
1144. Onígbáníńpeigbá/egravedotbelowníàíkàrágbákáyé
tóﬁkól/egravedotbelow.
It is the owner of the calabash who ﬁrst
called it a broken piece of gourd before the
world used it for scooping dirt. (If one does
not value what one has, other people will
value it even less. Compare the preceding
entry.)
1145. Onígbèsètíńpaàpatàẹyẹlé.
The habitual debtor butchers a pigeon for
sale. (The debtor is desperate, because there
is not much meat to a pigeon, and few
people eat pigeons anyway.)
1146. Oníṣègùntósọpédí/egravedotbelowòtóòun,òfoniyó
fọw/oacutedotbelowmú.
The medicine man who is dissatisﬁed with a
modest payment will wind up with nothing.
(One should not demand too much from
people who are in dire straights.)
1147. Oorép/eacutedotbelow,aṣiwèrè-égbàgbé.
The favor is long past; the imbecile forgets.
(Only an imbecile forgets a favor even long
after it was done.)
1148. Oòrùnkìíjẹiṣuàgbàkómámọb/egravedotbelow.
An elder does not lose his yams to the sun
without knowing where the event happened.
(A grown-up person should know where he
went wrong and make amends accordingly.)
1149. Oòrùnkìílàkínúbíolóko.
The sun does not shine and cause displea-
sure in the farmer. (Everybody welcomes an
auspicious event. See also 1164.)
1150. Orí/ogravedotbelowk/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowpopoláwo;bíawíf/oacutedotbelowmọẹnia
gb/oacutedotbelowràn.
The squirrel’s head sits in a plate like a
lump; if one counsels one’s child, it should
listen. (Refusal to listen to counsel leads to
disaster.)
Onperspicaciousness 135


--- PAGE 149 ---
1151. Orítíyójẹigúnkìígb/oacutedotbelow;bíw/oacutedotbelownfun
ládìẹkòníígbà.
The head that is destined to eat a vulture
cannot be saved; if a chicken is oﬀered to it,
it will refuse. (The person destined to suf-
fer will manage to succumb to the suﬀering
despite eﬀorts by others to save him or her.)
1152. Orítókọẹrù,owóníńnáni.
A head that refuses [to carry] loads will cost
its owner some money. (It costs money to
have others do what one refuses to do for
oneself.)
1153. Orintíòṣoro-ódákìíṣòro-ógbè;bíó
bání‘‘héééé,’’àní‘‘háááá.’’
A song that is not diﬃcult to lead is not dif-
ﬁcult to follow; if the leader sings ‘‘haaaay,’’
one responds ‘‘haaaah.’’ (One expends on a
task only the amount of eﬀort commensu-
rate with it.)
1154. Orínyí,ìlù-úyípadà.
The song changes, and the drumming
changes to suit. (One should match one’s
behavior to one’s circumstances.)
1155. ÒrìṣàtónítÒgúnkìíṣe/ogravedotbelownàònírí
nńkanjẹlásìkòtóf/eacutedotbelow.
The god that says matters pertaining to
Ògún are irrelevant will not ﬁnd anything to
eat when he or she wishes. (Humor those in
a position to punish you.)
1156. Òṣùpáléaníkògún;ẹnit/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowbáto
kótúnunṣe.
The moon appears, and people say it is not
straight; whoever can reach it, let him go
a n dr i g h ti t .( I ti sp o i n t l e s st oc o m p l a i n
about things one can do nothing about.)
1157. Òtòṣìògb/oacutedotbelowtìṣ/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowóníogúnkóàparò;ọd/eacutedotbelow
rorò.
The destitute person does not look to re-
pair his fortune; he says the partridge has
been captured in a war, for the hunter is
merciless. (Rather than deal with their own
problems, people sometimes gloat over the
troubles of others.)
102
1158. Owókìílóyek/oacutedotbelowmọkús/eacutedotbelowrú.
If the amount of money is known, a child
cannot die in slavery.
103 (One does not en-
dure adverse conditions when one is capable
of the eﬀort to escape them. The following
proverb is something of a variant.)
1159. Owókìíyéyek/oacutedotbelowmọókú.
If money is available in abundance, a child
does not die. (One should spare no expenses
to take care of one’s children or one’s aﬀairs.
See the previous entry.)
1160. Owólaﬁńfínáowó;bíẹgb/egravedotbelowrúnbáso
lókè,igbiólaﬁńkáa.
Money is what one uses to kindle the ﬁre
for money; if 1,000 cowries grow from the
branches above, one uses 200 cowries to
pluck them. (Without some expenditure
there can be no proﬁt.)
1161. Owólaﬁńlògbà;ọgb/oacutedotbelownlaﬁńgbéléayé.
It is with money that we secure pleasures; it
is with wisdom that one secures a good life.
(Riches are desirable, but wisdom is more
valuable.)
1162. Owóníńpaọjà/ogravedotbelowm/ogravedotbelowràn.
It is money that brings a knowing person’s
trading to a conclusion. (A wise trader
knows how to use his money to make his
oﬀer successful.)
102. The expression ogun-únkó, ‘‘to be carried oﬀ
or captured in a war,’’ means to be in serious trouble.
103. The reference is to the practice of pawning
oneself or a relative for a loan. If the amount is not
inﬁnity, the redemption of the pawn cannot be an
insurmountable problem.
136 the good person


--- PAGE 150 ---
1163. Owót/oacutedotbelowmọdébák/oacutedotbelowk/oacutedotbelowní,àkàràníńﬁ-í
rà.
The ﬁrst money a youth comes into he
spends on bean fritters. (Young people
seldom know how to manage wealth.)
1164. Òwúkìílàkínúbíolóko.
The cotton seed does not open and thus
anger the farmer. (The success of a venture
does not make one angry. See 1149.)
1165. Owúpanijukù/mgravem/ogravedotbelow.
Jealousy kills more surely than a cudgel.
(Jealousy is a dangerous thing.)
1166. ÒyìnbóÒkèEléérú,óṣubúsódeAl/oacutedotbelowba;
kùmmọniyógbedìde.
The white man from Òkè Elérú; he collapses
in front of Al/oacutedotbelowba’s compound; cudgels will
help him up. (A person who becomes dis-
abled where he is at his enemy’s mercy can
expect rough handling.)
104
Ọ
1167. /Ogravedotbelowbẹńwóléara/egravedotbelowóníòúnḿbaàk/ogravedotbelowj/eacutedotbelow.
T h ek n i f ei sd e s t r o y i n gi t so w nh o m e ;i t
says it is ruining the sheath. (Said of people
whose actions will hurt them more than
they will hurt other people. Compare 361.)
1168. Ọb/egravedotbelowtíbaálékìíjẹ,ìyáléilékìísèé.
The sort of stew the man of the house will
not eat, the woman of the house should not
cook. (One should not do what one knows
one’s comrades hate.)
1169. /Ogravedotbelowd/egravedotbelowọmọńﬁìdòṣeré.
An idiot child plays withìdòﬂowers. (A
simpleton does not know the value of any-
thing.)
104. The suggestion is that the white man had
earned the enmity of a certain person named Al/oacutedotbelowba.
1170. /Ogravedotbelowd/egravedotbelowd/egravedotbelowògbaòró,àﬁab/eacutedotbelowọdán.
The porch does not accommodate standing
people; only the shade of theọdán[banyan
tree] does. (An invitation to repair to an-
other place outside other people’s earshot to
discuss conﬁdential matters.)
1171. /Ogravedotbelowfàfàfohùnṣakin.
The tree bear wins renown with its voice.
(The loud person attracts attention.)
1172. Ọgb/oacutedotbelowna-dákọ-kéréòtótia-yọwó-má-
rà.
The cunning of the person who skimps
on the measure of her corn meal is not as
great as that of the would-be purchaser
who refuses to buy. (One does not have to
patronize a dishonest trader.)
1173. Ọgb/oacutedotbelowndùn-úngb/oacutedotbelown;ìm/oacutedotbelowdùn-únm/ogravedotbelow.
Wisdom is a good thing to have; knowl-
edge is a good thing to have. (Always seek
wisdom and knowledge.)
1174. Ọgb/oacutedotbelownjuagbára.
Wisdom is greater than strength. (Always
prefer wisdom to strength.)
1175. Ọgb/oacutedotbelownkìítán.
W i s d o mi sn e v e ru s e du p .( T h e r ew i l la l w a y s
be a place and some use for wisdom.)
1176. Ọgb/oacutedotbelownlaﬁńgbéayé.
One needs wisdom to live in this world.
(Wisdom is indispensable.)
1177. Ọgb/oacutedotbelownlajáﬁńpaìkokòbọIfá.
It is cunning that the dog employs in order
to sacriﬁce a wolf to Ifá. (A cunning per-
son can get the better of people far more
powerful than he.)
1178. Ọgb/oacutedotbelownníńṣ/eacutedotbelowgun;ìm/ogravedotbelowrànníńṣ/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowt/egravedotbelow.
Cunning wins battles; knowledge defeats
plots. (Cunning and knowledge will help
one prevail.)
Onperspicaciousness 137


--- PAGE 151 ---
1179. Ọgb/oacutedotbelownọlọgb/oacutedotbelownlaﬁńṣọgb/oacutedotbelown;ìm/ogravedotbelowràn
ẹnìkanòt/oacutedotbelowb/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow.
One learns wisdom from other people’s
wisdom; one person’s knowledge does not
amount to anything. (Wisdom and knowl-
edge are best shared.)
1180. Ọgb/oacutedotbelownọlọgb/oacutedotbelownòj/eacutedotbelowkápeàgbàníwèrè.
Other people’s wisdom saves the elder from
being called a lunatic. (The person who
can learn from others will avoid a lot of
embarrassment.)
1181. Ọgb/oacutedotbelowntíahúngb/oacutedotbelown,/egravedotbelowhìnniyómáatọ
tiìgbín.
The cunning of the tortoise will always rank
behind that of the snail. (Some people can-
not hope to be more cunning than certain
others.)
1182. Ọgb/oacutedotbelowntí/ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowﬁpaẹf/ogravedotbelownlóﬁńjẹ/eacutedotbelow.
The same cunning with which the toad
killed the buﬀalo will show it how to eat
the prey. (If a person has proved himself
capable of doing the impossible, one should
not doubt that he can accomplish another
impossibility.)
1183. Ọgbọọgb/oacutedotbelownlàgbàlagbà-áﬁńsáfún
ẹranlá.
It is with cunning that a grown man runs
away from a bull. (A grown person should
know how to avoid disaster without losing
face.)
1184. Ọj/oacutedotbelowerélàńjiyànohun.
It is on a playful occasion that one argues
about matters. (Arguments conducted in
jest conceal some serious import.)
1185. Ọj/oacutedotbelowtíìlù-úbáńluonílù,iṣ/eacutedotbelowmìíràn-án
yá.
The day the drum begins to beat the drum-
mer is the day he should seek another
employment. (One should know when to
abandon an unproﬁtable proposition.)
1186. Ọj/oacutedotbelowtíolówóńṣẹbọnià-wà-jẹ-wà-mu
ìw/ogravedotbelowfà.
The day the person who did the hiring
makes a sacriﬁce is the day the hired hand
eats and drinks. (The poor will eat when the
rich provide a feast.)
1187. /Ogravedotbelowk/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowńsunkúnagbádá;èyítíàjàò-ódá
léṣìíkílóﬁṣe?Ṣebíigilóﬁńgùn.
T h es q u i r r e lw e e p sf o rw a n to fas t a t e l yg a r -
ment; the garment the àjàòbird made last
year, what did it do with it? Was it not tree
climbing it used the garment for? (It is silly
to hanker for something one cannot use
anyway.)
1188. Ọk/oacutedotbelowọl/oacutedotbelowk/oacutedotbelowlaﬁńgb/oacutedotbelownèkìtì.
It is other people’s hoe that one uses to clear
a mound of rubbish. (One is usually more
respectful of one’s own property than that of
others.)
1189. /Ogravedotbelowk/ogravedotbelow/ogravedotbelowkanlàńyọẹs/egravedotbelowlábàtà.
One at a time is how one extricates one’s
f e e tf r o mam i r e .( T h eb e s tw a yt oa p p r o a c h
a problem is systematically. Compare 1870.
The following entry is a variant.)
1190. /Ogravedotbelowk/ogravedotbelow/ogravedotbelowkanlàńyọẹs/egravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowkù.
One at a time is how one removes one’s legs
from a masquerade costume. (The best way
to approach a problem is systematically.
Compare the preceding entry.)
1191. Ọkùnrinj/eacutedotbelowj/eacutedotbelowa-bìwà-kunkun.
An easygoing man’s gentle mien hides a
strong disposition. (The quiet type is often a
tough customer.)
1192. ỌlọòlọlódéÌbarà?Ìbaràamáaṣeilé
ọlọ?
138 the good person


--- PAGE 152 ---
If the grindstone did not move, how did it
get to Ìbarà? Is Ìbarà the home of grind-
stones? (People do not travel from home
without some reason.)
105
1193. Ọl/oacutedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelowndoríẹjamú;òmùg/oacutedotbelowdìrù-ur/egravedotbelow
mú.
The wise person grabs a ﬁsh by the head; the
fool grabs it by the tail ﬁn. (The wise per-
son knows better than a fool the best way to
handle a situation.)
1194. Ọl/oacutedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelownjẹnibíẹmùr/eacutedotbelown;aṣiwèréjẹnibí
ìgb/ogravedotbelowngb/ogravedotbelown.
The wise person bites one like a mosquito;
the mad person bites one like a gadﬂy. (Cau-
tiousness will get one to the goal far more
successfully than brashness.)
1195. Ọlọgb/oacutedotbelownlólèmọàdììtúèdè.
Only a wise person can decipher the mean-
ing of speech. (The deep meanings and
nuances of an utterance are for only the wise
to understand.)
1196. Ọlọgb/oacutedotbelownńdẹihò,/ogravedotbelowm/ogravedotbelowràn-ándúrótìí;
ọlọgb/oacutedotbelownní‘‘Háà,ójáde!’’/Ogravedotbelowm/ogravedotbelowránní‘‘Háà,
mokìí!’’Ọlọgb/oacutedotbelownní‘‘Kílokì?’’/Ogravedotbelowm/ogravedotbelowránní
‘‘Kínìwọnáà-álójáde?’’
The cunning man is watching a hole, and
the knowledgeable person is standing by
him; the cunning man exclaims, ‘‘Ha, it has
sprung out!’’ The knowledgeable person
responds, ‘‘Ha, I have grabbed it!’’ The cun-
ning person asks, ‘‘What did you grab?’’ The
knowledgeable person asks in turn, ‘‘What
did you say sprang out?’’ (Two matched wits
are in contest.)
1197. Ọlọgb/oacutedotbelownniyójogúnògo;aṣiwèrèniyó
ruìtìjúwálé.
105. The play is on the syllablelọ(which means ‘‘to
go’’) in the wordọlọ,grindstone.
The wise child will inherit glory; the idiot
child will bring shame home with him. (A
w i s ec h i l di st ob ep r e f e r r e dt oa ni d i o t . )
1198. Ọlọgb/oacutedotbelownọmọníḿmúinú-ubàbá/egravedotbelowdùn;
aṣiwèrèọmọníḿbainúìyá/egravedotbelowj/eacutedotbelow.
A wise child gladdens the heart of his father;
an imbecile child saddens the heart of his
mother. (Every parent would prefer a wise
c h i l dt oa ni d i o t . )
1199. Ọl/oacutedotbelowjàkìíwípék/oacutedotbelowjàótú.
The owner of the market never wishes the
market to be disrupted. (People always want
the best outcome for their ventures.)
1200. Ọl/oacutedotbelowtíkìímọọmọ/egravedotbelowlólè.
The wine seller never realizes that his child
is a thief. (One is always blind to the ﬂaws of
those one loves.)
106
1201. Ọl/oacutedotbelowt/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelownítòun/ogravedotbelowt/ogravedotbelow;ìyá/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowkúnílé,ogbé
elọsinsóko.
Ọl/oacutedotbelowt/ogravedotbelow says his ways are diﬀerent; his mother
dies at home, and he takes her to the farm
for burial. (The unconventional person will
always do things diﬀerently.)
107
1202. Ọmọatirotórabàtàfúnbàbá/egravedotbelow,/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowló
f/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelow.
The child of a cripple who bought shoes for
his father is asking for a stern lecture. (One
must not be thoughtless in one’s actions.)
1203. Ọmọẹnídàra,bí-ikáﬁṣayak/oacutedotbelow.
One’s child may be beautiful, but one can-
not make her one’s wife. (Not all attractive
propositions can be pursued.)
106. The wine seller leaves his child in charge and
does not realize that he has been cutting the wine with
water.
107. Ọl/oacutedotbelowt/ogravedotbelowmeans ‘‘One who is diﬀerent.’’
Onperspicaciousness 139


--- PAGE 153 ---
1204. Ọmọẹniẹl/eacutedotbelowniòjọọmọẹni;ọmọeni
ì-bájiyán,ọmọẹniẹl/eacutedotbelowniaj/egravedotbelowkọ.
Other people’s children are not like one’s
own; when one’s child eats pounded yams,
other people’s children will eat corn-meal
loaf. (One always favors one’s own children
over those of others.)
108
1205. Ọmọẹnikìígbọns/egravedotbelowkáﬁeèsúnnùú
nídìí.
One does not, after one’s child defecates,
wipe the child’s anus with the abrasive ele-
phant grass. (We do not deliberately injure
those who look to us for protection.)
1206. Ọmọinálàńránsíná.
It is the child of ﬁre that one sends on an
errand to ﬁre. (It is best to match the remedy
to the problem.)
1207. Ọmọtíòníbabakìíjìjà/egravedotbelowbi.
A fatherless child should not engage in an
unjust ﬁght. (Never provoke trouble unless
you have strong backers. Compare 3136.)
1208. Ọmọdékékeréòmọogun,óníkógunó
wá,óníbógúnbádéòunakósíyàráìyáòun.
A small child does not know what war is
like; hence he says that war should break
out, for when it does he will go hide in
his mother’s room. (Ignorance often leads
people to bite oﬀ much more than they can
chew.)
1209. Ọmọdékìímọàkókòtíkúrò-kúròóﬁ
ńkúrò.
A small child never knows whenkúròkúrò
takes its leave.
109 (Youth is a stranger to
etiquette or protocol.)
108. The assumption, of course, is that this mother
has charge of both her own children and thos of others.
109. Kúròmeans ‘‘leave’’ or ‘‘depart.’’Kúrò-kúrò,in
accordance with Yoruba word formation, would thus
1210. Ọmọdekìímọìtàn,kómọà-gb/oacutedotbelow-wí,kó
mọọj/oacutedotbelowtíaṣe/egravedotbelowdáòun.
A child does not know so much history and
know so much hearsay that it knows the day
of its creation. (However knowledgeable
a youth might be, some deep knowledge
would be beyond him.)
1211. Ọmọdékìímọori-íjẹkómáràáal/eacutedotbelownu.
A child is never so careful about eating corn
meal that it does not smear the meal on
its mouth. (A youth may be clever but will
inevitably make some mistakes.)
1212. Ọmọdékìíníinánílekítòdemájòóo.
A child does not have ﬁre at home and
therefore escape being burned by the ﬁre
abroad. (Being secure and well respected in
one’s home does not save one from vicissi-
tudes outside the home.)
1213. Ọmọdémọsáárá,ṣùgb/oacutedotbelownkòmọàl/ogravedotbelowyí.
A child knows snuﬀ but does not know how
to grind and turn the tobacco. (A child is
good at consuming but not at procuring.)
1214. Ọmọdéníw/oacutedotbelownńjẹigún,bàbá/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowní
wọnkìíjẹ/eacutedotbelow;óníẹnìkánjẹ/eacutedotbelowrílójúòun;bàbá
/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelownítani?Óníẹnináàòsí.
A child says that people do eat vultures, and
i t sf a t h e rs a y sp e o p l ed on o t ;t h ec h i l ds a y s
someone did eat a vulture in its presence;
i t sf a t h e ra s k s ,w h o ?T h ec h i l ds a y st h ep e r -
s o ni sd e a d .
110 (The youth who attempts to
challenge the wisdom of the elders will ﬁnd
himself tripped up by his own mouth.)
mean ‘‘one who departs.’’ The idea here is that the child
does not know the right time to leave a place.
110. The phrase kòsí in Yoruba means ‘‘there is
n o n e ’ ’o r‘ ‘ t h e r ei sn o t... ’ ’ ;w h e na t t a c h e dp r e d i c a t i v e l y
to a person, it is a euphemism meaning that the person
is dead. In this case the statement that the person died
does double duty in that it alsoliterallysupports the
father’s assertion.
140 the good person


--- PAGE 154 ---
1215. Ọmọdéòm/egravedotbelowf/oacutedotbelow,óńpèélégbògi.
A child does not recognize a vegetable and
calls it medicine. (An uninformed person
will inevitably make a fool of himself or
herself. Compare the following two entries.)
1216. Ọmọdéòmọoògùn,óńpèél/eacutedotbelowf/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelow,kòm/ogravedotbelow
péikútópababaòunni.
A child does not know medicine, and he
therefore calls it vegetables; he does not rec-
ognize it as what killed his father. (People
may call disasters on their own heads out
of ignorance. Compare the previous and
following entries.)
1217. Ọmọdéòmoògùnóńpèél/eacutedotbelowgùn-ún.
A child does not know medicine and says
i ti sat h o r n .
111 (The ignorant person knows
not the value of anything. Compare the
previous two entries.)
1218. Ọmọdéyìí,máawòmílójú,ẹni(tí)abá
lọsódelàńwòlójú.
Child, keep your eyes on me; one keeps
one’s eyes on the person who takes one
visiting. (Always pay attention to what your
guide and instructor does and tells you
to do.)
1219. ‘‘Ọmọ-/ogravedotbelowmiòyó’’lam/ogravedotbelow;‘‘ọmọ-/ogravedotbelowmíyó,
ṣùgb/oacutedotbelownkòrísááráf/eacutedotbelow,’’aòmọì yẹn.
‘‘My child did not have enough to eat’’ we
understand; ‘‘My child had enough to eat
but had no snuﬀ to snort’’ we do not under-
stand. (People should care for their children,
not spoil them with overindulgence.)
1220. /Ogravedotbelowm/ogravedotbelowrànníḿmọoyúnìgbín.
Only a sage knows the pregnancy of a snail.
111. Oògùnmay refer to medicine or to charms.
Much of Yoruba medicine is herbal; one can imagine
ac h i l dw h os e e so n l yt h o r n sw h e r eap e r s o nk n o w l -
edgeable about herbs would see a potent source of
medicine.
(Deep wisdom is the gift of only a select
few.)
1221. /Ogravedotbelowpágbóńgbónínṣíwájúagb/oacutedotbelowọni.
It is a small walking stick that goes before
the person who walks a path overhung with
foliage that is wet with morning dew. (One
uses the tools or weapons at one’s disposal
to tackle challenges.)
1222. Ọp/eacutedotbelowlóyẹẹrú.
Gratitude is what beﬁts the slave. (People
should be grateful for whatever charity they
receive.)
1223. /Ogravedotbelowp/egravedotbelowl/egravedotbelowèèyàn,bíaòbágbéelul/egravedotbelow,kòníí
lèfọhùnire.
A person who is like the divining string:
unless you throw him down, he will not
talk sense.
112 ( S o m ep e o p l er e s p o n do n l yt o
force.)
1224. /Ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowníkéjòmáakálọ;ìjàòúndiojú
/ogravedotbelownà.
The toad tells the snake to follow it, for
it does not ﬁght except by the roadside.
(Weaklings always make sure that saviors
are around before they get into a ﬁght.)
1225. /Ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowníòúnlèsínìl/egravedotbelowk/egravedotbelow;taníj/eacutedotbelowﬁìl/egravedotbelowk/egravedotbelow
/ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowsídìíọmọ-ọ/egravedotbelow?
The toad boasts that it knows how to string
beads; who, though, would put a toad’s
beads around his child’s waist? (Not just
anything will do for discriminating people.)
1226. /Ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowńyankáńdú-kàǹdù-káńdúlóju
ẹl/eacutedotbelowgùúsí;ẹl/eacutedotbelowgùúsíògbọd/ogravedotbelowyíiláta.
The toad struts nonchalantly before the per-
son cooking /egravedotbelowgúsístew; the person cooking
112. /Ogravedotbelowp/egravedotbelowl/egravedotbelowi st h es t r i n gt h eI f áp r i e s t(babaláwo)
divines with by casting it on the ground and reading the
pattern of the nuts strung on it.
Onperspicaciousness 141


--- PAGE 155 ---
the /egravedotbelowgúsístew will never add it to the ingre-
dients. (A person outside one’s jurisdiction
may well taunt one.)
1227. /Ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowòm/ogravedotbelownàodò,ódàásíàwàdà.
The toad does not know the way to the
stream and turns matters into a jest. (When
o n ei ss t u m p e d ,o n ec o v e r so n e ’ se m b a r r a s s -
ment with laughter.)
1228. /Ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowlọp/ogravedotbelowòjòníńléeégúnwọlékẹri-kẹri.
It is a deluge that chases theeégúnmasquer-
ader indoors indeﬁnitely. (When problems
become overwhelming, one has no choice
but to succumb to them.)
1229. /Ogravedotbelowrànkanlaﬁńṣòﬁn/ogravedotbelowkan.
One problem serves as the basis for a law
that will apply to another case. (Experience
establishes a precedent for future occur-
rences.)
1230. /Ogravedotbelowrànọl/oacutedotbelowrànlaﬁńk/oacutedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelown.
From other people’s problems one learns
wisdom. (One should learn from other
people’s vicissitudes.)
1231. /Ogravedotbelowràntíòsunw/ogravedotbelown,konkoǹṣojú.
A matter that is unpalatable hardens the
e y e s .( W h e no n ei si nt h ew r o n g ,o n eh i d e s
behind braggadocio.)
1232. /Ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowkìígbórínkáﬁ/ogravedotbelowbẹbùú,ẹnulaﬁ
ńwíi.
A problem is not so formidable that one at-
tacks it with a knife; one tackles it with the
mouth. (The weightiest problem is resolv-
able through discussion and negotiation.)
1233. /Ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowlaﬁńjẹomitooro/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow.
Words are the things with which to savor the
delicious broth of words. (It is with words
that one resolves all problems.)
1234. /Ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowrereníńyọobìlápò;/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowbúburúní
ńyọọfàlápó.
Good talk brings the kola nut out of the
pouch; provocative talk draws the arrow
out of the quiver. (Judicious language de-
fuses problems, whereas thoughtless talk
aggravates them.)
1235. /Ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowtíọlọgb/oacutedotbelownbásọ,ẹnuaṣiwèrèlati
ńgb/oacutedotbelowọ.
Whatever a wise man says will be heard
repeated by the nitwit. (Rumormongers
always distort the news they hear from
reliable sources.)
1236. /Ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowtódojúrúditiọl/oacutedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow,ayéád/egravedotbelowhìn.
A problem that is too complicated to resolve
becomes the sole responsibility of the person
concerned, whom the world leaves to his or
her devices. (People will help one only so
far; in the end each person must confront
his or her problems alone.)
1237. /Ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowniòunònílé;ibitíw/oacutedotbelownbáríni
w/oacutedotbelowntińsọòun.
Discourse says it has no home; people en-
gage in it wherever they please. (Any place is
a good place for an exchange of views.)
1238. Ọsángbéojúọrunlekókó;bóbáwọ
odò,adi/ogravedotbelow-r/ogravedotbelow-p/ogravedotbelowj/ogravedotbelow-p/ogravedotbelowj/ogravedotbelow.
The bowstring is taut while it remains on
t h eb o w ;d i p p e di n t ot h er i v e r ,i tb e c o m e s
very soft indeed. (One thrives on one’s home
ground where conditions are ideal; in hostile
territory one becomes helpless.)
1239. /Ogravedotbelowsán/ogravedotbelowrunòp/oacutedotbelown;ẹnitóbáyákómáa
báti/egravedotbelowlọ.
It is not yet noon in heaven;
113 whoever is
anxious to get there may go ahead by him-
113. Noon is considered the time after which one
m a yp r o p e r l yp a yav i s i t .
142 the good person


--- PAGE 156 ---
self or herself. (One is not eager to join
others in deadly adventures.)
1240. Ọw/oacutedotbelowaṣiwèrèniagbéḿbáapáyíya.
It is in the hands of an imbecile that one
ﬁnds a severed arm. (Simpleminded people
do not know how to cover their tracks or get
rid of the evidence.)
1241. /Ogravedotbeloww/ogravedotbelow-ọkókólaﬁńwọigi;/ogravedotbeloww/ogravedotbelowòrìṣàlaﬁ
ńwọàfín.
The regard one has for the knob is that with
which one clothes the tree; the regard one
has for the gods is the same that one invests
the albino with.
114 (One extends one’s regard
for certain people to those associated with
them.)
R
1242. Ràáire,gàáire;ìpéǹpéjúniàlà-afìlà.
Press it well on the head, puﬀ it out; the eye-
brow is the limit for the cap. (One may be
free to use one’s possession as one pleases,
but there are still some conventions to ob-
serve.)
1243. Ràdà-ràdà-ámọibitíóńrè.
The meandering person knows where he
is headed. (A person who seems without
a purpose may be engaged in something
known to himself or herself.)
1244. Rírítíaríigúnlaﬁńtaigúnl/oacutedotbelowfà.
It is because one sees the vulture that one
shoots arrows at it. (One who does not make
oneself available will not present a target for
people’s hostility.)
114. The knob is the toughest part of any tree.
The albino, like other so-called aﬄicted people, is
considered by the Yoruba to be a special ward of the
gods.
S
1245. ‘‘Sìnmíkáreléàna,’’ów/egravedotbelowwùẹtù.
‘‘Go with me to my in-laws’ home,’’ and he
wore a garment made from rich handwoven
material. (Said of a person who attempts to
steal other people’s glory whom he or she is
supposed to be helping.)
1246. S/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowkíọl/oacutedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelow,àbùkùníńﬁkanni.
Spreading rumors into the ears of the subject
of the rumor brings disgrace to the speaker.
(One should refrain from rumormongering.)
Ṣ
1247. Ṣàǹgókìíjàkómúiléaró.
Ṣango does not ﬁght and destroy the enclo-
sure for dyeing. (Some people are beyond
the reach of some nemesis.)
1248. Ṣàngóníòunníńkóọkùnrinsuurubá
jà;Èṣùníbí-itòun?ṢàngóníkítÈṣùkúrò.
Ṣango says he gathers people around him
to ﬁght together; Èṣù asks if Ṣango includes
people like him, and Ṣango says Èṣù is the
exception. (No one wants to engage in any
venture with an unpredictable trouble-
maker.)
1249. ‘‘Ṣemíníṣu’’níńṣíwájú‘‘ẹkúuṣ/eacutedotbelow’’bí?
Does ‘‘Give me some yam’’ go before ‘‘Hello
there, you working man’’? (It is bad form to
ask people for favors before you greet them.
This is a variant of 888.)
1250. Ṣ/egravedotbelowk/egravedotbelowr/egravedotbelowòṣééf/ogravedotbelowpána.
The beaded musical gourd is not some-
thing to play with a stick. (Always apply the
proper tool to the job.)
1251. Ṣ/eacutedotbelowk/eacutedotbelow-ṣẹk/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowdára,ṣùgb/oacutedotbelownalágb/egravedotbelowdẹòrọ/oacutedotbelow
fúnọmọ/egravedotbelow.
Onperspicaciousness 143


--- PAGE 157 ---
Handcuﬀs are pretty, but the blacksmith
does not fashion them for his own child.
(When trouble is being distributed, one
always wishes to exempt one’s own people.)
1252. Sútàònílé;ìkórítalÈṣùńgbé.
Perﬁdy has no home; the home of Èṣù is the
crossroads. (No one makes room in his or
her home for an abomination.)
T
1253. TalèèyànnínúẹrúÀàrẹ?AníÌdaganna
lawáwá,ẹníÌdakolo?
Which of the Ààr/eacutedotbelow’s slaves is a person of
any account? We said we came looking for
Ìdaganna, and you ask, ‘‘Ìdakolo?’’ (Said to
indicate that one’s auditor is making non-
sense out of the sense one is making. Also,
there is nothing to choose between two
worthless things.)
1254. Taníj/eacutedotbelowjẹọṣẹkófògìrìfọṣọ?
Who would eat soap and wash clothes with
fermented beans? (Who would seek unease
when ease is available?)
1255. Taním/ogravedotbelowdíòjò,bíkòṣeṢàngó?
Who can know the secret of the rain if not
Ṣango? (Only those privy to mysteries can
explain mysterious events.)
1256. Tábàtíòdùn,ẹnuòtàá.
Snuﬀ that is not pleasant, the mouth cannot
sell. (No amount of talk will make some-
thing unpleasant become pleasant.)
1257. ‘‘Tèmiòṣòro,’’tíkìíjẹk/oacutedotbelowmọalágb/egravedotbelowdẹní
idà.
‘‘Mine is not urgent’’ prevents the son of the
blacksmith from owning a sword. (The per-
son who always yields to others will never
get anywhere.)
1258. Tẹniníńjọnilójú;eèrà-ábímọ-ọr/egravedotbelowósọ
/oacutedotbelowníòyírìgbí.
One’s own thing is what one ﬁnds im-
pressive; the ant has a child and names it
The-one-who-rolls-mightily-around. (One
always tends to overestimate the worth of
one’s own possession.)
1259. Tẹnintẹni;bíàp/oacutedotbelownbásuniṣuabù
f/oacutedotbelowmọ-ọr/egravedotbelow.
One’s own is one’s own; when a man with-
o u taw i f er o a s t sy a m s ,h ec u t sap i e c ef o rh i s
child. (One makes do with what one has.)
1260. T/egravedotbelowt/eacutedotbelowníńṣíwájúerésísa.
A child’s learning to walk comes before run-
ning. (One should observe some order in
what one does.)
1261. Tì/eacutedotbelowsàn,tèmísàn,lolókùnrùnméjì-íﬁ
ńdìmú.
‘‘Your condition is better; my condition
is better’’ is what gets two invalids into a
ﬁght. (Fools will ﬁght over the most stupid
things.)
1262. Tinú/ogravedotbelowlẹl/ogravedotbelowlẹńjẹ;aṣiwèrèèèyànniòmọ
èrútíyógbà.
The lazy person eats the products of his
native wisdom; only a fool does not know
what devious way will be fruitful. (If one
lacks industry, one had better be resource-
ful.)
W
1263. Wàrà-wàràlàńyọoróiná.
When one is on ﬁre, one’s reaction is ex-
tremely agile. (Do not delay in exacting
vengeance for a wrong. Compare 1266.)
1264. Wèrè-édùn-únwò,kòṣé-ébíl/oacutedotbelowmọ.
An imbecile makes an entertaining spectacle
144 the good person


--- PAGE 158 ---
but not as one’s own child. (One might be
tolerant of simplicity or irresponsibility in
other people but not in one’s own relatives.)
1265. Wèrè-éyàt/ogravedotbelowsíwéré;wérékìíṣewèrè;
ìjáyàt/ogravedotbelowsíeré.
Madness diﬀers from the singing of Islamic
songs; the singing of Islamic songs is not
madness; ﬁghting is diﬀerent from play-
ing. (One should not confuse jesting with
quarreling.)
1266. Wéré-wérélọmọdéḿbọokoèèsì.
A child’s journey home from a nettle bush is
fast indeed. (Painful problems enforce quick
attention. Compare 1263.)
1267. Wòmílójú,wòmíl/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowk/eacutedotbelow;ẹniabálọ
sódelàńwòlójú.
Keep your eyes on my face, and keep your
eyes on my cheeks; one keeps one’s eyes
on the person with whom one goes visit-
ing. (People should not cultivate wandering
eyes.)
1268. ‘‘Woọmọ-/ogravedotbelowmidèmí’’:óńlokíjìpám/eacutedotbelowta
gbó;mélòóniọl/oacutedotbelowmọ-/oacutedotbelowmáalògbó?
‘‘Look after the child for me’’: she wears
three durable hand-loomed wrappers to
tatters; how many would the mother of
the child herself wear out? (The caretaker
should not use up all his own resources for
the beneﬁt of his or her employer.)
1269. Wolé-wolékìíwoléagb/oacutedotbelownláìt/eacutedotbelow.
The sanitary inspector does not inspect a
wasp’s home without coming to grief. (One
should be cautious in performing one’s
duties.)
1270. W/oacutedotbelownní,‘‘Af/oacutedotbelowjú,oòtannáal/eacutedotbelow. ’’Óní
àt/ogravedotbelowsánàtòru,èwolòúnríníbẹ?
People said, ‘‘Blind man, you did not light
a lamp.’’ He asked, night or day, which one
would his eyes register? (One should not
waste eﬀorts in procuring things one cannot
use.)
1271. W/oacutedotbelownní,‘‘Af/oacutedotbelowjú,ọmo-/ogravedotbelowrẹ-/eacutedotbelowpẹran.’’Óní
kòdáòunlójú,àﬁbíòúnbát/oacutedotbelowọwò.
They said to the blind man, ‘‘Blind man,
your son has killed game.’’ He responds that
he cannot believe them until he has tasted
the meat. (Always insist on positive proof.)
Onperspicaciousness 145


--- PAGE 159 ---
On caginess, caution, moderation,
patience, and prudence
A
1272. Abuomilámùaríeégún;kíniẹnitólọ
sódòlọpọnmiyórìí?
We scoop water from the water pot and see a
masquerader; what will the person who goes
to draw water at the river ﬁnd?
1 ( I fap e r s o n
exposed to minimal risk cries disaster, what
would the person exposed to much greater
risk do?)
1273. Afúnọníṣul/Oacutedotbelowy/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowòńdúp/eacutedotbelow;orígisèé
ná?
You are given yams at /Oacutedotbelowy/ogravedotbelow and you re-
joice; have you secured wood to cook them?
(Never assume that a propitious beginning
assures a successful conclusion.)
2
1274. Akiẹs/egravedotbelowkanbọodòomífàá;bíabáwá
timejèèjìb/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowńk/oacutedotbelow?
One dips one leg into the stream and the
water tugs at it; what if one had dipped both
legs in it? (Repercussions should not be
disproportionate to the act.)
1275. Akìíbáẹl/eacutedotbelownujìjàòru.
One does not ﬁght at night with a brag-
1. During the eégúnseason people who follow path-
ways (like those leading to rivers) are likely to run
into masqueraders on the way fromìgbàl/egravedotbelow,their secret
groves.
2. The rejoicing is premature because the /Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow
people supposedly tantalize strangers with deceptive
generosity.
g a r t .( N e v e rg e ti n t oac o m p e t i t i o nw i t ha
braggart unless a witness is present.)
1276. Akìíbúọbaoníg/egravedotbelowg/egravedotbelowlójúàwọnèèyàn-
ánr/egravedotbelow.
One does not insult a king with a goiter
in the presence of his people. (Never ex-
pose yourself to repercussions with careless
speech or indiscreet behavior.)
1277. Akìíduoríolóríkíàwòdìgbétẹnilọ.
One does not ﬁght to save another person’s
h e a do n l yt oh a v eak i t ec a r r yo n e ’ so w n
away. (One should not save others at the
cost of one’s own safety.)
1278. Akìíﬁì kánjúláọb/egravedotbelowgbígbóná.
One does not eat scalding stew in a hurry.
(Patience is best in delicate or diﬃcult mat-
ters.)
1279. Akìígbélégbaọfàláìlọogun.
One does not sit at home, not going to war,
a n dy e tb es h o tw i t ha na r r o w .( O n es h o u l d
be safe in one’s own home.)
1280. Akìíkánjútuolú-ọrán;igb a/egravedotbelowòtó-ó
seb/egravedotbelow.
One does not gatherolú-ọránmushrooms in
haste; two hundred of them are not enough
to make a stew. (Certain tasks demand
patience if they are to come out right.)


--- PAGE 160 ---
1281. Akìírídìíòkun;akìírídìíọsà /dotbelow;ọmọ-
oní-gele-gelekìíj/eacutedotbelowkíw/oacutedotbelownrídìíòun.
One never sees the bottom of the ocean;
no one ever sees the bottom of the lagoon;
a well-bred woman will never expose her
buttocks to anyone. (People should not
expose their innermost secrets to all and
sundry.)
3
1282. Akìírójúẹnipur/oacutedotbelowm/oacutedotbelowni.
One does not look into the eyes of a person
and still tell a lie against that person. (It is
always easier to do evil to people who are
absent.)
1283. Akìís/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbeloworíbíb/eacutedotbelowlójúọmọdé;l/oacutedotbelowrùnl/oacutedotbelow-
rùnniyómáawoolúwa-ar/egravedotbelow.
One does not speak of a beheading in the
presence of a child; otherwise, his gaze will
be ﬁxated on the neck of the person con-
cerned. (Never discuss a secret in the hear-
ing of a person whose behavior will give the
secret away.)
1284. Àńgbaòròmọadìẹl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowikú,óníwọnò
j/eacutedotbelowkíòunj/egravedotbelowláàtàn.
One struggles to save the chick from certain
death, and it complains that it is prevented
from foraging at the dump. (Chicks foraging
at the dump are easy prey for kites.)
1285. Aníṣ/eacutedotbelowiṣ/eacutedotbelowẹ,oníòńlọsóko;bóobálọ
sókoòḿb/ogravedotbelowwábáanílé.
You are told that a job is your responsibility,
and you say you are on your way to the
farm; you may be on your way to the farm,
but the job will be there on your return.
(One may devise stratagems to defer carry-
ing out one’s duties, but they are unlikely to
make others carry them out.)
3. The expression ríìdí, literally ‘‘see the bottom
[of],’’ also means ‘‘discover the guarded secrets [of].’’
1286. Àńṣak/eacutedotbelowk/eacutedotbelow,aájòẹwàni;àḿbàbàjà,
aájòẹwàni.
Marking one’s face withk/eacutedotbelowk/eacutedotbelowis a quest for
beauty; marking one’s face withàbàjàis a
quest for beauty.
4 (The pains one takes to
adorn oneself are for a good end.)
1287. Asìnkútán,alugbáòlọ;óf/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowṣúpóni?
The funeral is over, but the calabash beater
does not take his leave; does he want to in-
h e r i taw i f e ?
5 (This proverb has the same
import as 653.)
1288. Aakaògbé/ogravedotbelowdàn;igbóníńgbé.
The hedgehog does not live in the grass-
land, only in the forest. (Certain things are
proper; certain things are not.)
1289. Àákétíńgégi-íkọs/egravedotbelow,gb/eacutedotbelownàgb/eacutedotbelownà-ábu
ètùsórí.
The axe that cuts wood stumbles, and the
carver anoints his head with medicinal pow-
der. (The evildoer’s conscience will not let
h i mo rh e rr e s t . )
6
1290. Àáyákan-ánb/egravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowwò;igbaw/oacutedotbelowntiríọ.
If a single colubus monkey sees you, be sure
that two hundred of them have seen you. (A
secret disclosed to one person is as good as
published for all.)
1291. Abẹníḿbẹorí;oníṣ/eacutedotbelowàt/eacutedotbelowlẹs/egravedotbelowníḿbẹ/ogravedotbelownà;
bèbèìdíníḿbẹkíjìpá;bíadáw/oacutedotbelow-ọbíbẹni,a
tánnínúẹni.
The razor begs the scalp; the wayfarer’s soles
beg the path; waist beads beg the home-
4. K/eacutedotbelowk/eacutedotbelowand àbàjàare both patterns of facial scariﬁ-
cation.
5. The calabash beater is employed to clear evil
spirits ahead of the funeral procession by means of the
calabash.
6. Both the axe and the carpenter are oﬀenders
against wood; the carpenter takes the axe’s stumbling as
a bad omen.
Oncaginess 147


--- PAGE 161 ---
woven cloth; when the begging is done,
one lets matters drop. (One is placated by a
person close to one; afterward, one allows
oneself to be appeased.)
1292. Ab/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowb/oacutedotbelowsómitáló;/Ogravedotbelowd/ogravedotbelowfínníòun-ún
gb/oacutedotbelow‘‘jàbú!’’
The needle makes an almost inaudible
sound when it drops into the water; /Ogravedotbelowd/ogravedotbelowﬁn
said he heard a loud splash.
7 (Excessive
exaggeration amounts to lying.)
1293. Abiyamọ,kàgbowàrà;ọj/oacutedotbelowńlọ.
Nursing mother, make the herbal decoction
in good time; the day is waning. (Attend to
duties in time.)
1294. Àbùl/egravedotbelowníḿmúaṣọt/oacutedotbelow;ẹnitíkòt/oacutedotbelowjú
àbùl/egravedotbelowyóṣeara-ar/egravedotbelowlófòaṣọ.
Patching extends the life of clothes; whoever
does not save materials for patching deprives
himself or herself of clothing. (Everything
has its use; conserve your resources.)
1295. Àdàbàńpògèdè,óròpéẹyẹléògb/oacutedotbelow;
ẹyẹlégb/oacutedotbelow,títiirilótiiri.
The dove recites incantations, thinking that
the pigeon cannot hear; the pigeon hears,
only pretending to sleep. (Never mistake a
peron’s easygoing demeanor for cowardice
or folly.)
1296. Adì/eacutedotbelowńjẹkà,óḿmumi,óńgbéòkútap/eacutedotbelow-
p/egravedotbelow-p/eacutedotbelowmì,óníòunòléhín;ìdérègbètóléhín
ńgbéirinmìbí?
The chicken eats corn, drinks water, even
swallows small pebbles, and yet complains
that it lacks teeth; does the goat that has
teeth swallow steel? (One should be content
with one’s lot.)
7. /Ogravedotbelowd/ogravedotbelowﬁn,ac h i e f t a i n c yt i t l e ,s e r v e sh e r ea sap r o p e r
name.
1297. Àdógbaara/egravedotbelowt/eacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelow,kátóﬁoògùnsi?
Could the small gourd save itself, before we
put charms into it?
8 (Do not seek protection
from a helpless person.)
1298. Àdóìṣíloògùnọr/ogravedotbelow.
Choosing-a-base-and-maintaining-it is the
medicine for wealth. (One should not be a
rolling stone.)
1299. Af/eacutedotbelowf/eacutedotbelowtówọlétókóaṣọiyàrá,ìkìl/ogravedotbelownifún
ẹnitówọti/egravedotbelowsọrùn.
The wind that enters the house and carries
oﬀ the clothes in the bedroom is a warning
to those who wear theirs around their necks.
(When disaster befalls the most formidable
people, those less formidable should take
warning.)
1300. Àfojúdiìl/egravedotbelowk/egravedotbelowníńj/eacutedotbelow‘‘Ẹrú-kò-ní.’’
It is an impertinent bead that is named
‘‘The-slave-does-not-own-its like.’’
9 (One
must be mindful of how one’s actions might
aﬀect others.)
1301. Àgékùejò,tíńṣorobíagb/oacutedotbelown.
Partially severed snake stings like a wasp. (A
wounded adversary is a vicious one.)
1302. Àgúnbàj/eacutedotbelownitolódó.
Pounding-until-it-is-ruined is the habit
of the owner of the mortar. (One should
exercise restraint in using what one has in
abundance.)
1303. Àgùntànb/ogravedotbelowl/ogravedotbelowj/ogravedotbelowògbàgbéeléèríb/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow.
The big, fat sheep does not soon forget the
provider of corn bran. (One remembers
one’s benefactor.)
8. Àdóis a tiny gourd in which people keep charms,
often serving as talismans.
9. The insinuation is that whoever does not have its
like is no better than a slave.
148 the good person


--- PAGE 162 ---
1304. Àgùntànńwòsùn-ùn;ọgb/oacutedotbelowninúpé
egbèje.
The sheep stares blankly, but its cunning
stratagems number 1,400. (Looks are decep-
tive.)
1305. Àgùntànòjíníkùtùkùtùṣeẹnubọbọ.
A sheep does not wake in the morning and
droop its mouth. (One should not dawdle in
the morning.)
1306. Àgbàòṣìkàńgbinìyàsíl/egravedotbelowdeọmọ-ọr/egravedotbelow.
A wicked elder sows suﬀering for his chil-
dren. (One’s character often aﬀects the
fortunes of one’s children. Compare 702 and
3307.)
1307. Àgb/egravedotbelowòdáṣọlóṣù,àfọdún.
A farmer does not make new clothes
monthly, only annually. (The reward for
one’s labor is often a long time coming.)
1308. Àgb/egravedotbelowtóbáp/eacutedotbelowníléònííkọoko/ogravedotbelowsán.
A farmer who tarries in the house will not
object to hoeing the farm in the afternoon.
(He who dallies makes his tasks that much
more diﬃcult.)
1309. À-gb/eacutedotbelowrù-àì-w/egravedotbelowhìnl/ogravedotbelowpálábáﬁgbàgbéìyá
/egravedotbelowsíl/egravedotbelow.
Picking-up-one’s-load-without-checking-
one’s-rear caused the piece of broken bottle
to forget its mother on the ground. (The
broken bottle suﬀered its fate, perhaps,
because it was not careful about what it
‘‘carried.’’ The hasty traveler leaves his goods
behind.)
1310. Agbójúlógúnﬁara-ar/egravedotbelowfóṣìta.
He-who-places-his-hopes-on-inheritance
delivers himself to destitution. (One should
secure one’s own living.)
1311. Àgb/oacutedotbelowkáetíọl/oacutedotbelowrànádi.
10
The ear that will insist on hearing every-
thing will go deaf. (There is some beneﬁt to
ignoring certain things.)
1312. Àgb/oacutedotbelowkànléòpanilébi.
A thing in which one reposes one’s trust
does not make one hunger. (One’s reserve
guarantees one’s supplies.)
1313. Àìf/egravedotbelows/ogravedotbelowkéìbòsínikòṣéégbè.
An alarm raised without moderation ﬁnds
no helpers. (If the person who raises an
alarm puts people oﬀ by his or her methods,
they will not come to his or her aid.)
1314. Àìgb/oacutedotbelowràn,babaàfojúdi.
Disobedience, father of disregard. (To dis-
obey people is to show a lack of regard for
them.)
11
1315. Àìlèfọhùnníńṣáájúoríburúkú.
Inability to speak out precedes misfortunes.
(A person who will not speak on his or her
own behalf suﬀers the consequences.)
1316. Àìr/oacutedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowsọìyàwótówípéèkúté-iléyójẹ
idẹ;b/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowniM/oacutedotbelowjidẹnìyálé-er/egravedotbelowńj/eacutedotbelow.
The junior wife could ﬁnd nothing to say,
and said that the mice in the house will eat
brass; the senior wife of the household hap-
pens to be named Mọjidẹ [Ọmọ-/oacutedotbelow-jẹ-idẹ,
meaning ‘‘Child eats brass’’]. (Veiled insults
directed at an adversary are as potent as any
other sort of provocation.)
1317. Àìsànlàńwò,akìíwoikú.
One treats an illness; one does not treat
10. In plainer Yoruba the statement would be
Àgb/oacutedotbelowkáletíọl/oacutedotbelowràn-ánﬁńdi.
11. The formulation babaàfojúdi means both ‘‘father
of disregard’’ and ‘‘father-type disregard’’: in other
words, an extraordinary degree of disregard.
Oncaginess 149


--- PAGE 163 ---
death. (If one neglects an illness until death
intervenes, the treatment comes too late.
Compare 1356.)
1318. Àìtètèmólè,olèémólóko.
Because of the delay in apprehending the
thief, the thief apprehends the owner of the
farm. (One must be alert in dealing with
slippery people; otherwise, they turn the
tables.)
1319. Ajáiléòmọdẹ/eacutedotbelowṣe.
A domesticated dog does not know how to
hunt. (Pampering kills initiative.)
1320. Ajákìídán-nu‘‘Kòséwu’’lókòẹkùn.
A dog does not boast ‘‘No danger’’ in a leop-
ard’s bush. (Never sneer at obvious danger.)
1321. Ajátíyósọnùkìígb/oacutedotbelowfèrèọdẹ.
A dog destined to be lost does not hear the
hunter’s whistle. (No matter what help one
may render, one cannot save an ill-fated
person.)
1322. Ajátórím/oacutedotbelowtòtódúróﬁara-ar/egravedotbelowbọ
Ògún.
A dog that sees a motor vehicle and stands
in its way makes itself a sacriﬁce to Ògún. (A
person who needlessly endangers himself or
herself deserves his or her fate.)
1323. Àjànàkútíagb/eacutedotbelow/ogravedotbelowfìnsíl/egravedotbelowdè,erin-ín
mojú;erinòbáib/egravedotbelowlọ.
One digs a pit in the path of the elephant,
but the elephant can read signs; the elephant
does not go that way. (The alert person will
thwart an enemy’s machinations.)
1324. Àj/eacutedotbelowńké,òkùnrùnòparadà;ólówóẹbọ
nílé.
A witch proclaims her presence and an in-
valid does not make way; he must have
money for sacriﬁces at home. (One need
not fear a scourge for which one has the
remedy.)
1325. Ajẹnif/eacutedotbelowni,èkútéilé.
One-that-bites-and-blows-on-the-wound:
the house mouse.
12 (Be wary of adversaries
who pose as friends.)
1326. Àkàlàmàgbò-óṣooreóyọg/egravedotbelowg/egravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowrùn.
The ground hornbill did a favor and devel-
oped a goiter. (Good deeds sometimes come
back to haunt the doer. Compare 1783 and
1787.)
1327. Akánjújayé,/ogravedotbelowrunwọnòp/eacutedotbelow.
People who live impatiently: their going to
heaven is not far oﬀ. (Reckless living leads to
early death.)
1328. Àkèekèéòṣé-édìníbò.
A scorpion is not a thing to close one’s
palms on. (Some matters call for extreme
caution.)
1329. Àkèekèérìntapótapó.
The scorpion travels accompanied by
venom. (The stalwart is never unprepared to
answer a call.)
1330. ÀkèekèétaKindolẹp/ogravedotbelown,aráiléeLabata
ńrojú;kílókànánníb/egravedotbelow?
A scorpion stung Kindo in the testicle, and
a person from Labata’s household frowns
in dismay; what business is it of his? (One
should not take on matters that are not one’s
business.)
1331. Àk/ogravedotbelowtóbábá/ogravedotbelowbẹdìt/egravedotbelowágbọgb/eacutedotbelowlátiinú.
A sheath that engages in a dispute with a
knife will suﬀer an internal wound. (Never
court the anger of a person in a position to
inﬂict injury on you.)
12. The bite hurts, but the animal also soothes so as
to be able to continue hurting its victim.
150 the good person


--- PAGE 164 ---
1332. Akóbánilèkúté-ilé;ejòkìíjàgbàdo.
The mouse is a bringer of disaster to the
innocent; snakes do not eat corn. (Bad
company brings bad fortune.)
1333. Àlátíajábálá,inúajáníńgbé.
Whatever dream the dog dreams remains
inside the dog. (Keep your own counsel.)
1334. Aláàárùkìísọpékíajéṣeòunpa;ẹl/eacutedotbelowrù
ńk/oacutedotbelow?
The hired carrier does not ask to die from
his eﬀorts; what would the owner of the
merchandise ask? (One should not assume
other people’s responsibilities and risks.)
1335. Alágbàróòyege;aláṣọágbàábód/ogravedotbelowla.
She who borrows a wrapper skirt to wear is
not home free; the owner of the cloth will
take it back tomorrow. (There is nothing
like having one’s own.)
1336. Aláǹgbátófojúdierè,ikùnejòniyó
bàáara-a/egravedotbelow.
A lizard that views a python with disre-
gard will ﬁnd itself in the belly of the snake.
(Whoever disdains obvious danger will
suﬀer dire consequences.)
1337. Alápàáǹd/egravedotbelowd/egravedotbelowńjayélébé-lébé.
The sparrow enjoys life carefully. (The best
way to live is carefully.)
1338. Aláraòlèwípékòdunòun,káníókú
àìsùn,ókúàìwo.
The owner of the body does not say that he
is in no pain, while we insist on commis-
erating with him for his sleeplessness and
his restlessness. (One does not commiserate
with a person who does not admit his or her
misfortune).
1339. Alárìnjótíyójòó,kótiìwòyímúẹs/egravedotbelowkó
lekókókó.
The person who will engage in itinerant
dancing should look to his legs in good
time. (Before embarking on a trade, one
should hone one’s tools.)
1340. Aláwàdàlólèṣọkọòṣónú;ẹnitíkòl/eacutedotbelownu
mímúteteòlèṣọkọalápẹpẹ.
Only a good-humored person can make a
good husband for an ill-humored woman;
a person whose mouth is not sharp can-
not make a good husband for a hyperactive
woman. (Incompatible natures cannot make
a good marriage.)
1341. Àlejòtów/ogravedotbelownílé-eP/oacutedotbelowngilá,P/oacutedotbelowngilání,
‘‘Ìwọtani?’’Àlejò-óníòunBugijẹ;P/oacutedotbelowngilá
ni,‘‘Tòò,l/oacutedotbelowdájúigi-itìrẹl/oacutedotbelowt/ogravedotbelow.’’
The visitor arrived at the home of P/oacutedotbelowngilá
[Lickwood], and P/oacutedotbelowngilá asked him, ‘‘Who
are you?’’ The visitor replied, ‘‘I am Bugijẹ’’
(Bitewood). P/oacutedotbelowngilá said, ‘‘Well, you had
better go ﬁnd yourself some wood else-
where.’’ (Do not encourage people to take
advantage of you or abuse your generosity.)
1342. Àlọtialábaun;àb/ogravedotbelowtiàna-ar/egravedotbelow.
To Tortoise belongs the outward trip; to his
father-in-law belongs the return. (The per-
son in the right in a dispute, if he or she is
too vindictive, quickly becomes the one in
the wrong. Compare 1482.)
13
1343. Àlùkẹrẹsẹòm/ogravedotbelowpéolóko-óládàá.
The weed did not know that the farmer had
a machete. (The evildoer does not consider
the response of the person wronged.)
1344. Àm/ogravedotbelowjùlàḿmọẹkùn-unSàár/eacutedotbelow.
Sàár/eacutedotbelow always goes too far in his description
13. The proverb is based on a folktale in which
Tortoise stole yams from the farm of his father-in-law.
The latter caught Tortoise and tied him up by the path,
where people going to their farms saw him and justiﬁed
the father-in-law. When on their return in the evening
they saw Tortoise still tied up, however, people began
to scold the father-in-law for the excessive punishment,
especially considering his relationship to Tortoise.
Oncaginess 151


--- PAGE 165 ---
of a leopard. (An immoderate display of
knowledge soon backﬁres.)14
1345. Àpáàdìlótókoinálójú.
Only a potsherd has what it takes to con-
front a live coal. (Only a person capable of
facing a situation should take it on. Com-
pare 1984.)
1346. Apatapara-ápaara-ar/egravedotbelowlájùbà;ẹnití
yókolàńwòye.
Apatapara kills himself in the wilderness;
who will carry him is now the question.
(One should not outstrip one’s help.)
1347. Àpòtíakòﬁọw/oacutedotbelowẹnidáṣòro-ókiw/oacutedotbelowb/ogravedotbelow.
A pocket one did not make with one’s own
hand is a diﬃcult one to dip one’s hand into.
(One should keep one’s hands in one’s own
pockets.)
1348. AráÌbàdànkìíságun ;àórìn s/eacutedotbelowhìnni
w/oacutedotbelownńwí.
Ibadan people do not run from war; what
they say is, ‘‘We will fall back a little.’’ (There
are ways of avoiding battle without seeming
to do so.)
1349. À-rí-ì-gbọd/ogravedotbelow-wí,à-rí-ì-gbọd/ogravedotbelow-f/ogravedotbelowniikú
awo.
Something-seen-but-unmentionable,
something-seen-but-unspeakable is the
death of a guardian of the mysteries. (The
eyes sometimes see things that are too
sacred for the mouth to mention.)
14. The story behind the proverb is of a boy who
ran home panting because he had seen a leopard in the
forest. Grateful that the animal did not kill his son, the
father killed a cock as a sacriﬁce. The boy went on to
describe how huge the animal was, and the father, even
more thankful, killed a he-goat for sacriﬁce. Then the
son spoke of how the animal went from okro plant to
okro plant to eat the fruits. The father knew, of course,
that only antelopes eat okro, and he scolded the son for
not killing the game and bringing it home.
1350. Àrísáiná,àkòtagìrìejò;àgbàtóréjòtí
kòsá,araikúlóńyáa.
Fire, something-one-sees-and-ﬂees; snake,
something-one-sees-and-jumps; an elder
who sees a snake and does not ﬂee ﬂirts
with death. (Fire and snakes are not things
to take lightly, and elders should not be
embarrassed to ﬂee from danger.)
1351. Àròkànníḿmúà-sun-ùn-dáwá;ẹl/eacutedotbelowkún
sunkún/egravedotbelowólọ.
Going-from-one-sad-thought-to-another
results in endless weeping; the person weep-
ing does his weeping and departs. (If one
keeps thinking sad thoughts, one will ever
remain miserable; if one must be sad, one
must observe some limits.)
1352. Arọònas/egravedotbelowkandí/ogravedotbelownà.
A cripple does not block the road with his
legs. (A person with a handicap should not
challenge those who are not handicapped.)
1353. Arọtíkòl/eacutedotbelows/egravedotbelowníl/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelownnínú.
A cripple who has no legs to stand on has
wisdom inside him. (Whatever one’s handi-
caps, one will have some asset.)
1354. Ar/oacutedotbelowbasáòṣojo.
He-who-ﬂees-on-seeing-the-king is no cow-
ard. (One’s safest course is to steer clear of
those in authority. Compare 5.)
1355. Arúgbóṣogerí;àkísà-álògbàrí.
The old person was once a dandy; the rag
w a so n c ei nf a s h i o n .( T h o s ew h oa r ef a v o r e d
should remember that times and circum-
stances do change.)
1356. Àrùnlàńwo;akìíwokú.
One treats a disease; one does not treat
death. (We should attend to problems before
they become unmanageable. Compare 1317.)
152 the good person


--- PAGE 166 ---
1357. Asáréteteníńkọjáilé;arìngb/egravedotbelowr/egravedotbelowniyórìí
oyèjẹ.
The fast runner will run past his home; the
leisurely stroller is the one who will win the
title. (A fast start does not guarantee success.
Compare 778.)
1358. Àṣáḿbáẹyẹléṣeré,ẹyẹléńy/ogravedotbelow;ẹyẹlé
ńﬁkúṣeré.
The kite plays with the pigeon, and the
pigeon rejoices; the pigeon is courting death.
(An enemy who pretends friendship is even
more dangerous.)
1359. Àṣàyákìíj/eacutedotbelowkíọmọ/ogravedotbelowyàógb/oacutedotbelown.
Roughhousing keeps the young of the cane
rat from learning wisdom. (A person who
takes life as a jest does not learn to be wary.)
1360. Àṣesíl/egravedotbelowlàb/ogravedotbelowwábá;ẹnitódaomisíwájú
átẹl/egravedotbelowtútù.
What one puts aside is what one returns to
ﬁnd; whoever dumps water ahead of him or
her will step on wet earth. (One reaps what
one sows. This is a variant of 952.)
1361. Àṣ/egravedotbelowṣ/egravedotbeloww/oacutedotbelownológbòníńjìyà;bóbáp/eacutedotbelowtítía
tóeku-úpa.
Only the newly weaned cat suﬀers; eventu-
ally it will learn to kill mice. (A child may be
helpless today but not in the future.)
1362. Aṣòroów/ogravedotbelowbí/egravedotbelowwùàṣejù.
Diﬃcult-to-wear is like the garment of
immoderation. (Wearing the cloak of im-
moderation exposes one to diﬃculties.)
1363. Ata-ákéré;ìjájùú.
Pepper is small; its ﬁght is much bigger.
(One should not judge people by their size.)
1364. Ataare-ér/eacutedotbelownitúnìdí-ir/egravedotbelowṣeóńﬁòbùró
ṣ/egravedotbelowsín;òbùróìbár/eacutedotbelownitúnìdí-ir/egravedotbelowṣeasunw/ogravedotbelown
júataarelọ.
Alligator pepper has someone to tend it,
and it mocks theòbùrótree; had the òbùró
tree someone to tend it, it would look better
than alligator pepper. (A person enjoying
a run of good fortune should not deride
the less fortunate; if they had been similarly
favored, there is no telling what they might
have accomplished.)
1365. Atàkòf/oacutedotbelowẹyinàparò:ohunojúńwálojú
ńrí.
Person-who-stones-and-breaks-partridge’s-
eggs: the eyes ﬁnd what the eyes seek. (The
culprit is asking for trouble, and he will not
be disappointed.)
1366. At/egravedotbelowhìnr/oacutedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelownagétíajá;agéelétítánó
fabẹpam/oacutedotbelow.
A-creature-that-learns-wisdom-in-reverse-
order, dog-with-severed-ears: after its ears
have been severed, it hides the razor. (Pre-
vention makes sense only before the disas-
ter.)
1367. Àt/eacutedotbelowlẹw/oacutedotbelowẹnikìítanni.
One’s palm does not deceive one. (One’s
trust is best placed in one’s own resources.)
1368. Atọrọ-ohungbogbo-l/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow-Ọl/oacutedotbelowrunkìí
kánjú.
The-seeker-of-all-things-from-God does not
yield to impatience. (The supplicant must be
patient for an answer.)
1369. Àwòfínníḿmú/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowbàj/eacutedotbelow;fírílàńwoẹni
tíńwoni.
Persistent staring ruins a friendship; look
only glancingly at those looking at you. (A
battle of looks does not help a friendship.)
1370. Ayáraròhìn,ayaọdẹ,óníọkọòun-ún
paèkínní,ópa/egravedotbelowkẹfà.
The impatient reporter, wife of the hunter,
says that her husband killed the ﬁrst and
killed the sixth. (The impatient reporter is
likely to outstrip her report.)
Oncaginess 153


--- PAGE 167 ---
1371. Àyégbaògùnm/ogravedotbelowóránṣ/eacutedotbelowsíòdú;àyégba
Tápàók/oacutedotbelowléìgunnu.
The cultivated vegetable is contented, so
it sends for its wild variety; the Nupe [Fu-
lani]
15 person is so comfortable that he
builds a tall house. (When one enjoys a life
of ease, one is tempted to overreach.)
1372. Ayéòṣééﬁpájẹ.
Life is nothing to enjoy heedlessly. (Life
demands caution.)
B
1373. ‘‘Bámimádìẹ’’k ìíﬁorúnkúnbó.
‘‘Help me catch a chicken’’ does not scrape
his knees. (Overzealousness in helping
others is a fault.)
1374. Baáléilékú,w/oacutedotbelownﬁolókùnrùnr/oacutedotbelowlé;
ẹkúnńgoríẹkún.
The man of the house died and they put an
invalid in his place; weeping climbs upon
weeping. (People known to be unsuitable
should not be entrusted with important
aﬀairs.)
1375. ‘‘Baálépèmínkòwá,’’/ogravedotbelowhànhànníńpa
w/oacutedotbelown.
‘‘The patriarch of the compound called me
but I did not respond’’ dies of anxiety. (A
p e r s o nw h od e ﬁ e sh i so rh e rm a i ns u c c o r
heads for ruin.)
1376. Bánúsọ,mábàáèèyànsọ;èèyànòsí;
ayétidèké.
Counsel with your inside, not with people;
[good] people are no longer to be found; the
world has turned false. (There is no one to
trust but oneself.)
15. An ethnic group in the Sahelian areas of West
Africa, also known as the Fulbe.
1377. Bíabábuìr/egravedotbelowjẹ,kábuìr/egravedotbelowsápò.
If one takes a bite of a cricket, one should
put a little in one’s pocket. (Even if one has
only a little, one should still save something
for the morrow.)
1378. Bíabábúọba,às/eacutedotbelow;bíabábú/ogravedotbelowṣ/ogravedotbelowrun,
às/eacutedotbelow.
If one insults the king, one denies doing so;
if one insults the chief minister, one denies
doing so. (One may disdain authority, but
should not expose oneself to punishment for
doing so. Compare the following entry and
4475.)
1379. Bíabábuọbatías/eacutedotbelow,ọbaaﬁnisílẹ.
If one insults a king and denies doing so, the
king leaves one in peace. (One should not be
held accountable for an insult one recants.
Compare the preceding entry and 4475.)
1380. Bíabádák/eacutedotbelow,taraẹniabánidák/eacutedotbelow.
If one keeps silent, what is in one’s body
keeps silent as well. (If one does not disclose
one’s problems, one can expect no help.)
1381. Bíabáfaàgbòféégún ,àﬁo kùn-unr/egravedotbelow
síl/egravedotbelow.
I fo n ed r a g sas h e e pt op r e s e n tt oam a s q u e r -
ader, one lets go of its leash. (When one has
made a gift of something, one should forget
about it.)
1382. Bíabáf/eacutedotbelowràn/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowẹniláf/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowjù,bóbá
forígbún,ìjàníńdà.
If one loves one’s friend beyond reason,
when that friend bumps his or her head,
a ﬁght results. (Friendship that knows no
limits is a burden.)
1383. Bíabáﬁdídùnhọifàn ,aóhọradé
eegun.
If one scratches an itch as long as the sensa-
tion is pleasant, one will scratch down to the
154 the good person


--- PAGE 168 ---
bone. (Even pleasures should be pursued in
moderation.)
1384. Bíabáﬁojúigigbígbẹwotútù,tútù-ú
lèwópani.
I fo n ea p p r o a c h e sad r i e d - u pt r e ea so n e
would a green one, it is likely to crash and
crush one to death. (One should be alive to
the peculiarities of whatever situations one
ﬁnds oneself in.)
1385. Bíabáﬁọdúnm/eacutedotbelowtapil/egravedotbelowṣ/egravedotbelow-ẹwèrè,ọj/oacutedotbelow
wolaóbunijẹ?
If one takes three years to prepare for mad-
ness, when will one start biting people?
(Preparations for an action should not be
endless. See also the following entry.)
1386. Bíabáﬁọdúnm/eacutedotbelowtaṣánpá,ọdúnmélòó
laóﬁfò?
If one spends three years ﬂapping one’s
arms, how many years will one take to ﬂy?
(Preparations for an action should not be
interminable. See also the previous entry.)
1387. Bíabáﬁọw/oacutedotbelowkanfọmọf/oacutedotbelowkọ,ọw/oacutedotbelow
m/eacutedotbeloww/egravedotbelow/egravedotbelowwákìíṣeégbàám/oacutedotbelow.
If one gives a girl away in marriage with one
hand, ten hands will not suﬃce to take her
back. (Mistakes made casually are seldom
easy to correct.)
1388. Bíabáléẹni,tíakòbáẹni,ìw/ogravedotbelownlà
ḿbáẹni-íṣ/ogravedotbelowtámọ.
If one chases a person and does not catch
up, one should moderate one’s hatred of the
person. (Envy should not turn into hatred.)
1389. Bíabáníkáb/eacutedotbelowigi,aób/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowèèyàn.
I fo n ea t t e m p t st oc u tat r e e ,o n ew i l lc u t
people. (If one behaved toward certain
people as they deserve, one would oﬀend
innocent people.)
1390. Bíabáníkájẹèkurukótán,akìígbọn
ọw/oacutedotbelow-ọr/egravedotbelowsáwo.
If one wishes to clean one’s plate of dry bean
grits, one does not keep scraping the rem-
nants from one’s ﬁngers onto the plate. (If
one wishes a quarrel to end, one does not
keep recalling its cause.)
1391. Bíabáńjà,bííkákúlàńwí?
Even though we are quarreling, should we
wish each other dead? (Quarrels should stop
short of death wishes.)
1392. Bíabáńretíòfò,káﬁohuntọrẹ.
If one expects a loss, one should make a gift
of what one has. (Rather give things away
than lose them.)
1393. Bíabáperíajá,káperíìkòkòt íaóﬁ
sèé.
If one talks of the dog, one should also talk
of the pot one will use to cook it. (If one
proposes a momentous action, one should
also consider the consequences.)
1394. Bíabáróbìnrinàléríogun;bíabá
róbìnrinàs/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowìjà;bíadéojúogunàba
búbú.
When one sees women, one boasts of war;
when one sees women, one talks of battle;
when one gets to battle, one lies low. (Before
women, one protects one’s image; in battle,
one protects one’s life.)
1395. Bíabásọpéẹyẹniyójẹojúẹni,bíarí
tí-ń-tín,aómáasálọ.
I fo n eh a sb e e nt o l dt h a tab i r dw i l le a to n e ’ s
eyes, when one sees the tiniest of birds, one
takes to one’s heels. (Given prior warning of
a peril, take extraordinary precautions.)
1396. Bíabás/ogravedotbelowkòsíàárínọjà,aráiléẹniní
ḿbà.
If one throws a stone into the marketplace,
Oncaginess 155


--- PAGE 169 ---
it hits someone from one’s household. (Ran-
dom acts of wickedness are likely to aﬀect
those close to one.)
1397. Bíabás/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowfúnolófòófó,ajádìíagb/ogravedotbelown
lasọ/oacutedotbelowsí.
Whatever one says to a talebearer one says
to a basket that has lost its bottom. (Words
whispered to a talebearer are in eﬀect broad-
cast.)
1398. Bíabáṣíìdíẹnisókè,ọmọaráyéárọ
omigbígbónásíi.
If one exposes one’s anus to view, people will
ﬁll it with hot water. (If one exposes one’s
vulnerability to people, one will be done in.)
1399. Bíabáwíadàbíòwe;b íaòbáwía
dàbíìjà.
If one speaks, it sounds like speaking in
proverbs; if one does not speak, it seems
like picking a ﬁght. (In certain delicate
situations no option is safe.)
1400. Bíakòbáláyà-arìnd/ogravedotbelowrìnd/ogravedotbelow,akìíjẹ
aáyán.
If one’s stomach is not immune to nausea,
one does not eat roaches. (One should avoid
things one cannot stomach.)
1401. Bíakòbálèkú,ìp/egravedotbelowlàńgbà.
If one is unable [or unwilling] to die, one
accepts consolation. (Unless you want to die
of grieving, allow yourself to be consoled.)
1402. Bíakòbálèmúọkọ,akìínaobìnrin-
inr/egravedotbelow.
If one is no match for the husband, one does
not hit the wife. (Never provoke a ﬁght you
cannot ﬁght.)
1403. Bíakòbálówóaládìn-ín,àjẹun
lójúmọmọ,àgbál/egravedotbelowsùnwàrà.
If one has no money for lamp oil, one eats
in the daytime and sweeps the house and
goes to sleep in good time. (One’s plans and
actions should ﬁt one’s resources.)
1404. Bíakòbáníèsè/egravedotbelowfà,akìíkóiṣuòje.
If one does not have 1,200 cowries in
savings, one does not purchase yams worth
1,400 cowries. (One’s aspirations should
match one’s means.)
1405. Bíakòbáríwọlé-w/ogravedotbelowdeaòg bọd/ogravedotbelowwọlé
ọba.
If one cannot ﬁnd the oﬃcial gatekeeper,
one dares not enter the king’s palace.
16
(Always ask leave before venturing into
another person’s domain.)
1406. Bíakòbárígún,àfàkàlàṣẹbọ.
If one cannot ﬁnd a vulture, one sacriﬁces a
hornbill. (One makes do with what one has.)
1407. Bíakòbáṣefúnil/egravedotbelow,akìíﬁọw/oacutedotbelowsọ/oacutedotbelow.
If one has done nothing for Earth, one does
not swear by it. (One cannot expect suste-
nance where one has not cultivated.)
1408. Bíakòrówóraẹrú,àsọadìẹẹni
lórúkọ.
If one has no money to buy a slave, one
gives one’s chicken a name. (One should
somehow make do with what one has and be
content.)
1409. Bíaótiṣeéníńﬁara-ar/egravedotbelowhàn.
H o wi tw i l lb ea c c o m p l i s h e dw i l lr e v e a l
itself. (The way to accomplish a task will
always reveal itself.)
1410. Bíaáṣ/eacutedotbelowbátińfò,b/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowlatińs/ogravedotbelowkòsíi.
It is according to the ﬂight pattern of the
standard-winged nightjar
17 that one throws
16. Wọlé-w/ogravedotbelowde,literally ‘‘enter-come out,’’ is another
designation for the ẹmẹs/egravedotbelowor ẹm/egravedotbelowwà,the king’s chief
messenger.
17. A bird characterized by erratic ﬂight.
156 the good person


--- PAGE 170 ---
stones at it. (One responds according to the
situation one is confronted with.)
1411. Bíadì/eacutedotbelowbágbél/egravedotbelowayaòpìpì.
If a chicken always keeps to the ground, it
becomes ﬂightless. (Whatever endowment
one has, one loses it if one neglects it.)
1412. Bíàjànàkúòbágb/eacutedotbelowk/egravedotbelowléfùr/ogravedotbelow,kìími
òdùàgbọn.
If an elephant is not sure of its anus, it does
not swallow whole coconuts. (Unless one
can cope with the consequences, one does
not engage in an action. Compare 1427.)
1413. Bíàj/eacutedotbelowbámupo,ojú-ur/egravedotbelowar/ogravedotbelow.
Once a witch has drunk oil, she calms down.
(After one has achieved one’s goal, one
should relax.)
1414. Bíalágbára-ábájẹ/oacutedotbelowníyà,f/egravedotbelowrínsíi.
If a powerful person mistreats you, burst
into laughter. (Never protest against vic-
timization by one against whom you can do
nothing.)
1415. Bíalágẹmọ-/oacutedotbelowbáf/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowkọjá,ìjà/mgravepereòní-í
jà.
When the chameleon wishes to go by, the
black ants refrain from stinging. (The cau-
tious person is immune to the dangers that
beset others.)
1416. Bíal/eacutedotbelowbál/eacutedotbelow,ad/eacutedotbelowt/egravedotbelowarìn,ayan.
When night falls, the leper walks and struts.
(Night is a welcome cloak for blemishes.
This is a variant of 1429.)
1417. Bíàṣábáḿbínú,sùúrùlóyẹọl/oacutedotbelowjà.
18
If the kite is displaying anger, the best re-
18. Ọl/oacutedotbelowjà,literally ‘‘the owner of the merchandise’’
or ‘‘the owner of the market,’’ is also used as a designa-
tion for a king, inasmuch as he owns the main market,
which is usually sited outside the palace.
sponse for the trader is patience. (One must
learn forbearance in the face of provoca-
tion.)
1418. Bíawótińlùlawótińjó.
As the initiate of mysteries drums, so the
initiate of mysteries dances. (One’s actions
are best suited to the circumstances.)
1419. Bíbàtábáróàrójù,yíyaníńya.
If the bàtádrum sounds too loud, it tears.
(Excess leads to disaster. See also 1430.)
1420. Bíekòlóbákọebè,ara-ar/egravedotbelowniyógbìn
síi.
If a worm makes a heap, it is itself that it will
plant in it. (The consequences of a person’s
actions will fall on that person’s own head.)
1421. Bíèṣùikúbáńṣeìgbínnìgbínńy/eacutedotbelowyin.
It is when the snail wants to invite death
that it lays eggs.
19 (A person who knows an
action will be disastrous but carries it out
anyway deserves what he gets.)
1422. Bíẹjábásùn,ẹj aáﬁẹjajẹ.
If ﬁsh sleep, ﬁsh will devour ﬁsh. (If one
does not wish to be taken advantage of, one
must be ever watchful.)
1423. Bíẹl/eacutedotbelowhìnkùléòsùn,àp/eacutedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowhìnkùlé-er/egravedotbelow
títí;bóp/eacutedotbelowtítíorunagbéonílélọ.
If the owner of the back yard does not sleep,
one stays in the back yard for a long time;
sooner or later the owner of the house will
fall asleep. (Patience accomplishes all ends.)
1424. Bíẹl/eacutedotbelowj/oacutedotbelowbámọẹj/oacutedotbelow-ọr/egravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowbi,kìíp/eacutedotbelow
níkùnúnl/egravedotbelow.
T h ep e r s o ni n v o l v e di nac a s ew h oa c k n o w l -
edges guilt does not last long on his or her
knees. (Penitence invites leniency.)
19. Snails supposedly die after laying eggs.
Oncaginess 157


--- PAGE 171 ---
1425. BíẹnìkánbáfojúdiOrò,Oròagbée.
If anyone deﬁes the Orò mystery, it does
a w a yw i t hh i mo rh e r .( W h o e v e rd i s d a i n s
potential dangers eventually pays for the
disdain.)
1426. Bíẹnìkánṣeohuntíẹnìkanòṣerí,
ojú-ur/egravedotbelowáríohuntíẹnìkanòrírí.
I fap e r s o nd o e sw h a tn oo n eh a se v e rd o n e
before, his eyes will see what no one has ever
seen before. (Those who do unusual things
should expect unusual consequences.)
1427. Bíìdíìkokòkòbádáalójú,kìígbé
egungunmì.
If the wolf does not have faith in its anus, it
does not swallow bones. (One should not
attempt a thing whose repercussions one
cannot withstand. Compare 1412.)
1428. Bíìfàbíìfàlọmọdéﬁńdárànwọlé.
As though he were stumbling on treasures,
thus a youth brings trouble into the house-
hold. (A youth seldom realizes what actions
will involve his household in trouble.)
1429. Bíilébádá,ad/eacutedotbelowt/egravedotbelowarìn,ayan.
When the house is deserted, the leper will
walk and strut. (When one is unobserved,
one does as one pleases. This is a variant of
1416.)
1430. Bíìlùúbádúnàdúnjù,yófàya.
If a drum makes too much noise, it breaks.
(Disaster follows excess. See also 1419.)
1431. Bíinábájóni,tójóọmọẹni,taraẹnilà
ńk/oacutedotbelowgb/ogravedotbelown.
I fo n ei so nﬁ r ea n do n e ’ sc h i l di so nﬁ r e ,o n e
douses one’s own ﬁre ﬁrst. (Without ﬁrst
attending to one’s own needs, one cannot
attend to those of others.)
1432. Bíiṣuẹníbáfunfun,àfọw/oacutedotbelowbòójẹ.
I fo n e ’ sy a mi sw h i t e ,o n ee a t si tf u r t i v e l y .( I t
would be unwise to ﬂaunt good fortune.)
1433. Bíkòbásíoníṣ/eacutedotbelowiṣ/eacutedotbelowòleèlọ;bíkòbásí
ọl/oacutedotbeloww/egravedotbelowakìíṣ/ogravedotbeloww/egravedotbelow;àk/egravedotbelowhìnsíọl/oacutedotbeloww/egravedotbelowlàńṣípá.
If the owner of the job is absent, the job does
not progress; if the person who engaged
the help is absent, no help is given; when
the back of the person who engaged help is
turned, one lifts one’s hands from the job.
(The employee is most industrious under
the supervision of the employer.)
1434. Bíomáarailárailá,bíomáagbaènì
gbaènì;ọmọdékìíwás/oacutedotbelowjàAgbó-m/eacutedotbelowkùnkó
wámúeku.
If you wish to buy okro, buy okro; if you
w i s ht or e c e i v eag r a t u i t y ,d os o ;ac h i l d
does not come to a tiger hunt and catch rats.
(One’s deeds should be appropriate to the
location.)
1435. BíobìnrínbáwọgbóOrò,aòlèrí àb/ogravedotbelow-ọ
/egravedotbelowm/oacutedotbelow.
If a woman enters the ritual grove of the Orò
cult, no one will ever see her return. (Any
person who engages in forbidden action
courts destruction.)
1436. Bíògbóẹniòbádánilójú,ak ìíﬁg bárí
wò.
If one does not trust one’s cudgel, one does
not try it on one’s own head. (One should
not swear by something about which one is
not certain. Compare 2020.)
1437. Bíojúalákẹdunòdáigi,kìígùnún.
If the monkey is not certain about a tree, it
does not climb it. (One should not embark
on projects one cannot accomplish.)
1438. Bíojúonísóòbásunw/ogravedotbelown,akìíl/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelow.
If the face of the person who farted is bale-
ful, one does not make a big fuss about the
fart. (Do not incite a person who is spoiling
for a ﬁght.)
1439. Bíológbò-óbápaeku ,aﬁì rù-ur/egravedotbelowdẹlé.
When a cat kills a mouse, it uses the tail as a
158 the good person


--- PAGE 172 ---
sentry. (One should save something of one’s
fortune for the future.)
1440. Bíológbò-óbáṣ/egravedotbelowńpaẹm/oacutedotbelow,àm/ogravedotbelowpéó
máalọ.
When a cat begins to kill guinea pigs, one
knows it is ready to go.
20 (A person who
embarks on improper behavior invites
ostracism.)
1441. Bíolówe-ébámọòwe-er/egravedotbelow,tíkòjáa,
/egravedotbelowrùìjàḿbàáni.
If the butt of a proverb recognizes but does
not acknowledge it, he is afraid of a ﬁght. (A
person who has reason to take oﬀense but
does not is avoiding a ﬁght.)
21
1442. Bíònítirí,/ogravedotbelowlaòríb/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelow;nibabaláwo-óﬁ
ńdÍfál/oacutedotbelowrọọrún.
As today is, tomorrow will not be; hence the
diviner consults the oracle every ﬁve days.
(Since no one knows the future, one must
constantly reassess one’s decisions.)
1443. Bíoníṣúbáﬁiṣu-ur/egravedotbelowse/egravedotbelowb/eacutedotbelow,ọgb/oacutedotbelowna
tánnínúa-tu-èèpo-jẹ.
If the owner of the yams cuts them for por-
ridge, the person who gleans what sticks to
the peelings is at a loss for what to do. (If the
perennial victim learns to protect himself,
the victimizer is stumped.)
22
1444. Bíoorébáp/ogravedotbelowláp/ogravedotbelowjù,ibiníńdà.
If goodness is excessive, it becomes evil.
( T h e r ec a nb et o om u c ho fe v e nag o o d
thing.)
1445. Bíòweòbájọòwe,akìípaá.
I fap r o v e r bd o e sn o ta p p l yt oas i t u a t i o n ,
20. Guinea pigs are kept as pets.
21. Olówe(owner of the proverb) in this instance
means the person to whom the proverb is applied.
22. Yams cut for porridge leave no remnants stick-
ing to the peels.
one does not use it. (One’s comparisons
should be apt.)
1446. Bíọmọẹníbádára,kásọpéódára;bí-i
káﬁṣayaẹnik/oacutedotbelow.
If one’s daughter is beautiful, one may ac-
knowledge that she is beautiful but may not
marry her. (However much one is attracted
to a forbidden thing, one must avoid it.)
1447. Bíọmọdébádárísọapá,apáápá;bó
bádárísọìrókò,ìrókòakòól/oacutedotbelownà.
If a child strikes his head against the
mahogany-bean tree, the tree will kill him; if
he strikes his head against theìrókòtree, the
tree will accost him on his way.
23 (Whoever
incites a terrible force to ﬁght will rue his
folly.)
1448. Bíọmọdéòríàjẹkù-ukìnìúnnínúigbó,
aníkíẹranbíẹkùnópaòun.
If a child has not seen the leavings of a lion
in the forest, he prays that he might be killed
by an animal like the leopard. (One is likely
to disdain forces the extent of whose powers
o n ei si g n o r a n to f . )
1449. Bí/ogravedotbelownà-ádéoríàpáta,níṣeníńpin.
When a trail comes to a rock, it ends.
(When an insurmountable obstacle inter-
venes, eﬀorts must stop.)
1450. Bí/ogravedotbelowràn-ánbáṣúòkùnkùn,àb/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowwò
láb/eacutedotbelow.
I fam a t t e ri sd a r k ,o n ep e e p sa ti tu n d e r
cover. (If the facts of a matter are a close
secret, one should quietly investigate it.)
1451. Bí/ogravedotbelowrànòtán,ibìkanlàńgbé;arékété
lohunńṣe.
If a problem is not ﬁnished, one stays in
place; it is the overeager person who comes
23. Both of these trees are reputed to be homes for
fearful spirits.
Oncaginess 159


--- PAGE 173 ---
to grief. (One should await the outcome of
a confused situation before taking further
action.)
1452. Bíọtíbákúninú,ọtíápọmọ;bíoòrùn-
únbáp/ogravedotbelowláp/ogravedotbelowjùasọọmọdiwèrè;bíabá
l/oacutedotbelowbalánìíjùasínniníwín;t/egravedotbelowt/egravedotbelow/egravedotbelowgúnp/ogravedotbelowlódòo
diolúeri.
If wine ﬁlls the stomach, it intoxicates a
child; if there is too much sun, it makes a
child go insane; if one has too much au-
thority, one goes mad; spinach that grew in
too great abundance by the stream became
ordinary weed. (Excess in anything is evil.)
1453. Bíọw/oacutedotbelowòbátẹèkùidà,akìíbèrèikútó
pababaẹni.
If one has not laid one’s hand on the hilt
of the sword, one does not ask what killed
one’s father. (Until one is able, one should
not attempt to right an injustice.)
1454. Bíbilàḿbiodòwòkátów/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelow.
One asks a river before one enters it. (One
must study well any situation before be-
coming involved in it.)
1455. B/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowkìnníàṣejù,okoolówóniḿmúni
lọ.
Excessive devotion to fashion leads one to
pawn oneself. (Excessive trendiness depletes
a person’s resources.)
1456. B/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowkìnnínl/ogravedotbelowtáìlú;afínjúlọbańpa.
The dandy is the enemy of the town; it is
the ﬁnicky person that the king kills. (The
people of a town may envy a dandy, but it is
the reckless person who comes to grief.)
24
24. The idea is that the dandy knows his place, even
if he incites envy, whereas the ﬁnicky person who is
afraid of death refuses to show respect for the king in
the usual way—by prostrating himself—and therefore
loses his head.
D
1457. Dàdaòleèjà,ṣùgb/oacutedotbelownólábùúròtó
gbójú.
Dada cannot ﬁght, but he has a brave
younger brother. (One who may not be
able to do much has relatives to take up his
cause.)
1458. Dágun-dágunKaletutíńdáìbejìlápá.
Troublemaker of Kaletu breaks the arms of a
twin. (A person who provokes someone with
powerful champions is a troublemaker.)
1459. Dá-mìíràn-kún-mìíràntíńpaàpatà
ẹyẹlé.
One-who-commits-crimes-atop-crimes: he
butchers pigeons for sale. (Refers to a hard-
ened criminal who piles crimes on crimes.)
25
1460. Dàńdógókọjá/egravedotbelowwùàbínúdá;bíabáko
ẹnitójunilọ,ayàgòfúnun.
Dàńdógóis not something to make in a
huﬀ;
26 one makes way for a person who is
too much for one. (One should know one’s
limits. Compare 2026.)
1461. Dá-ǹkan-dá-ǹkan,tíkìídáṣ/ogravedotbelow,tíkìí
d/eacutedotbelowwù.
Originator-of-problems: he does not make
a cloth and does not make a dress. (What
a troublemaker brings is trouble, never
anything useful.)
E
1462. Èèyanmá-j/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelow-kí-èèyàn-kúḿbẹníbòmí-
ràn;bó-le-kú-ó-kú/mgravebẹnílé-ewa.
The save-the-person-from-death type
25. Killing a pigeon is bad enough; cutting it up for
sale worsens the crime.
26. Dàńdógóis an expensive and elaborate tradi-
tional garment.
160 the good person


--- PAGE 174 ---
of people abounds elsewhere; the let-
the-person-die-if-he-or-she-wishes type
abounds in our house. (It is not our way
to stop people bent on destroying them-
s e l v e s .A l s o ,w ed oh a v ee v i lp e o p l ei no u r
home.)
1463. Èèyàn-ánníòunóbà/oacutedotbelowj/eacutedotbelowoníkòtób/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelow;
bíóbáníoònùdí,ẹnimélòólomáafẹfùr/ogravedotbelow
hàn?
Ap e r s o nv o w st od i s g r a c ey o u ,a n dy o u
respond that there is no way he can suc-
ceed; if he spreads the word that you did not
clean yourself after defecating, to how many
people will you display your anus? (No one
is immune to malicious defamation.)
1464. Èkétan-nisíjàẹkùn ,óﬁọránṣíṣ/eacutedotbelowsápó
ẹni.
The devious person goads one to confront
a leopard and ﬁlls one’s quiver with broken
arrows. (It is dangerous to follow a devious
person’s counsel.)
1465. Ekuògbọd/ogravedotbelownáọjàtíológìnnídá.
A mouse dares not visit a market established
by a cat. (One should not deliberately court
disaster.)
1466. Ekutíyópaológìnníòníídúróláyé.
The mouse that attempts to kill a cat will
not live long on this earth. (It is foolhardy to
take on powers that can destroy you.)
1467. ‘‘Èmilólòní,èmilól/ogravedotbelowla’’lọmọdéﬁ
ńdígbèsè.
‘‘Today belongs to me; tomorrow belongs to
me’’ is the attitude that pushes a youth into
debt. (Lack of foresight leads to disaster).
1468. Èmiòwáikúninúagbèﬁjiyán;ṣùgb/oacutedotbelown
bíkúnbáyísínúagbèmimolèﬁjiyán.
I will not go looking for a squirrel in my
gourd to eat with pounded yam; but if a
squirrel falls into my gourd, I will eat it with
pounded yam. (I will not steal, but neither
w i l lIr e f u s eal u c k yﬁ n d . )
1469. Èpè-ép/ogravedotbelowjuohuntónù;ab/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowsọnùw/oacutedotbelown
lọgbéṢàǹgó.
The cursing is far in excess of what is lost: a
needle goes missing, and the owners invoke
Ṣango. (One’s reaction to a situation should
be commensurate to it. This is a variant of
the following entry.)
1470. Èpè-ép/ogravedotbelowjuohuntónùlọ;ab/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowsọnùa
gbéṣ/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowsíta.
The curse is out of all proportion to the
lost article: a needle is lost and [the owner]
brings out a magic wand. (One should not
overreact to events. Compare the preceding
entry.)
1471. Eré-ekílajáḿbáẹkùnṣe?
What sort of sport is it that the dog engages
in with the leopard? (One should know
better than to court disaster.)
1472. Èròkìíj/eacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow-ọ‘‘Motàtán.’’
The trader never confesses, ‘‘I sold all my
wares.’’ (People are ever loath to disclose the
extent of their good fortune.)
1473. Eṣinṣinòmọkú;jíjẹnitir/egravedotbelow.
The ﬂy does not heed death; all it cares to
do is eat. (The ﬂy will persist in attacking
an open sore, heedless of death; nothing will
keep an addict from the thing he or she is
addicted to.)
1474. Èṣùòṣejò;ẹnitótẹejòm/oacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelowl/egravedotbelowbáḿbá.
There is no disaster stalking the snake; it is
whoever steps on a snake that is in trouble.
(It is not the snake inadvertently stepped on
t h a ti si np e r i l ;i ti st h ep e r s o nw h oi n a d v e r -
tently steps on the snake.)
1475. Etím/eacutedotbelowtaòyẹorí;èèyànm/eacutedotbelowtaòdúróní
méjì-méjì.
Oncaginess 161


--- PAGE 175 ---
Three ears are unbecoming for the head;
three people cannot stand in twos. (Good
things are not good in all situations; one can
have too much of a good thing.)
1476. Ewúlogbó;irùngb/ogravedotbelownlàgbà;máamú
làfojúdi.
Gray hair shows age; a beard shows matu-
rity; a mustache shows impudence. (One’s
appearance in a group sometimes indicates
one’s attitude toward the group.)
27
1477. Ewúr/eacutedotbelowjẹórelé;àgùntánjẹórelé;à-jẹ-ì-
wálélóbaẹl/eacutedotbelowd/egravedotbelowj/eacutedotbelow.
The goat forages and returns home; the
sheep forages and returns home; the pig’s
ﬂaw is its habit of not returning home after
foraging. (There is nothing wrong with
traveling, as long as one knows when to go
home.)
1478. Ewúr/eacutedotbelowkìíwọlétọìkokò.
A goat does not venture into the lair of a
wolf. (Never knowingly put yourself in
harm’s way.)
1479. Èyíayéńṣengkàṣàìṣe;bádìẹ-/eacutedotbelowmáawọ
/ogravedotbelow/ogravedotbelowd/egravedotbelowab/egravedotbelowr/egravedotbelow.
Whatever the rest of the world does, I will
not forswear; when a chicken wants to enter
the porch, it stoops. (One should not violate
established custom.)
1480. Èyíòtófò,èyíòtófò:fìlàìmàle-ékù
p/eacutedotbelowt/eacutedotbelowkí.
‘‘This is no great loss; this is no great loss’’:
the Muslim’s cap dwindles to almost noth-
27. Máamú(máamú), here used for mustache,
means ‘‘keep drinking,’’ since when a mustached person
takes a drink, some liquid clings to the mustache—for
later drinking. The proverb presumably refers to the
practice of drinking from a communal cup or bowl; in
that situation a person who wears a mustache invites
others to drink from a vessel in which he has washed
his mustache.
ing.28 (If one keeps dispensing one’s prop-
erty only a little at a time, soon little will be
left.)
Ẹ
1481. ẸpaAyéj/eacutedotbelownkú,ẹpaÌyálódeAníwúrà;
ìgbàtíẹpaÌyáp/ogravedotbelowẹgbàgbéogun.
You killed Ayéjẹnkú and killed Ìyálóde Aní-
wúrà; but when you killed Ìyáp/ogravedotbelow, you forgot
about wars.
29 (Past misbehaviors might have
gone unpunished, but the latest will have
dire repercussions.)
1482. /Egravedotbelowbialábaunkìígbèéd/egravedotbelowbiàna-ar/egravedotbelow.
Tortoise’s guilt is not long in becoming its
parent-in-law’s. (Incommensurate retalia-
tion soon transfers public sympathy from
the aggrieved person to the culprit. See
1342.)
1483. /Egravedotbelowbìtìòpeèràtóṣep/egravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowp/egravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelow;ẹnuẹniní
ńpani.
A trap does not kill an ant that is cautious;
it is one’s mouth that turns out to be one’s
death. (The cautious will live long on the
earth; the incautious engineers his or her
own death.)
1484. /Egravedotbelowbìtìtíòkúnẹm/oacutedotbelowlójú,òunníńyíi
l/eacutedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowns/eacutedotbelowhìn.
It is a trap that the giant rat disdains that
wrenches its testicles backward. (Dangers
28. The reference is to the skull cap associated with
Muslims. The idea is that once it was much larger, but
then the owner raised no objection to successive re-
quests for just a little piece of it. His response each time
i st h a th ec a na ﬀ o r dt og i v eu pj u s tal i t t l eb i t .
29. The references are to real events and real people
in Ibadan history in the 1870s. The three named persons
are notables: Ìyálóde [Ẹfúnsetán] Aníwúrà, the leader
of the women in the community; Ayéjẹnkú, a person of
worth; Ìyáp/ogravedotbelow, apparently a great warrior whose demise
placed the community at risk.
162 the good person


--- PAGE 176 ---
that one belittles are likely to cause great
havoc.)
1485. /Egravedotbelow/egravedotbelowkanṣoṣolọmọńsíntíàńní‘‘à-sín-
gbó,à-sín-t/oacutedotbelow.’’
It is when a child sneezes only once that one
wishes for the child ‘‘Sneeze and grow old,
sneeze and live long.’’ (Casual responses are
appropriate only for minor diﬃculties; if the
diﬃculties grow serious, more appropriate
measures must be adopted.)
1486. /Egravedotbelowgbám/ogravedotbelowdíỌbà;ẹnitógbéniṣánl/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowlè
pani.
The /Egravedotbelowgbá know the secrets of Ọbà town;
whoever throws a person has the ability to
kill the person. (Whoever holds a person’s
secret has some power over that person, just
as the wrestler who can throw his opponents
can probably also kill him.)
1487. Ẹgb/eacutedotbelowẹjalẹjańw/egravedotbelowt/ogravedotbelow;ẹgb/eacutedotbelowẹyẹlẹyẹńw/oacutedotbelow
lé.
Fish swim in a school of their own kind;
b i r d sﬂ yi naﬂ o c ko ft h e i ro w nk i n d .( O n e
should seek and keep the company of people
of one’s own station.)
1488. /Egravedotbelowhìnàjànàkúlàńyọogbó;taníj/eacutedotbelowyọ
agadalójúerin?
It is after the demise of the elephant that
one brandishes a cudgel; who dares draw a
scimitar in the face of an elephant? (One can
be brave after the danger has been removed.
This is a variant of 1764.)
1489. /Egravedotbelowhìnníńdunol-ókùú-àdásí.
It is the back of the man with a blunt cutlass
that suﬀers. (A person who does not make
adequate preparations for a task or test will
rue his or her negligence. Compare 1598.)
1490. /Egravedotbelowkọtíkòbáléwélàgbàńgbà.
It is corn loaf with no leaf wrapping that the
elder takes. (One who is careless with one’s
property is likely to lose it.)
30
1491. Ẹkùnkìíyankíajáyan.
A leopard that struts is not answered by
strutting from a dog. (One should recognize
danger and avoid it.)
1492. Ẹl/eacutedotbelowd/egravedotbelowtókúlégbodòlóníkáfòunjẹyán.
It is a pig that dies at the time of the harvest-
ing of new yams that asks to be eaten with
pounded yam. (If one puts oneself in harm’s
way, one deserves what one gets.)
1493. Ẹl/eacutedotbelowj/oacutedotbelowkúsílé,aláròyékúsítagbangba.
T h ep e r s o ni n v o l v e di na na ﬀ a i rd i e sa t
home; the spokesperson dies out in the
open. (The busybody’s fate is worse than
that of the person involved in the aﬀair.)
1494. Ẹl/eacutedotbelowkúnsunkúnóbátir/egravedotbelowlọ;aláròpaìbá
sunkúnkòdák/eacutedotbelow.
The person with a cause to cry cries and de-
parts; a person whose mind never leaves a
problem will never stop crying. (One should
not keep harping on one’s injuries.)
1495. Ẹl/eacutedotbelowrùníńgbéẹrùkátóbakéọfẹ.
The owner of the load must ﬁrst lift it before
one lends one’s encouragement. (Only those
who make an eﬀort on their own behalf
deserve help from others.)
1496. /Egravedotbelowlúlùú,ìwọlófòjòpaara-àrẹ.
Lark-heeled Cuckoo, it was you that got
yourself drenched in the rain. (Whatever
your diﬃculty is, you brought it on your-
self.)
1497. Ẹniàjòòpékómúrailé.
The person for whom a journey has not
30. Àgbà(elder) should not be taken literally here;
the proverb plays on the syllablegbà(take from), the
sense being that what-takes (construed here asa-gbà)
takes only what is unprotected.
Oncaginess 163


--- PAGE 177 ---
been proﬁtable should prepare to return
home. (One should know when it is time to
go home.)
1498. Ẹníbáf/eacutedotbelowabukéniyóruọmọ-ọr/egravedotbelow
dàgbà.
Whoever marries a humpbacked woman
will carry her child on his back until the
child is weaned. (One who knowingly gets
himself or herself into a diﬃculty will bear
the consequences.)
1499. Ẹníbáf/eacutedotbelowarúgbógb/egravedotbelowhìnniyósìnkú-u
r/egravedotbelow.
T h el a s ts p o u s eo fa no l dp e r s o nw i l lb u r y
him or her. (One should weigh the obli-
gations an enterprise will entail before
embarking on it.)
1500. Ẹníbámọayé-éjẹkìígunàgbọn.
Whoever knows what makes for a good
life never climbs coconut palms. (Whoever
cares about his or her welfare does not live
dangerously. Compare 128 and 223.)
1501. Ẹníbámọayé-éjẹkìíjà.
Whoever knows how to enjoy life does not
enter into a ﬁght. (The best way to enjoy life
is to avoid conﬂict.)
1502. Ẹníbámọiṣin-ínjẹamọikúojú-ur/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelow
y/ogravedotbelow.
W h o e v e rk n o w sh o wt oe a tA k e ea p p l em u s t
k n o wh o wt or e m o v ei t sd e a d l yr a p h e .( O n e
should be sure of one’s capabilities before
attempting dangerous feats.)
31
1503. Ẹníbána/Ogravedotbelowy/egravedotbelowkúáríjàOgbè.
Whoever whips /Ogravedotbelowy/egravedotbelowkú will have Ogbè to
31. Iṣin,Akee apple, is a fruit whose ﬂeshy part is
eaten raw or cooked. Its raphe, or seam, is deadly and
must be carefully removed before the ﬂesh is consumed
(see Abraham 323).
answer to.32 (If one assaults a protected per-
son, one should be prepared to answer to his
or her protector.)
1504. Ẹníbápékíàkàlàmájòkú,ojú-ur/egravedotbelow
lẹyẹńk/oacutedotbelowk/oacutedotbelowyọjẹ.
Whoever says the ground hornbill should
not eat carrion will be the ﬁrst to lose his or
her eyes to the bird. (Whoever tries to pre-
vent the inevitable will be trampled in the
process of its occurring. Compare 2192.)
1505. Ẹníbárọrapaeèràáríìfuninú-ur/egravedotbelow.
Whoever takes great care in killing an ant
will see its innards. (One must handle deli-
cate matters carefully.)
1506. Ẹníbásọpúp/ogravedotbelowáṣìsọ.
Whoever talks a lot will misspeak. (It is best
to be a person of few words.)
1507. Ẹníbẹni-ít/eacutedotbelowni.
Whoever pleads with one makes one lose
face. (A beseecher places the beseeched at
risk of losing face.)
33
1508. Ẹnídáríjiníṣ/egravedotbelowt/eacutedotbelowẹj/oacutedotbelow.
The one who forgives defuses the dispute.
(Once the aggrieved person is paciﬁed, there
is no further point in pursuing the case.)
1509. Ẹnídúródeeríndúródekú;ẹnídúró
dẹf/ogravedotbelown-/oacutedotbelowndúródèjà;ẹnídúródeeégúnalá-
gangan,/ogravedotbelowrunlóf/eacutedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowlọ.
Whoever waits in a charging elephant’s
path waits for death; whoever waits in a
32. Ogbè is the chief of the chapters that make up
the Ifá divination corpus; /Ogravedotbelowy/egravedotbelowkú is one of the junior
chapters. These chapters are regarded as spirits.
33. The idea is that whatever one’s justiﬁcation
might be and however great the beseecher’s unworthi-
ness, one who refuses his or her plea is likely to appear
heartless.
164 the good person


--- PAGE 178 ---
buﬀalo’s path waits for an attack; whoever
tarries before a ﬂeet-footed masquerader
hankers for a trip to heaven. (Whoever sees
trouble approaching and does not ﬂee courts
disaster.)
1510. Ẹníﬁìp/oacutedotbelownjúkọẹyìnákọàb/ogravedotbelown;ẹníﬁ
ìp/oacutedotbelownjúroj/oacutedotbelowáj/egravedotbelowbiọba;ẹníﬁìp/oacutedotbelownjúlọgb/eacutedotbelowìhò
ágb/eacutedotbelowihòaw/oacutedotbelownrínw/oacutedotbelown.
Whoever gathers palm fruits in despera-
tion will gather unripe ones; whoever states
his or her case in desperation will be ad-
judged at fault by the king; whoever digs a
hole in desperation will dig out an iguana
lizard.
34 (Nothing turns out well if done in
desperation. Easy does it.)
1511. Ẹnígúnyánkal/egravedotbelowyóòjúbàọb/egravedotbelow.
A person who has made pounded yams
must pay homage to the stew. (The prudent
person cultivates the source of what he or
she needs.)
1512. Ẹnígbéadíẹòtòṣì-ígbétialáròyé.
Whoever steals a poor person’s chicken
steals from an incessant complainer. (One
should choose one’s adversaries with pru-
dence.)
1513. Ẹníkánjújayéákánjúlọs/oacutedotbelowrun.
Whoever is in a hurry to enjoy life will go to
heaven in a hurry. (Patience is what life calls
for.)
1514. Ẹniméjìkìíbínúegbinrin.
Two people do not hold a grudge and refuse
reconciliation. (If there is to be any hope of
ending a quarrel, at least one of the parties
must be willing to make up.)
34. The digging of holes in this case would normally
be for the purpose of ﬁnding something edible: a crab,
for instance. An iguana is not only unsuitable as food
but is also considered dangerous.
1515. Ẹniòyìnbóf/eacutedotbelowrànníńtìm/oacutedotbelowlé.
It is the person the white man likes that the
white man incarcerates. (Whoever becomes
too friendly with a white man deserves what
the white man does to him. A favorite, being
more likely to take liberties with his or her
benefactor, is more likely to get in trouble
than the unfavored.)
1516. Ẹníṣe/ogravedotbelowrànÌj/egravedotbelowbú:etí/egravedotbelowágb/oacutedotbelowìbọn.
Whoever provokes an Ìj/egravedotbelowbú person, his or
her ears will hear gunshot. (If one incites a
bellicose person, one asks for trouble.)
35
1517. Ẹnitíabáḿbáṣiṣ/eacutedotbelowkìíṣ/ogravedotbelowlẹ;bóríbá
túnniṣeakìít/eacutedotbelowb/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow.
The person being lent a hand does not
malinger; one whom Providence favors is
not easily disgraced. (One should make
the most of unexpected good fortune and
not squander the opportunity it presents.
Compare 2064.)
1518. Ẹnitíabáḿmúìyàwób/ogravedotbelowwáfúnkìí
garùn.
T h ep e r s o nt ow h o mab r i d ei sb e i n g
brought does not strain his neck [to see her
from a distance]. (One should not be unduly
impatient for what is coming toward one
anyway.)
1519. Ẹnitíabátiríkìítúnbam/oacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelowm/oacutedotbelow.
A person who has been seen has no further
need of hiding. (Once the damage is done,
prevention comes too late.)
1520. Ẹnitíaf/eacutedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowsunjẹkìífepoparalọjókòó
sídìíiná.
A person being eyed for barbecuing does
not baste himself with oil and sit by the
35. The Ìj/egravedotbelowbú are an ethnic group reputed to pos-
sess powerful and fearful charms with which they are
believed to attack their enemies.
Oncaginess 165


--- PAGE 179 ---
ﬁre. (One should not facilitate one’s own
undoing.)
1521. Ẹnitíalùlógbòóm/eacutedotbelowfà,tíaníkó
ﬁyèdénú:ìgbàtíkòﬁyèdénúńk/oacutedotbelow?
A person is hit with a cudgel six times and
then urged to learn forbearance; what other
o p t i o nd o e sh eo rs h eh a v e ?( Av i c t i mw i t h
no access to any remedy needs no advice to
let matters drop.)
1522. Ẹnitíaòlèmú,akìígọdèé.
One does not lie in ambush for an adversary
one is no match for. (Pick ﬁghts only with
those over whom you can prevail. Compare
4201.)
1523. Ẹnitíaòlèmú,Ọl/oacutedotbelowrunlàńﬁlél/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow.
An adversary over whom one cannot prevail
one leaves to God’s judgment. (If your ad-
versary is too much for you, let God attend
t oh i mo rh e r . )
1524. Ẹnitíńsárékirinínú-upápáńwá/ogravedotbelownà
àtijìnsíkòtò.
The person who runs about in the bush
courts the danger of falling into a ditch.
(Reckless action can lead to disaster.)
1525. Ẹnitíóbámuọtíogójìás/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowokòó.
Whoever drinks 40 cowries’ worth of wine
will talk 20 cowries’ worth of talk. (A little
wine opens the way for even less informa-
tion.)
1526. Ẹnitíóbáobìnrinkólọsílé-er/egravedotbelowyósùn
nínú/egravedotbelowrù.
A man who goes with a woman to her house
will sleep in fear. (Illicit acts carried on
indiscreetly are attended by great anxiety.)
1527. Ẹnitíóbaogún-unbabar/egravedotbelowj/eacutedotbelow,ójaòkú
/ogravedotbelowrunlólè,yósìdiẹniìﬁbú.
Whoever ruins his or her father’s bequest
robs the dead and becomes a person of
reproach. (We must keep faith with our
ancestral heritage.)
1528. Ẹnitíóbáwọodòniàyàńkò,àyàòfo
odò.
I ti st h ep e r s o nw h oe n t e r sar i v e rw h oi s
terriﬁed, not the river. (It is the person who
takes on an invincible adversary, not the
adversary, who has a problem.)
1529. Ẹnitíòf/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowwọàkísàkìíbáajáṣeeré-e
géle.
A person who does not wish to wear rags
should not engage in rough play with a dog.
(People should avoid situations that might
earn them disgrace.)
1530. Ẹnitíójìnsíkòtò-ók/oacutedotbelowaráìyókù
l/oacutedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelown.
The person who falls into a ditch teaches
others a lesson. (One learns from the experi-
ences of those who have gone before.)
1531. Ẹnitíómúulóríníókú,ìwọtíomúu
l/eacutedotbelows/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowníóńjòwèrè.
The person holding it by the head says it is
dead; you who are holding it by the feet say
it is going through death throes. (Novices
should not presume to be more knowledge-
able than the experts.)
1532. Ẹnitíótọodòtíkòd/egravedotbelowhìnyòbàá
Olúwẹripàdé.
Whoever follows the river without turning
b a c kw i l lc o m ef a c et of a c ew i t hO l u w ẹ r i .
36
(Whoever persists in courting danger will
eventually ﬁnd it.)
1533. Ẹnitíòtóni-ínàògbọd/ogravedotbelowṣek/oacutedotbelow-ń-dú
síni.
A person who is not strong enough to beat
you up should not adopt a threatening pose
3 6 .S a i dt ob ear i v e rg o d d e s s .
166 the good person


--- PAGE 180 ---
toward you. (People should not challenge
forces they cannot withstand.)
1534. Ẹnitíóyáẹgbàafàtíkòsanán,ób/eacutedotbelowgi
dí/ogravedotbelownàegbèje.
The person who borrows 1,200 cowries and
does not pay them back blocks the path of
1,400 cowries. (A person who defaults in
little things does himself or herself out of the
opportunity for larger beneﬁts.)
1535. ẸnitíOrò-ómáamúḿbawọnṣeàìsùn
Orò.
The person who will be the sacriﬁcial vic-
tim of Orò is joining in the revelry on the
eve of the sacriﬁce. (The intended victim
innocently helps in making preparations for
his or her own demise; if there is the slight-
est possibility of peril, one should not act
carelessly.)
1536. Ẹnìkankìíﬁ/ogravedotbelowbẹtónùjẹṣu.
No one eats yams with a lost knife. (People
are loath to admit they are at fault in any
matter.)
37
1537. Ẹnuẹyẹníńpẹyẹ;ẹnuòrofóníńpòrofó;
òrofóbímọm/eacutedotbelowfà,óníiléòun-únkúnṣ/oacutedotbelowṣ/oacutedotbelowṣ/oacutedotbelow.
The bird’s mouth is its death; the green
fruit pigeon’s mouth is its death; the pigeon
hatches six chicks and boasts that its house
is bursting at the seams. (To boast about
good fortune is to invite predators. See 1539
and 1540.)
1538. Ẹnuináníńpainá;ẹnuèròníńpaèrò.
The mouth of the louse is its death; the
mouth of the nit is its death. (Reckless per-
sons bring disaster on their heads by their
own actions.)
38
37. Once a knife is lost, no one will admit that he or
s h eu s e di tl a s t .
38. If lice and nits did not bite, no one would know
of their presence and crush them.
1539. Ẹnuniàparò-óﬁńpe/ogravedotbelowrá;aní‘‘Kìkì
/ogravedotbelowrá,kìkì/ogravedotbelowrá!’’
With its own mouth the partridge invites its
own ruin; it cries, ‘‘Nothing but fat, noth-
ing but fat!’’
39 (Conspicuous display of one’s
good fortune invites predators. Compare
1537 and 1540.)
1540. Ẹnuòfòròníńpaòfòrò;òfòrò-óbímọ
méjì,ókówọnwás/eacutedotbelowbàá/ogravedotbelownà,óní‘‘Ọmọ-/ogravedotbelowmí
yèkoro-koro.’’
The squirrel’s mouth summons its death; the
squirrel has two children, takes them to the
edge of the path, and says, ‘‘My children are
hale and well indeed.’’ (Excessive boasting
about one’s good fortune invites predators.
Compare 1537 and 1539.)
1541. Ẹnutíìgbínﬁbúòrìṣàníńﬁ-ílọl/egravedotbelowlọ
báa.
The same mouth with which the snail insults
the god is the one on which it crawls to the
god.
40 (The person who insults a power-
ful person will in time eat his or her words
before the person insulted.)
1542. Ẹnu-ùmik/oacutedotbelowniw/oacutedotbelowntimáagb/oacutedotbelowpéìyá
ọba-áláj/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelow.
It is not from my mouth that people will
learn that the king’s mother is a witch. (I
will not place myself in jeopardy by speak-
ing dangerous truths; one should not ac-
knowledge or comment on everything one
sees.)
1543. Ẹr/egravedotbelowòkè/ogravedotbelowdànniyókìl/ogravedotbelowfúna-l-áròó-
gbál/egravedotbelowaṣọ.
39. The proverb is based on the call of the partridge,
which is here suggested to be what attracts the attention
of the hunter./Ogravedotbelowráis ‘‘fat,’’ but it can also mean ‘‘being
eliminated.’’
40. Snails are used as sacriﬁces to some gods. The
suggestion is that snails crawl mouth down because a
snail once insulted a god.
Oncaginess 167


--- PAGE 181 ---
The mud on the plains will teach a lesson
to the person whose loincloth has a train
sweeping the ground. (The thoughtless
person will learn wisdom when his or her
thoughtlessness comes home to roost.)
1544. /Egravedotbelowrùk/oacutedotbelowníḿba/ogravedotbelowpẹtóníkádáòunsí,
nítoríẹmu/ogravedotbelowlani.
It is not out of fear that the palm tree pleads
to be allowed to stand; it is on account of
tomorrow’s palm wine.
41 ( W h a tw eh a v e
the good sense to preserve today will yield
beneﬁts for us in the future.)
1545. Ẹṣiniwájúniti/egravedotbelowhìnńwòsáré.
The leading horse is the one by which the
followers set their pace. (One takes example
from those that have gone before.)
1546. /Egravedotbelows/ogravedotbelow/egravedotbelows/ogravedotbelowlaﬁńláọb/egravedotbelowtógbóná.
S l o w l y ,s l o w l yi st h ew a yt oe a ts o u pt h a ti s
scalding hot. (The more dangerous the task,
the greater the care required.)
1547. /Egravedotbelowt/eacutedotbelowníńgb/egravedotbelowhìnaláṣejù.
Disgrace is the reward of excess. (Lack of
moderation results in disgrace.)
1548. Ẹyẹkílomáapatíòńﬁàkùkọṣeoògùn
àtè?
What sort of bird do you hope to kill that
you use a cock as the birdlime charm?
42 (It
is unreasonable to expend something of
great value in pursuit of something of lesser
value.)
41. Palm tees are tapped for wine by hacking oﬀ
some of the leaves to expose the pulp at their base and
then punching a hole in the pulp. Palm wine is the
milky juice that oozes out of the incision and ferments
as it collects in a gourd or bottle tied to the tree.
42. ‘‘Birdlime’’ is a sticky trap for birds to which
a charmed or magical item may be added to make it
more eﬀective.
1549. Ẹyinadìẹògbọd/ogravedotbelowforísọàpáta.
A chicken egg should not strike its head
a g a i n s tar o c k .( I ti su n w i s et ot a k eo nf o r c e s
one cannot withstand.)
1550. Ẹyinl/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow;bóbábal/egravedotbelowfíf/oacutedotbelowníńf/oacutedotbelow.
Words are eggs; when they drop on the ﬂoor,
they shatter into pieces. (Words are deli-
cate things; once spoken, they cannot be
retrieved.)
F
1551. Fáàáríàṣejù,okoolówóníḿmúọmọlọ.
Intemperate dandyism lands a youth on
a creditor’s farm as a pawn. (Squandered
resources bring destitution.)
1552. F/egravedotbelowhìntìkíoríìṣeèké;farapam/oacutedotbelowkíogb/oacutedotbelow
bíaṣeni-ítińsọ.
Sit back and and you will see how a devi-
ous person operates; conceal yourself and
you will hear how those who seek others’
destruction speak. (One must be cagey in
order to learn the truth about unreliable
people.)
1553. Fi/egravedotbelowj/egravedotbelowsínú,tuit/oacutedotbelowfunfunjáde.
Keep your red blood inside and spit out
clear saliva. (Never show your hand to your
enemy or let your words or action reveal
your intentions.)
43
1554. Fiohunwéohun,ﬁ/ogravedotbelowrànwé/ogravedotbelowràn;ﬁ
/ogravedotbelowrànjìkáyìn/oacutedotbelow.
Liken one thing to another, liken one mat-
ter to another; forgive and forget and earn
people’s praise. (Rather than permit an
4 3 .T h i sp r o v e r bi ss o m e t i m e su s e da sac r i t i c i s m
of deceitful people who appear to be friends but are
full of ill will: Ọmọaráyéf/egravedotbelowj/egravedotbelowsínútut/oacutedotbelowfunfunjáde
(‘‘Human beings keep their blood inside and spit out
clear saliva’’).
168 the good person


--- PAGE 182 ---
oﬀense to recall earlier ones, one should
forgive and forget. This is a variant of
3298.)
1555. Fi/ogravedotbelowrànsínúpète/egravedotbelowrín;ﬁebisínúsunkún
ayo.
Keep your troubles inside and laugh heartily;
keep your hunger hidden and pretend to
weep from satiation. (One should keep one’s
woes to oneself and show a happy face to the
world.)
1556. Fòsíhìn-ínfòs/oacutedotbelowhùn-únlàkèréﬁńṣ/eacutedotbelow
nítan.
Jump this way, jump that way is how a frog
breaks its thigh. (Restlessness lands people
in trouble.)
G
1557. Ganganranòṣéékìm/oacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelow;a-gúnni-l/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow-
bíi-ṣoṣoro.
A sharp object is not something to grab
for; [it is] a-thing-that-pierces-one’s-hand-
like-a-sharp-instrument. (Dangerous things
must be handled very carefully.)
1558. Gìdì-gìdìòm/oacutedotbelowlà;káṣiṣ/eacutedotbelowbíẹrúòda
nǹkan.
Scurrying around does not ensure pros-
perity; working like a slave results in noth-
ing. (One does not necessarily prosper by
working oneself to death.)
1559. Gùdùguduòtúrasíl/egravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowkan.
Poisonous yam has never lost its skin.
44 (A
c e r t a i np e r s o nh a sn e v e rb e e nk n o w nt ob e
oﬀ his or her guard.)
1560. Gùdùgudu-úkanlégbòkán-ín-kán-ín.
Poisonous yam’s roots are sour indeed. (The
44. One would not bother to peel a poisonous
variety of yam.
subject is something one must stay away
from, for encounter with it is unpleasant.)
Gb
1561. ‘‘Gbàsókè’’ni‘‘Gbàs/oacutedotbelowk/ogravedotbelow’’;ohuntáabá
sọsíwájúlàḿbá.
‘‘Put this above [ashore]’’ equals ‘‘Put this
in the boat’’; it is what one throws ahead
that one ﬁnds in one’s path. (One reaps the
rewards of the good one sows.)
1562. Gbéjò-gbéjòògbéọká.
No snake dancer dances with a cobra. (There
a r es o m ep e r i l se v e nt h eb r a v e s to fp e o p l e
should not court. Compare the following
entry.)
1563. Gb/eacutedotbelowran-gb/eacutedotbelowranògbéẹkùn.
No animal pilferer ever pilfers a leopard.
(There are some risks even the most brazen
risk taker would be wise to avoid. Compare
the preceding entry.)
1564. Gbígbòòròlàńṣe/ogravedotbelownàigi.
The path along which a log will be rolled
must be made wide enough. (One should
make provisions adequate for the task
ahead.)
1565. Gbogboajáníńjẹimí:èyítóbájẹti/egravedotbelow
b/eacutedotbelownularáyéńpènídìgbòlugi.
All dogs eat excrement, but only those that
smear their mouths with it are described
as rabid. (No one is without blemish, but
one must keep one’s ﬂaws within reasonable
bounds. Compare 1567.)
1566. Gbogboìjànìjà;bóogbémilul/egravedotbelowmàm/oacutedotbelowẹ
lójúlákọlákọ.
Every way of ﬁghting is a legitimate way
of ﬁghting. If you are strong enough to
throw me, I will ﬁght back by looking at
you with absolute disdain. (One must know
Oncaginess 169


--- PAGE 183 ---
one’s limitations, especially when up against
insurmountable odds.)
1567. Gbogboobìnrinlóńgbéṣ/eacutedotbelow,èyítóbáṣe
ti/egravedotbelowláṣejùlaráyéńpèláṣ/eacutedotbelowwó.
All women are unfaithful; only those who
know no moderation are put down as
whores. (Nobody is without blemishes; the
important thing is to keep them from getting
out of hand. Compare 1565.)
1568. GbólóhùnkanAgántóawo-óṣe.
Just one utterance by the masquerader Agán
is suﬃcient to eﬀect many wonders.
45 (The
truly competent person need not strain
o v e r m u c ht oa c c o m p l i s hm u c h . )
1569. Gbólóhùnkanlabielépo;elépońṣe
ìrànrán.
One asks only one question of the palm-
oil seller, but she rambles endlessly on. (A
person plagued by a bad conscience makes
endless excuses when asked simple ques-
tions.)
1570. Gbólóhùnkan-ánba/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowj/eacutedotbelow;gbólóhùn
kan-ántún/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowṣe.
One solitary statement muddies an entire
aﬀair; one solitary statement clears all the
confusion. (A single sentence can cause irre-
parable damage; a single sentence can also
repair the greatest relational damage.)
I
1571. Ìb/egravedotbelowr/egravedotbelowòṣìbíọmọọl/oacutedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowlàńrí.
At the beginning of one’s penury one seems
like the child of most prosperous parents.
(A course of action that will lead to disaster
often has a pleasant beginning.)
45. Agán (or Ag/oacutedotbelown) is one of the more formidable
Yoruba masqueraders; he was traditionally employed to
execute witches.
1572. Ibiìṣánálatińkíyèsóògùn.
From the time one makes one’s boasts,
one should begin to mind one’s charms
[or juju]. (One should always match one’s
vows with adequate preparation to eﬀectuate
them.)
1573. Ibirerelàkàs/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowńgbésọl/egravedotbelow.
T h el a d d e ra l w a y sr e s t so nap r o p i t i o u ss p o t .
(A prayer that one may always land at a
fortunate place.)
1574. Ibitíagb/oacutedotbelownmọlàńṣòwò-omàlúùmọ.
One should limit the depth of one’s involve-
ment in cattle trading to the extent of one’s
astuteness. (Be careful not to put at risk
more than you can aﬀord, or to get in over
your head.)
1575. Ibitíàńlọlàńwò,akìíwoibitíati
ṣubú.
One should keep one’s eyes on where one is
going, not where one stumbled. (The best
course of action is not to dwell on setbacks
but to face the future resolutely.)
1576. Ibitíatińwoolókùnrùnlatińwoara
ẹni.
Just as one cares for the sick, one should also
care for oneself. (One should be as solicitous
of one’s own welfare as of others’ .)
1577. Ibitíakátábasí,adìẹògbọd/ogravedotbelowdéb/egravedotbelow.
Wherever the jackal lurks, the chicken must
give the place a wide berth. (Keep as clear of
known dangers as possible.)
1578. Ibitíinúḿbías/eacutedotbelowtó,inúògbọd/ogravedotbelowbí
ìkòkòdéb/egravedotbelow;bínúbábíìkòkòdéb/egravedotbelow,ẹl/eacutedotbelowkọòní-í
rídá.
The cooking pot must never harbor a
grudge to the same extent that the sieve
does; if the pot does so, the corn-meal trader
will have nothing to sell. (The more power
170 the good person


--- PAGE 184 ---
one has, the more one should exercise re-
straint.)46
1579. Ibitíómọlàńpèl/oacutedotbelowmọ.
W h e r ei ts t o p s ,t h e r eo n ed e s i g n a t e s‘ ‘ c h i l d . ’ ’
(When one reaches the end of a matter, or
the end of a road, one should acknowledge
the end.)
47
1580. Ìbínúbabaòṣì.
Anger [is the] father of hopelessness. (Anger
achieves no good but may backﬁre on who-
ever expresses it. Compare 1582.)
1581. Ìbínúlọbáﬁńyọidà;ìtìjúlóﬁḿb/eacutedotbelowẹ.
It is in anger that the king draws his sword;
it is shame that makes him go through with
the beheading. (Once one begins an injudi-
cious action on impulse, one may have to
carry it through to avoid embarrassment.)
1582. Ìbínúòdanǹkan;sùúrùbabaìwà;àgbà
tónísùúrùohungbogbolóní.
Anger accomplishes nothing; forbearance
is the father of character traits; an elder
who has forbearance has everything. (For-
bearance will avail one everything, whereas
anger will always prove futile. Compare
1580.)
1583. Ìbínúòm/ogravedotbelowpéolúwaòunòl/eacutedotbelows/egravedotbelowńl/egravedotbelow.
Anger does not know that its owner has
no legs to stand on. (Anger does not know
prudence.)
1584. Ìbìs/eacutedotbelowhínàgbòkìíṣojo.
A ram’s stepping backward is not indica-
46. In a sense, both the pot that cooks the corn meal
and the strainer used to separate the starch from the
eèrí(bran) are containers, but the pot holds all the ma-
terial put into it; the strainer permits some to escape.
That action is here represented as a manifestation of
anger. If the pot were to behave like the strainer, there
would be no food left.
47. This is a play on the wordsmọ(which indicates
‘‘limit’’ or ‘‘extent’’) andọmọ(which means ‘‘child’’).
tive of cowardice. (One should not mistake
for indecisiveness a person’s deliberateness
before acting.)
1585. Ìbọn-/oacutedotbelownníapátíkòlápátí,taníj/eacutedotbelowj/eacutedotbelowká
kọjúìbọnkọòun?
Whether a gun has a trigger or not, who
would calmly permit it to be pointed at
him or her? (One should not take foolish
chances.)
1586. Ì-dún-kídùn-únòyoniw/oacutedotbelownﬁńsọòyo
nígi;ì-f/ogravedotbelow-kúf/ogravedotbelowògbìgbìniw/oacutedotbelownﬁńtaògbìgbì
lókò;ì-jẹ-kújẹàdánníńﬁ-ítẹnup/ogravedotbelowfẹnuṣu.
It is the incessant chattering of the Pata-
guenon monkey that causes people to bela-
bor it with sticks; it is the annoying sounds
of the ògbìgbìbird that causes people to
throw stones at it; it is indiscriminate feed-
ing that causes the bat to ingest food and
excrete with the same mouth. (A person’s
mouth may be his or her death.)
1587. Ìf/eacutedotbelowàf/eacutedotbelowjùlewúr/eacutedotbelowﬁḿbáọko-ọr/egravedotbelowhu
irùngb/ogravedotbelown.
It is excessive love that induces the goat to
g r o wab e a r di ns y m p a t h yw i t hh e rm a t e .( I n
all things, moderation is advisable.)
1588. Ìﬁohunwéohun,ìﬁ/ogravedotbelowrànwé/ogravedotbelowràn,kòj/eacutedotbelow
kí/ogravedotbelowrànótán.
Citing comparable things and recalling simi-
lar occurences [in the past] make ending a
quarrel impossible. (Refusal to forget the
past prevents reconciliation.)
1589. Ìfunraloògùnàgbà.
Wariness is the elders’ most eﬃcacious juju.
( T h ep e r s o nw h oi sa l w a y sw a r yw i l la v o i d
much grief.)
1590. Igiganganranmágùn-únmilójú,
òkèèrèlatińwòówá.
‘‘Protruding twig, do not poke me in the
eye’’; one must keep one’s eyes on the twig
Oncaginess 171


--- PAGE 185 ---
from a distance. (Don’t wait until problems
arise before preparing to deal with them.)
1591. IgitóbábáṢàngólérí,gbígbẹníńgbẹ.
Whatever tree engages in a contest of threats
with Ṣango will suﬀer the fate of drying up.
(Never take on an adversary too tough for
you to handle.)
1592. Igúnnugúngb/oacutedotbelownsínú.
The vulture conceals a lot of wisdom in
itself. (Even a person who appears foolish
m a yb eq u i t ea s t u t e . )
1593. Ìgbàaraḿbẹláralàḿbùútà.
It is when there is a surfeit of ﬂesh on the
body that one cuts some of it for sale. (One
makes a gift only of one’s surplus.)
1594. Igbádojúdéòjọtiòṣónú,tinúigbá
nigbáńṣe.
That a calabash faces downward is no anti-
social sign; the calabash is only acting ac-
cording to its nature. (One should not read
evil intent into others’ innocent actions.)
1595. ÌgbàtíabáníkíÈgùnmájàníńy/ogravedotbelowbẹ.
It is only when one pleads with the Ègùn
person [from Porto Novo or Àjàṣ/eacutedotbelow in
present-day Benin Republic] that he draws
his knife. (Said of people who redouble
their eﬀorts belatedly, just when they are
supposed to break oﬀ.)
48
1596. Ìgbàtíabáperíàparòníńjáko.
Just as the talk turns to the partridge, it
shows up to raid the farm. (Said of a person
who plays into his or her adversary’s hand
just when the adversary most wants to injure
h i mo rh e r . )
48. The Ègùn serve the Yoruba as favorite butts of
jokes.
1597. Igbátóf/oacutedotbelowníńgbakasẹlétí;ìkòkòtóf/oacutedotbelow
níńgbaokùnl/oacutedotbelowrùn.
It is the broken calabash that has iron staples
driven into its edges; it is the cracked pot
t h a th a si t sn e c kt i e dw i t har o p e .( I ti st h e
person who makes trouble who is visited
with repercussions.)
1598. Ìgb/egravedotbelowhìnníńyéolókùúàdá.
It is only at the end that the person with
a blunt cutlass realizes his error. (Some-
times wisdom comes too late to salvage lost
opportunities. This is a variant of 1489.)
1599. Ìgbínńràjòóﬁlé/egravedotbelowṣẹrù.
The snail sets out on a journey and makes
a load of its house. (Said of people who are
overly possessive of their goods or turf.)
1600. Ìgbíntóńj/egravedotbelownímàf/ogravedotbelown,tíòkúròní
màf/ogravedotbelown,ewéàf/ogravedotbelownniwọnóﬁdìídele.
A snail that forages at the base of the Afri-
can breadfruit tree and never leaves the
base of the African breadfruit tree will be
taken home wrapped in the leaf of the Afri-
can breadfruit tree. (One should know
when to quit, or else one will wind up in
trouble.)
1601. Ìhàl/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowba/ogravedotbelowṣ/oacutedotbelowèèyànj/eacutedotbelow.
Empty boasts ruin a person’s reputation.
(One’s mouth should not be more powerful
than one’s arms.)
1602. Ìjẹǹjẹànádùnméhoro;ehorórebiìjẹ
ànákòd/egravedotbelowhìnb/ogravedotbelow.
Yesterday’s food ﬁnd so delighted the hare
that it went to the spot of yesterday’s feeding
and never returned. (Persistence in risky
ventures leads to disaster.)
1603. Ìjímèrètólóunòní-ísáfájá,ojúajáni
òìtí-ìto.
T h eb r o w nm o n k e yv o w si tw i l ln o tr u n
172 the good person


--- PAGE 186 ---
from a dog, only because the dog has not
caught a glimpse of it. (The coward may
boast as much as he or she wishes, until the
real test materializes.)
1604. Ijóàjójùníńmúkíokóeégúnyọjáde.
Unrestrained dancing is what causes the
masquerader’s penis to become exposed.
(One should exercise restraint in performing
even pleasurable activities.)
1605. Ìkánjúòunp/egravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelow,ọgbọọgba.
Haste and patience end up the same. (Great
haste oﬀers no advantage over patience.)
1606. Ìkekereńf/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowikúṣ/egravedotbelowrín.
Ikekere[a type of ﬁsh] is treating a deadly
thing as something to laugh about. (One
should not take serious or deadly matters
lightly.)
1607. Ìkóerukuèèw/ogravedotbelowIf/egravedotbelow;ajákìígbóníbòji
ẹkùn.
Carrying dust is taboo in Ifẹ; no dog dares
bark in the shadow of the leopard. (One
should not engage in forbidden or danger-
ous acts.)
1608. Ìkòkòńseṣuẹnìkanògb/oacutedotbelow;iṣúdénúodó
ariwóta.
Yams cook in a pot and nobody knows, but
when the yams get into the mortar, alarms
sound. (Matters disclosed only to prudent
people can be contained, but once they
leak to irresponsible persons, they become
broadcast.)
1609. Ìkókóọmọtótọw/oacutedotbelowbọeérúniyóm/ogravedotbelowbó
gbóná.
The newborn child who thrusts its hand into
ashes will ﬁnd out for itself if they are hot.
(Experience best teaches that one should
avoid dangerous ventures.)
1610. IkúńdẹD/egravedotbelowd/egravedotbelow,D/egravedotbelowd/egravedotbelowńdẹikú.
Death stalks Dẹdẹ, and Dẹdẹ stalks death.
49
(Said of a person whom people are after but
who does everything to become even more
vulnerable.)
1611. Ikúnńj/ogravedotbelowg/egravedotbelowd/egravedotbelowikúnńrèdí;ikúnòm/ogravedotbelowpé
ohuntódùnníńpani.
The squirrel is eating a banana, and the
squirrel is wagging its tail; the squirrel does
not know that it is what is sweet that kills.
(Overindulgence in good things can result in
serious problems.)
1612. Ìlaraàlàjùníḿmúnigbàj/eacutedotbelow,níḿmúni
ṣ/eacutedotbelowṣó.
Excessive envy of others causes one to take
on witching and makes one become a wiz-
ard. (Too much envy leads to antisocial
behavior.)
1613. IlénÌjèṣà-átińmúnálọsóko.
It is from the home that the Ìjèṣà person
takes ﬁre to the farm. (The wise person
assembles all the materials needed before
embarking on a venture.)
1614. Inákìíwọodòkórójúṣayé.
Fire does not enter into a stream and yet
retain the opportunity to live. (Whoever
ventures into dangerous situations deserves
the repercussions.)
1615. Ináòṣé-ébòmáṣọ.
Fire is not something one conceals under
one’s clothing. (One should not hide one’s
pressing problems but seek help.)
1616. Ìnàkíkìíránṣ/eacutedotbelowìjàs/eacutedotbelowkùn.
The baboon does not send an ultimatum to
49. Dẹis ‘‘stalk,’’ and the proverb plays on that word
by redoubling it as the name of the subject.
Oncaginess 173


--- PAGE 187 ---
the leopard. (People should not challenge
forces they are no match for.)
1617. Inúẹnilorúkọt íaósọọmọẹnińgbé.
It is inside oneself that the name one will
name one’s child resides. (One should not
broadcast one’s secrets to the whole world.)
1618. Inúureàníjù,ìfunraatèébúníḿmùwá
báni.
Too much good will toward others engen-
ders suspicion and attracts insults. (One can
be too good to others.)
1619. Ìpà/dotbelowk/oacutedotbelowlàńdàs/eacutedotbelowhìnkátódayangan
s/eacutedotbelownu.
One throws back the head ﬁrst before throw-
ing corn into the mouth. (One should not
put the cart before the horse.)
1620. Ìpàk/oacutedotbelowògb/oacutedotbelowṣùtì,ìp/egravedotbelowhìndàòmọy/egravedotbelowg/egravedotbelow
yíy/egravedotbelow.
The occiput does not recognize contempt;
a turned back does not see a disdainful
gesture. (The best response to insults is to
disregard them.)
1621. IsàtíòlójúAlalantoríńdẹ/eacutedotbelow,áḿb/ogravedotbelowǹtorí
àgbáikún.
Alalantori watches a hole without a visible
opening, how much more a squirrel’s bur-
r o w .( Ap e r s o nw h ow a t c h e sh i so rh e r
pennies is not likely to be careless with
dollars.)
1622. Isánniàḿmọolè;ìtàdógúnlàḿmọ
d/oacutedotbelowkọ-d/oacutedotbelowkọ.
The thief is exposed on the ninth day; the
woman who sleeps around is exposed on
the seventeenth day.
50 (Bad habits can be
50. People who had been caught stealing were ex-
posed to the public every nine days, and women who
had been caught in illicit relationships were exposed
every seventeenth day.
kept secret only so long; they are eventually
exposed.)
1623. Ìṣ/eacutedotbelowkìípani;ay/ogravedotbelowníńpani.
Misfortune does not kill; it is indulgent
happiness that kills. (Indulgence kills more
surely than want.)
1624. Iṣ/eacutedotbelowtíakòránni,òunìyàlójọńrìn.
A task one was not asked to do usually
travels in the company of punishment. (One
usually rues doing things one has no busi-
ness doing.)
1625. It/oacutedotbelowtíatusíl/egravedotbelowkìítúnpadàreẹnuẹni
m/oacutedotbelow.
The saliva one has spat out does not re-
turn to one’s mouth. (Once one has said
something, one cannot take it back.)
1626. Ìt/oacutedotbelowjúlóyẹab/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelow.
Safekeeping is what is appropriate for a
needle. (One should pay special attention to
matters that are very delicate.)
1627. Ìtọs/egravedotbelowlónìlú.
Close investigation keeps the aﬀairs of the
town in order. (Investigating matters well
before acting helps maintain harmony in a
group.)
1628. Ìwàòní,ẹj/oacutedotbelow/ogravedotbelowla.
Today’s behavior [causes] tomorrow’s prob-
lem. (The foolish behavior of the present
sows the seeds of diﬃculties for the future.)
1629. Ìyálàbábú;bíabúbabaìjàníńdà.
One would be wiser to insult [another per-
son’s] mother; if one insults the father, a
ﬁght would certainly ensue. (One should
measure one’s insults in order to avoid a
ﬁght; a father is valued well over a mother.)
1630. Iyánàm/oacutedotbelowdúnbáọb/egravedotbelow.
Next year’s pounded yam will still ﬁnd some
174 the good person


--- PAGE 188 ---
stew. (Whenever one’s good fortune comes
will be time enough to enjoy it.)
1631. Iyánmú,ìr/eacutedotbelowyó;ìyàn-ánr/ogravedotbelow,ìr/eacutedotbelowrù.
A famine rages and the grasshopper grows
fat; the famine subsides and the grasshopper
grows lean. (One should husband one’s re-
sources wisely and save for lean times in
t i m e so fp l e n t y . )
1632. Ìyàwólabásùn;ọkọlólóyún.
T h ew i f ew a st h eo n em a d el o v et o ,b u ti ti s
the husband who got pregnant. (The person
directly involved in a matter does not make
as much fuss as the person only tangentially
involved.)
1633. Ìyàwóòfọhùnóf/oacutedotbelowjú.
The bride does not speak, and she is also
blind. (Persons newly arrived in a place
or a company should shut their mouths
and open their eyes so that they learn the
customs before speaking.)
1634. Ìy/egravedotbelowwùkanṣoṣoòlègbaolókùnrùnméjì.
One single room will not do for two in-
valids. (Make adequate provisions for what-
ever one contemplates doing.)
J
1635. Jáewé/ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowt/oacutedotbelowkíoríjàeèrùn;jáwébọẹnu
kóoríjàodi.
Pluck a ﬁg leaf and be attacked by sol-
dier ants; put a leaf in your mouth and
be attacked by the deaf.
51 (Whoever takes
unnecessary risks will very likely face dan-
gerous consequences.)
51. Fig leaves are usually infested with soldier ants,
and the deaf are supposed to be insulted by anyone who
places a leaf in his or her mouth.
1636. Jayé-jayéﬁ/egravedotbelowl/egravedotbelowjayé;báyébájákòní
àmúso.
You reveler, do things in moderation; if
the string of life is cut, there is no retying
it. (One should observe moderation in all
things.)
1637. Jẹ/eacutedotbelowkíoyóoògùnnikòsunw/ogravedotbelown.
Eat-your-ﬁll-of-it medicine is no good.
(Anything without measure is dangerous.)
1638. J/eacutedotbelowkíọmọótiọw/oacutedotbelowìyá/egravedotbelowkúwá.
Let a child die at his or her own mother’s
hands. (One should not become involved in
the aﬀairs of a person intent on his or her
own ruin.)
K
1639. Kàkàkíósànláraìyáàj/eacutedotbelow,óﬁgbogbo
ọmọbíobìnrin;ẹyeńgoríẹyẹ.
Instead of mother witch’s aﬀairs improv-
ing, all the children she bears turn out to
be female; birds climb upon birds.
52 (De-
s p i t ea l le ﬀ o r t s ,t h ef o r t u n e so fap e r s o nm a y
continue to be bad.)
1640. Kàkàkíọmọób/egravedotbelowb/egravedotbelow/ogravedotbelowràn,òmírànnikò
ní-íṣem/oacutedotbelow.
Instead of apologizing for past misbehavior,
a child should rather guard against a repeti-
tion. (One should look to the future and not
dwell on past mistakes.)
1641. Kànìkétìtoríoókankùngb/eacutedotbelow.
Kànìké set ﬁre to the forest on account of a
single cowry shell. (It makes no sense to lose
control of oneself over triﬂing matters.)
53
52. Witches are believed to change into birds for
trips to their nocturnal covens or when they go on any
errand.
53. One cowry shell was the very smallest amount in
traditional Yoruba currency.
Oncaginess 175


--- PAGE 189 ---
1642. Kékeréejò,máfooreṣeé.
However small the snake, show it no mercy.
(Better to be safe than sorry.)
1643. Kékerélatińpaẹkànìrókò;bóbádàgbà
ọw/oacutedotbelowkìíkáam/oacutedotbelow.
One kills the roots of theìrókòtree while it
is still a sapling; when it matures it is out of
control. (One should take care of problems
before they become unmanageable.)
1644. Kékerénìmàlétińk/oacutedotbelowọmọ/egravedotbelowlóṣòó.
The Muslim teaches his children how to
squat from their youth.
54 (One should do
things in a timely manner.)
1645. Kèrègbètíkòl/oacutedotbelowrùnniyóòjúwebíàgb/egravedotbelow
ótisoòunk/oacutedotbelow.
The neckless gourd will itself indicate to the
farmer how to tie it up. (A diﬃcult person
prompts others as to the best way to handle
h i mo rh e r . )
1646. Kèrègbètóf/oacutedotbelowapadàl/eacutedotbelowhìnodò.
The broken gourd ceases plying the river.
(One should know when to stop pursuing
an adversary.)
1647. Kíabaàlèm/ogravedotbelowpéàjàpáṣeògbóni,w/oacutedotbelown
ní‘‘Káàb/ogravedotbelow’’;óní‘‘Awoàbí/ogravedotbelowgb/egravedotbelowrì?’’
Just so that people might know that Àjàpá
[the tortoise] has joined the secret society,
he was greeted, ‘‘Welcome’’; he responded,
‘‘Initiate or a novice?’’
55 (Said of those who
unnecessarily ﬂaunt their accomplishments.
Compare the next entry.)
1648. Kíabaàlèm/ogravedotbelowpéWòrúpaawó,w/oacutedotbelownní
‘‘Káàb/ogravedotbelow’’;óní‘‘Kẹnkẹnlàpò.’’
54. The reference is to the squatting posture Mus-
lims adopt during their ablutions.
55. The point is that one does not have to be an
initiate to oﬀer ordinary greetings to a person, and
initiates are not barred from responding to greetings
from noninitiates.
Just so that people might know that Woru
killed a partridge, he was greeted, ‘‘Wel-
come’’; he responded, ‘‘My hunting-bag is
full!’’ (Said of people gratuitously proclaim-
ing their accomplishments when no one is
interested. Compare the preceding entry.)
1649. Kíáfọnfèrè,kájámúsí-i,/ogravedotbelowkanyóò
gbél/egravedotbelow.
Between blowing a ﬂute and wriggling the
nose, one [action] will have to go. (No one
can hope to perform two conﬂicting activi-
ties at the same time.)
1650. Kíájìnnàséjòtíaòb/eacutedotbelowlórí;ikútíyó
panniajìnnàsíni.
One should stand far back from a snake that
has not been beheaded; the death that would
kill deserves a wide berth. (One should rec-
ognize dangerous situations and keep away
from them.)
1651. Kíáléakátájìnnàkátóbáadìẹwí.
One should ﬁrst chase the jackal away be-
fore reprimanding the chicken. (Get rid of
the immediate danger before reprimanding
those who caused it.)
1652. Kíamáaretábàkámáawòkè,k/oacutedotbelowj/oacutedotbelowtó
kanríkáwooyeìkatíyókù.
Let us keep on cutting tobacco leaves to
pieces while looking up, and let us see at
day’s end how many ﬁngers will be left.
(One should pay close attention when one is
engaged in dangerous work.)
1653. Kíáṣiṣ/eacutedotbelowkálówól/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowòdàbí-ikám/ogravedotbelow-ọ
ná.
To work and make a great deal of money
is nothing like knowing how to spend it.
(Riches are nothing if one does not know
how to use the wealth.)
1654. Kíátasíl/egravedotbelowkátas/eacutedotbelownu,kámáj/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowkítil/egravedotbelow
p/ogravedotbelowjutiinúigbálọ.
176 the good person


--- PAGE 190 ---
Let us place some on the ground and put
some in the mouth, but let what is placed
on the ground be more than what is left in
the calabash.
56 (One should do one’s duty by
others but not at the expense of providing
for one’s future.)
1655. Kíátaninápaagb/oacutedotbelownrán,káf/ogravedotbelowpá
gbọọrọpejò,kádìtùfùkáﬁgb/ogravedotbeloww/egravedotbelowl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow-ọ
Ṣàngó;níìṣojú-uMádiyànlagaráṣeńdáni.
Let us light a lamp to kill the wasp; let us use
a long stick to kill the snake; let us light a
torch to secure the help of Ṣango; when one
is face-to-face with Mádiyàn [enter-into-
no-dispute], one runs out of patience. (One
should adopt the appropriate solution for
every problem instead of engaging in long
disputes.)
1656. Kíátóm/ogravedotbelowpékíjìpákìíṣeawọ,ódi
ọdúnm/eacutedotbelowta.
Before one realizes that tough hand-woven
cloth is not leather, three years will have
passed. (It may take time, but one will even-
tually realize that no one is invulnerable to
misfortune.)
1657. Kìíb/oacutedotbelowl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowèèyànkób/oacutedotbelowsíl/egravedotbelow;ọw/oacutedotbelow
ẹlòmírànníḿb/oacutedotbelowsí.
It never slips out of a person’s hand and falls
to the ground; it always drops into some-
one else’s hand. (Other people always stand
ready to appropriate whatever one carelessly
lets slip through one’s ﬁngers.)
57
1658. Kìíṣeojú-uk/ogravedotbelowl/ogravedotbelowk/ogravedotbelowl/ogravedotbelowladì/eacutedotbelowtińj/egravedotbelow.
It is not in the presence of the fox that the
chicken forages nonchalantly. (One would
5 6 .I ti sc u s t o m a r yw h e no n ee a t st op l a c eal i t t l eo f
the food on the ground for the ancestors.
57. The expression Ób/oacutedotbelowl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow,‘‘It has slipped out of
the hands of,’’ expresses the sentiment that the person is
no longer worth bothering about.
be foolish to let down one’s guard when one
knows that danger is nearby.)
1659. Kìítánnígbáosùnkómábaàlàj/eacutedotbelow.
The calabash of camwood is never so empty
that it cannot soil white cloth. (Some people
or conditions are so unredeemable that no
matter what one does, they persist in being
evil. Compare 2183 and 4617.)
1660. Kìítètèyéoníbúr/eacutedotbelowdì;ódìgbàtóbádi
m/eacutedotbelowtak/oacutedotbelowb/ogravedotbelow.
The bread seller never learns in time, not
until his ware has become three a penny.
(People rarely learn to mend their ways until
they have suﬀered some reverses.)
1661. Kìítètèyéni:òweńláni.
One never learns in good time: that is a pro-
found proverb. (People tend always to learn
wisdom too late.)
1662. Kínióyáapárílórítóńmòòkùnlódò?
What got into the bald person that made
him or her swim underwater? (One should
not unnecessarily endanger oneself.)
58
1663. Kíniológìníńwátóﬁjónam/oacutedotbelowle?Ṣòkòtò
lóf/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowmúni,tàbíẹrùníńdì?
What was the cat doing that caused it to
be burnt in a house ﬁre? Was it looking
for its trousers or gathering its property?
(One should not put oneself in the path of
avoidable dangers.)
1664. Kíoníkálùkùrọraṣeé;ìfẹjúòbòòlèfa
aṣọya.
Let everybody take matters easy; the vagina
cannot tear a cloth by gaping at it. (Over-
excitement accomplishes little; it is far better
to take life easy.)
58. The proverb is based on the proposition that a
bald person underwater could be mistaken for some
aquatic animal.
Oncaginess 177


--- PAGE 191 ---
1665. Kìtìòm/oacutedotbelowlà;káṣiṣ/eacutedotbelowbíẹrúòdanǹkan.
Sudden pouncing does not capture great-
ness; working like a slave does not ensure
anything. (One does not guarantee greatness
for oneself by slaving.)
1666. Kòsíajátíkìígbó;àgbójùajálàńpèní
dìgbòlugi.
There is no dog that does not bark; exces-
sive barking by a dog is what makes people
say it is rabid. (No person is without a ﬂaw;
unbounded ﬂaws are what give people a bad
reputation. Compare 1565.)
1667. Kòsíìgbàtíadáaṣọtíaóríl/egravedotbelowﬁw/oacutedotbelow.
There is no time one makes a dress that
one lacks opportunities to wear it casually.
(There will always be time to enjoy what one
has worked for; one should not be unduly
impatient.)
1668. Kòsíohuntíńletíkìír/ogravedotbelow.
There is nothing that gets hard that does
not eventually become soft. (Every prob-
lem eventually becomes solved somehow.
Compare 1670.)
1669. Kòsíohuntísùúrù-úsètíkòjinná.
There is nothing that patience cooks that is
not well cooked. (Forbearance overcomes all
things.)
1670. Kòsíohuntólọsókètíkònípadàwá
síl/egravedotbelow.
There is nothing that goes up that will not
eventually come down. (One should not be
too impatient in anticipating the inevitable.
Compare 1668.)
1671. Kòsíohuntóyárapaẹnibí/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowàsọjù.
There is nothing that kills faster than talk-
ing too much. (One should govern one’s
mouth.)
1672. Kọkọ-kọkọòj/eacutedotbelowkámọẹnití/ogravedotbelowrànńdùn.
The woman who divorces husbands at the
least provocation does not allow one to
know when a matter really hurts. (Habitual
overreaction defuses real alarms.)
1673. K/oacutedotbelowk/oacutedotbelowr/oacutedotbelowàṣejù,il/egravedotbelowkùn/egravedotbelowt/eacutedotbelowlaﬁńṣí.
The key of excess is usually good only to
open the door of disgrace. (Excess brings
disgrace.)
1674. Kòkòròtój/egravedotbelowf/oacutedotbelowjàre/egravedotbelowf/oacutedotbelow;ìw/ogravedotbelownlewéko
ńdáramọ.
The insect that eats the vegetable wins the
case against the vegetable; leaves should ob-
serve moderation in their attractiveness. (A
person enticed to a crime is not as guilty as
the person who did the enticing.)
1675. Kùkùtékankìíf/oacutedotbelownilépol/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowmejì.
No one stump can break one’s oil pot twice.
(The same disaster should not befall a per-
son twice; one usually learns from experi-
ence.)
1676. Kùnyún,kùnwábíik/ogravedotbeloweèrà.H u r r y
forth and hurry back like a messenger ant.
(Said of people who are too restless to stay
still.)
L
1677. Làákàyèbabaìwà;bíonísùúrù,ohun
gbogboloní.
Common sense [is] the father of good char-
acter; whoever has patience has everything.
(Common sense and patience are the chief
qualities one must have. Compare 1582.)
1678. Làálàátóròkè,il/egravedotbelowníḿb/ogravedotbelow.
A worrisome problem that soars to the
heavens must eventually come down. (No
diﬃculty is without its end.)
1679. Labalábákìíbáwọnnájàẹl/eacutedotbelowgùn-ún;
aṣọ-ọ/egravedotbelowáfàya.
178 the good person


--- PAGE 192 ---
The butterﬂy does not join others at a mar-
ket of thorns; otherwise, its cloth will be
shredded.
59 (One should know one’s limi-
tations and act accordingly. Compare the
following entry.)
1680. Labalábátódìgbòl/egravedotbelowgún,aṣọ/egravedotbelowáfàya.
The butterﬂy that collides with a thorn will
have its cloth shredded. (One should be wise
enough to know one’s nemesis and avoid it.
Compare the preceding entry.)
1681. Lùmíp/eacutedotbelow,lùmíp/eacutedotbelowlàp/oacutedotbelownﬁńluọmọ/egravedotbelowpa.
It is by gentle but persistent beating that the
bachelor beats his child to death. (People
not used to caring for delicate articles soon
destroy them by mishandling.)
M
1682. Màájẹiṣu;màájẹèrú;ibiayolómọ.
Iw i l le a taw h o l ey a m ;Iw i l la l s oe a tas l i c e
of yam; satiation ends it all. (The greediest
appetite will not survive satiation.)
1683. Mábàáloògùn/egravedotbelowt/egravedotbelow.
Avoiding contact is the only medicine for
leprosy. (The best way out of trouble is not
to get into it in the ﬁrst place.)
60
1684. Mábàámiṣerétíkèrègbéﬁgbaokùn
l/oacutedotbelowrùn.
Do not ask me to play the sort of game the
gourd played and got a rope around its
neck. (Do not ask me to endanger myself
needlessly.)
1685. Máﬁiyánewùràgb/oacutedotbelownmil/oacutedotbelowb/egravedotbelowlọsóko
ẹgàn.
Do not eat up my stew with pounded yam
59. The cloth here refers to the butterﬂy’s wings.
60. The proverb is obviously from the days when
there was no cure for leprosy.
made from water yams before your trip to
the forest farm. (Do not use up my meager
resources on your way to a place of plenty.)
61
1686. ‘‘Máﬁokoòmidá/ogravedotbelownà,’’ọj/oacutedotbelowkanlàńk/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelow.
‘‘Do not cut a path through my farm’’ is a
protest one must make some day. (Whoever
does not take a stand to protest the violation
of his or her rights will continue to have
them violated.)
1687. ‘‘Máﬁtìrẹk/oacutedotbelowmil/oacutedotbelowrùn’’làńdáfún
apènààtiòwú.
‘‘Do not hang your trouble around my neck’’
is the oracle delivered to the shuttle and the
weft thread. (Do not involve me in your
problems as the weft thread got the shuttle
entangled.)
1688. Máfìkánjújayé,awoiléAlárá;máﬁ
wàà-wààjoyè,awoÒkèÌjerò;ayékanḿbẹ
l/eacutedotbelowhìn,ódùnbíẹníńláoyin.
Do not go impatiently about enjoying life:
the oracle delivered to the [royal] Alárá
household; do not rush into chieftaincy:
the oracle for the people of Òkè Ìjerò; there
comes another life in the future that is as
delicious as licking honey. (Whoever goes
about life with patience will reap untold
enjoyment from it.)
1689. Máṣejáfara;àfarafírílópaBíálà;ara
yíyálópaAbídogun.
Never be sluggish; sluggishness killed Bíálà,
but then overeagerness killed Abídogun.
(One should avoid extremes in all things.)
1690. Mábàj/eacutedotbelowòj/eacutedotbelowﬁaṣọ/egravedotbelowfún/ogravedotbelowlẹbora.
Mábàj/eacutedotbelow will never think of giving his cover-
61. Water yam (Dioscureaalata) is a poor make-
do for preparing pounded yams. The objection is that
the person addressed is eating up stew that is valuable
or scarce even though made with second-rate pounded
yams.
Oncaginess 179


--- PAGE 193 ---
ing cloth to a shiftless person to use. (Who-
ever values his or her property will not
entrust it to worthless people.)
62
1691. ‘‘Méè-wáyé-ẹj/oacutedotbelow’’fọmọ/egravedotbelowf/oacutedotbelowkọm/eacutedotbelowfà.
Méèwáyéẹj/oacutedotbelow [‘‘I did not come to live a life of
litigation’’] gave his daughter to six suitors
all at once. (If one wishes to avoid trouble,
one should avoid actions certain to result in
trouble.)
1692. Méjì-igb/egravedotbelowduòṣé-ésok/oacutedotbelow.
Two gb/egravedotbelowdudrums are too much to hang on
one’s shoulders. (Some propositions are
simply too much for anyone to tackle.)
N
1693. ‘‘Ngóòw/oacutedotbelowọkágbó’’/egravedotbelowhìn-inr/egravedotbelowniyóﬁ
lànà.
‘‘I will drag you through the bush’’ will have
to clear a path with his own back. (Whoever
is determined to make trouble for others
must be prepared to take some trouble
himself. Compare 3140 and 4819.)
1694. Nítoríaráilélaṣeńdáṣòkòtòaráoko
dára.
It is with the town dweller in mind that
one makes the bush person’s trousers well.
(One’s products are one’s advertisement,
regardless of whether the recipient knows
their quality. Compare 1699.)
1695. Nítorí-ikálèsimilaṣeńṣeàì-simi.
It is to be able to rest that one forgoes rest.
(One labors in the present to provide for
one’s future. Compare the following entry
and also 1698.)
1696. Nítorí-ikámájìyàlaṣeńyáMájìyà
l/oacutedotbelowfà.
62. The name Mábàj/eacutedotbelow means ‘‘Spoil not.’’
It is in order not to suﬀer that one pawns
Májìyà. (One should not suﬀer the misfor-
tune one has done everything to avoid.
63
Compare the preceding entry and also
1698.)
1697. Nítoríọj/oacutedotbelowtíóbámáadárànlaṣeńsọmọ
lórúkọ.
It is in anticipation of the day a child will get
into trouble that one gives it a name. (Each
individual has a name and is therefore an
independent agent responsible for his or her
own actions.)
1698. Nítorí/ogravedotbelowlalaṣeńṣònílóore.
It is with tomorrow in mind that we do fa-
vors for today. (What one sows determines
what one reaps. Compare 1695 and 1696.)
1699. Nítoríọlọgb/oacutedotbelownlaṣeńdá/egravedotbelowwùaṣiwèrè
kanl/egravedotbelow.
It is with the wise person in mind that one
makes the idiot’s garment full length. (One
who cares about his or her reputation will
perform obligations well even when the
recipient has no power over him or her.
Compare 1694.)
1700. Nǹkanm/eacutedotbelowtalakìípèníkékeré:akìí
peináníkékeré;akìípeìjàníkékeré;akìí
peàìsànníkékeré.
Three things one must never treat as of little
consequence: one must never treat ﬁre as
of little consequence; one must never treat
a quarrel as of little consequence; and one
must never treat an illness as of little conse-
quence. (Attend to every potential problem
early before it gets out of hand.)
63. The name Májìyà means ‘‘Suﬀer not.’’ The sug-
gestion is that the speaker has either taken Májìyà as
ap a w nt ow o r kf o rh i mo rh a ss e n tM á j ì y àa w a ya s
a pawn to perform the obligations the speaker had
taken on.
180 the good person


--- PAGE 194 ---
O
1701. Obáẹf/ogravedotbelownlábàtàoy/ogravedotbelowbẹsíi;omọibi
ẹf/ogravedotbelown-/oacutedotbelowntiwá?
You come upon the carcass of a buﬀalo in
the marshes and you pull out your butcher-
ing knife; do you know where the bush cow
came from? (People should not lay claim
to things whose procurement they know
nothing about.)
1702. Ódéoríakáhínàkàràádeegun.
In the mouth of a toothless person, bean
fritters become like bones. (To the shiftless
person even the easiest task is onerous.)
1703. Ódéọw/oacutedotbelowaláròób/ogravedotbelowódiníná.
When goods get into the hands of the re-
tailer, they become objects to haggle about.
(A shopkeeper is a diﬃcult person to obtain
a good bargain from. Compare 4702.)
1704. Okòríàkàṣùòńpatas/eacutedotbelowf/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelow.
You have not found corn loaf and yet you
are readying the vegetable stew. (Said of a
person too eagerly anticipating a favor that
might not materialize.)
1705. OlọsÍj/egravedotbelowbú/egravedotbelow/egravedotbelowkan,oruigbáàṣẹb/ogravedotbelowwálé.
You made only one trip to Ìjèbú and you
returned with a calabash of charms. (Said of
a person on whom the impact of an experi-
ence is all out of proportion.)
64
1706. Òḿbáobìnrinẹjàòńkanrím/oacutedotbelownú;o
máanàálóògùnni?
You quarrel with your wife and you put on
a baleful look; do you propose to use an evil
charm on her? (One should moderate one’s
response to annoyances.)
1707. ‘‘Óḿb/ogravedotbelow,óḿb/ogravedotbelow!’’/egravedotbeloww/ogravedotbelownlàńsosíl/egravedotbelowdèé.
‘‘Watch out, watch out, for here it comes!’’
64. The saying is obviously a reference to the
reputation of the Ìj/egravedotbelowbú for powerful charms.
For such a thing one would best prepare
a snare. (If the thought of something ﬁlls
one with apprehension, one should plot to
defeat it.)
1708. Óníibitítanp/eacutedotbelowp/eacutedotbelowńgbèjàẹyìnmọ.
There is a limit to the protection that black
stinging ants can oﬀer palm fruits. (There
is a limit to the help one can expect from
others.)
1709. Óníohuntíàgbájẹt/eacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelowikùnkótósọ
péèyíyóòun.
The elder ate something to line his stomach
before he said that what [little] was before
him would suﬃce to sate his hunger. (The
prudent person prepares himself or herself
for all eventualities. Compare the following.)
1710. Óníohuntíàgbájẹt/eacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelowikùnkótósọpé
ìyà-áyóòun.
The elder ate something to line his stom-
ach before he said his suﬀering was enough
food for him. (Even when one is prostrated
by grief, one does not ignore one’s need to
survive. Compare the preceding entry.)
1711. Óníohuntíìbòsírànnínúìjà.
Raising an alarm or calling for help goes
only so far to aid someone in a ﬁght. (No
m a t t e rw h a th e l pap e r s o ni nt r o u b l er e -
c e i v e s ,h eo rs h ew i l ls t i l lb ei nf o rs o m e
grief.)
1712. Óp/eacutedotbelowtítíaboyún,oṣùm/eacutedotbelowsàn-án.
The longest respite for the pregnant woman
is nine months. (Sooner rather than later,
the day will arrive when one must fulﬁll
one’s obligation or pay one’s debt.)
1713. Oríàgbéb/ogravedotbelowadìẹl/oacutedotbelowjàòńtageeresíi;ìba
ṣerereolúwar/egravedotbelowòj/eacutedotbelowtàá.
You see an adult chicken at the market and
you eagerly go for it; if it was of any value,
would the owner sell it? (People should
Oncaginess 181


--- PAGE 195 ---
think carefully before they assume obliga-
tions.)
1714. Osópamímop/oacutedotbelownnulá,obojúw/egravedotbelowhìn
mod/ogravedotbelowbál/egravedotbelow,otiw/oacutedotbelowb/ogravedotbelowgb/eacutedotbelow;of/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowdèmíni?
You foul the air in my face and I lick my
lips; you glance back and I prostrate myself
before you and yet you stretch your hand
into the bush; would you tie me up? (Said
by a long-suﬀering person who has quietly
taken a great deal of abuse, when the abuser
persists in his or her ill treatment.)
1715. Oṣíwóníléokòsan,odókoońṣíìkòkò
/ogravedotbelowg/egravedotbelowd/egravedotbelowwò,obímọosọ/oacutedotbelowníAdéṣínà;bíṣíṣíò
básìnl/eacutedotbelowhìnrẹ,okìísìnl/eacutedotbelowhìn-inṣíṣí?
You borrow money at home and you refuse
to repay it; you arrive on the farm and open
the pot containing plantains for inspec-
tion; and when you have a baby you name
it Adéṣínà; if ṣí-ṣídoes not leave you alone,
why don’t you leave it alone? (Obsession
with anything is bad.)
65
1716. Owàl/oacutedotbelowrùn/ogravedotbelowpẹòḿbáỌl/oacutedotbelowrunṣèlérí.
You are perched at the lofty neck of the palm
tree and you are bandying words with God.
(Said of a person who taunts more power-
ful adversaries even when he or she is in a
vulnerable position.)
1717. Obìnrinbẹẹrẹ:òṣìbẹẹrẹ.
Innumerable wives, innumerable prob-
l e m s .( W h o e v e ra d d sw i v e st ow i v e sa d d s
problems to problems.)
1718. ObìnrintógéginígbóOrò,ógéàgémọ.
A woman who cuts wood in the grove of
Orò has cut her last. (Whoever tempts a
fate that is known to strike unfailingly has
tempted her last.)
65. The proverb plays on the wordṣí,which can
mean ‘‘borrow’’ or ‘‘open.’’ The name Adéṣínà means
‘‘The crown (or king) opens the way.’’
1719. Òbò-óníìtìjúlómúòunsápam/oacutedotbelowsáb/eacutedotbelow
inú,ṣùgb/oacutedotbelownbíokóbádé,òunásínàfúnun.
The vagina says it is coyness that caused it
to hide below the belly, but if a penis shows
u p ,i tw i l lo p e nt h ew a yf o ri t .( M o d e s t yd o e s
not indicate a lack of ability or willingness
to act decisively.)
1720. Odídẹr/eacutedotbelowníwọnòlètíojúòunyanòun
m/oacutedotbelowẹbọ;bíw/oacutedotbelownbáńdÍfá,òunasáwọlé.
The parrot says no one will prescribe it as a
sacriﬁce in its presence; when it sees people
consulting the oracle, it will go hide in its
closet. (The smart person should always
distance himself or herself from disaster.)
1721. Odídẹr/eacutedotbelowńwoléhóró-hóróbíẹnipéyó
kòósílé;àgbìgbòn/ogravedotbeloww/ogravedotbelowrànńwohòigibíẹnipé
kòtib/egravedotbelowjáde.
The parrot eyes the cramped house as
though it would enter; the big-headed bird
ágbìgbòeyes the hole in the tree as though
it did not emerge from there. (Some people
fail to appreciate their assets, while others
envy them what they have.)
1722. Òfèèrèféòṣé-éf/egravedotbelowhíntì.
A chasm is nothing to lean on. (One should
not trust in emptiness.)
1723. Ogunàgb/oacutedotbelowt/eacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelowkìípaarọ.
A long-foreseen war does not kill a cripple.
(One must take advantage of foreknowledge
to protect oneself. Compare 2237.)
1724. Ohunàńjẹlàńtà;bíepoòyìnbók/oacutedotbelow.
What one eats is what one sells; but not
like kerosene. (One must be selective about
which of one’s just desserts one will ac-
cept.)
66
66. The proverb would make better sense if the two
balancing phrases were reversed: what one sells is what
one eats.
182 the good person


--- PAGE 196 ---
1725. Ohungbogbo,ìwọnlódùnmọ.
All things are good or pleasing only to a
point. (One should observe moderation in
all things.)
1726. Ohungbogbokìíp/eacutedotbelowjọolóhunlójú.
It is never long before a thing becomes in-
valuable to the owner. (A person always
attaches excessive value to his or her pos-
sessions. Trust a person to exaggerate their
value, especially when they are damaged or
coveted by others.)
1727. Ohungbogbokìítóolè.
Nothing ever satisﬁes a thief. (Greed and
covetousness are the marks of a thief.)
1728. Ohungbogbolàńdiyelé;ṣùgb/oacutedotbelownkòs/eacutedotbelowni
tómoyeara-ar/egravedotbelow;/egravedotbelowj/egravedotbelowòfojúrerejáde.
Everything has its price, but no one knows
his or her own worth; bloodshed never has
a good cause. (People should not devalue
their own lives by exposing themselves to
unnecessary danger.)
1729. Ohuntíabámáajẹakìíﬁrunmú.
One does not sniﬀ at what one will even-
tually eat anyway. (Don’t sneer at what you
will eventually embrace.)
1730. Ohuntíàbáṣep/egravedotbelows/egravedotbelow,kámáﬁṣeìkánjú;
bóp/eacutedotbelowtítíohungbogboatóọw/oacutedotbelowẹni.
That which one should do slowly and care-
fully one should not do in a hurry; sooner
or later everything comes within one’s reach.
(One should not shirk present responsibili-
ties in the pursuit of a distant goal.)
1731. Ohuntíabátẹjúm/oacutedotbelowkìíjóná.
W h a t e v e ro n et r a i n so n e ’ se y e su p o nw i l ln o t
get charred. (Matters to which one devotes
one’s undivided attention will not go awry.)
1732. Ohuntíaﬁ/egravedotbelows/ogravedotbelowmúkìíbàj/eacutedotbelow;ohuntía
fagbáramúníńninilára.
Whatever one handles gently will not be
ruined; it is what one attempts with force
that causes grief. (A gentle approach will ac-
c o m p l i s hm u c h ,w h e r e a saf o r c e f u la p p r o a c h
is likely to complicate matters.)
1733. Ohuntíafúnẹl/eacutedotbelowm/ogravedotbelowṣ/oacutedotbelowníńṣ/oacutedotbelow.
It is what one gives to a caretaker to look
after that he looks after. (One would best
focus only on the task assigned.)
1734. Ohuntíaòpéyó dẹrùníńdiṣ/eacutedotbelow.
It is always something one does not expect
to be a load that eventually becomes a huge
task. (Matters that one considers of little sig-
niﬁcance have a way of becoming insoluble
problems.)
1735. Ohuntíarílaﬁḿbọpáráẹni;bíigi
tínáḿbẹl/eacutedotbelownu/egravedotbelowk/oacutedotbelow.
One uses whatever one can ﬁnd to ﬁll gaps
in one’s roof; that does not apply to a faggot
spewing ﬂames. (Every seemingly sensible
generalization has exceptions.)
1736. Ohuntíajárítóﬁńgbóòtóèyítí
àgùntánﬁńṣèranwò.
That which a dog sees and barks at is noth-
ing compared to what the sheep contem-
plates in silence. (Some people make moun-
tains out of other people’s molehills.)
1737. Ohuntóbáwuolókùnrùnníńpaá.
Whatever the invalid craves is what spells his
or her death. (Whatever one is addicted to is
likely to prove one’s undoing.)
1738. Ohuntóbáwuọmọ-/oacutedotbelowjẹkìírunọmọ
nínú.
Whatever a child craves will not give him or
her a stomachache. (One is always willing to
endure sacriﬁces in order to have whatever
one craves.)
1739. Òjijìlàńr/oacutedotbelowmọl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowalákẹdun.
It is all of a sudden that one sees a baby in
Oncaginess 183


--- PAGE 197 ---
the arms of the colobus monkey. (One need
not announce ahead of time what feat one
will perform.)
1740. Òjòkankìíbánilábàkájìjàdù/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelow
sọ;bí/egravedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelownbásọtán,àbúròásọ.
When people are trapped in a hut by a
downpour, there is no sense in ﬁghting to
get a word into the discussion; after the
older person has spoken, the younger per-
son will speak. (When there is a surfeit of a
commodity, there is no sense in scrambling
t og e ts o m eo fi t . )
1741. Òjòńr/ogravedotbelow,Oròńké;at/oacutedotbelowkùnàlùgbètíò
láṣọméjìaṣeògèdè/mgravegbésùn.
The rain is falling, and the call of the secret
cult is sounding loudly outside; the shuttle
that lacks a change of clothing will sleep
naked. (If one has not made provisions for
rainy days, when they come one must suﬀer
the attendant hardship.)
1742. Ojúabẹòṣé-ép/oacutedotbelownlá.
The edge of a razor is not a thing to lick.
(Never engage in dangerous behavior.)
1743. Ojúàwòdìk/oacutedotbelowladìẹńreàpáta.
It is not in the watchful presence of a kite
that a chicken strolls to a rock. (One does
not engage in culpable activity in the pres-
ence of those charged with upholding disci-
pline. Compare 476.)
1744. Ojúìmàleòkúròl/oacutedotbelowtí,óbímọ/egravedotbelowósọ/oacutedotbelowní
Ìmórù-máhá-wá.
The Muslim cannot take his mind oﬀ liquor;
he has a child and named him Ìmórù máhá
wá.
67 (One’s addiction will always mani-
67. Ìmórù is the Yoruba rendering of the Arabic
name Umar; the Yoruba version in full would beÌmú
orù,meaning ‘‘the taking up of a wine cup’’; themáhá
wá[múaháwá ] attached at the end means ‘‘bring a
wine cup.’’
fest itself, however much one might hide
it. In a variant, the father names the child
Lèmámù.)
68
1745. Ojúkanlàdáńní.
A machete can have only one edge. (One
should be true to one calling or relationship
and not philander.)
1746. Ojúkannáàlèweńbágbà.
It is at the same place that the youth will
come up on the elder. (Sooner or later the
youth becomes an elder; patience is all.)
1747. ‘‘Ojúlàńgbóre/ogravedotbelownàÌbàdàn’’;óﬁogún
/ogravedotbelowk/eacutedotbelowgbàdí.
‘‘It takes a great deal of fortitude to set out
for Ibadan’’; he ties his money around his
waist.
69 (One should take the necessary pre-
cautions when one embarks on a dangerous
venture.)
1748. Ojúníńkánọkọlóbìnrin;àlèméjìájà
dandan.
The husband of the wife is only being un-
duly hasty; in time two concubines will
inevitably quarrel. (One should not be
overly anxious for results that are inevitable
anyway.)
1749. ‘‘Ojúòf/eacutedotbelowrakù’’tótaajá/egravedotbelowlókòó;óníbó
báj/eacutedotbelowb/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowniw/oacutedotbelownńtàáwọnamáatúnara-a
wọnrí.
‘‘We-might-see-each-other-again’’ sold his
dog for 20 cowries; he said if that is how
things are sold, they might well see each
other again. (If someone sells you an item at
68. Lèmámù is the Yoruba rendering of Imam;
here it suggests the nameLè-máa-mu,which means
‘‘Maintain the ability to drink.’’
69. The road to Ibadan is in this case taken to be
full of peril from ambushers. The person involved must
be brave indeed when the amount of money he ties
around his waist is considerable.
184 the good person


--- PAGE 198 ---
a ridiculously low price, you may expect to
see that person again soon.)
1750. Ojúológbòlèkútéògbọd/ogravedotbelowyan.
In the presence of the cat the mouse must
not saunter. (One cannot aﬀord to be care-
less in the presence of powerful enemies.)
1751. Ojútíkìíwoiná,tíkìíwoòòrùn;ojútí
ḿbánidal/eacutedotbelowk/oacutedotbelow.
Eyes that cannot stand lamplight and that
cannot stand sunlight are not eyes that will
last until the twilight of one’s life. (From
early indications, one can tell what friend-
ships or possessions will prove lasting.
Compare the next entry.)
1752. Ojútíyóòbánidal/eacutedotbelowkìítàár/ogravedotbelowṣepin.
The eyes that will last one until nighttime
will not start oozing matter at the dawn.
(Relationships that will last will not become
onerous right at the start. Compare the
preceding entry.)
1753. Ojúkòkòròbaba/ogravedotbelowkánjúà.
Covetousness [is] the father of envy. (The
envious and the covetous are similar.)
1754. Ojúlélóbáwá;/egravedotbelowbùrúlógbàl/oacutedotbelow;ódÍfá
fúnàlejòtíńf/eacutedotbelowobìnrinonílé.
He entered through the front door, but
it was through a hidden shortcut that he
sneaked away; the Ifá oracle was consulted
for the visitor who had an aﬀair with his
host’s wife.
70 (Whoever abuses hospitality
will depart in disgrace.)
1755. Òkèlègbò-ǹ-gbò-ófẹọmọlójútoto.
A huge morsel forces the child’s eyes wide
70. The formulation is typical of several in which a
leading statement describing a situation is followed by
the statement ÓdÍfáfún (‘‘He consulted the Ifá oracle
for’’) and then by a description of the behavior that
leads to the condition described at the opening.
open. (A person who bites oﬀ more than he
can chew will suﬀer in the process of trying.)
1756. Òkèlèkanníńpaàgbà.
Only one morsel kills an elder. (The smallest
thing, if not accorded the proper attention,
can be the death of even the most powerful
person.)
1757. Òketèbabaogun:bíaṣígun,olúkúlùkù
níńdiòketè-e/egravedotbelowl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow.
Large bundle, father of all wars: when pre-
paring for war, each person prepares his
bundle to take along. (For all tasks, adequate
preparations are mandatory.)
1758. Òkététób/oacutedotbelowìrù-úm/ogravedotbelowpéìpéjúọjàọrún
òunlósún.
The giant bush rat that has its tail stripped
b yat r a pk n o w st h a ti ti si t sv i s i tt ot h e
ﬁfth-day market that was postponed. (One
should take a near-disaster as a warning.)
1759. ÒkìpaajálaﬁḿbọÒgún.
It is a mature and sizable dog that one sac-
riﬁces to Ògún. (One should use material
proper for the occasion.)
1760. Òkòàbínújùkìípẹyẹ.
A stone thrown in anger does not kill a bird.
(Whatever one does in anger is likely to go
awry.)
1761. Okonigbégbéńgbé.
T h ef a r mi sw h e r egbégbébelongs.
71 (Every-
thing in its proper place.)
1762. Òkòtíẹy/eacutedotbelowbáríkìípẹyẹ.
Am i s s i l et h a tab i r ds e e sw i l ln o tk i l lt h e
bird. (If one sees danger approaching, one
will take precautions.)
71. See note 9 to 59 about the magic ofgbégbé
leaves.
Oncaginess 185


--- PAGE 199 ---
1763. Òkóbóòlèﬁalát/ogravedotbelowsíṣ/egravedotbelowsín.
The eunuch cannot make fun of the person
with gonorrhea. (A person who has a blem-
ish should not make fun of other people’s
blemishes.)
1764. Òkúàjànàkúlàńyọogbósí;taníj/eacutedotbelowyọ
agadaséerin?
It is a dead elephant one approaches with a
cutlass; who would dare draw a machete to
attack an elephant [that is alive]? (One dares
taunt a powerful adversary only when he has
been neutralized. This is a variant of 1488.)
1765. Okùnàgbòkìígbèédoríìwo.
It is never long before a ram’s tethering rope
slips to its horns. (Seemingly minor diﬃcul-
ties soon become unmanageable problems.)
1766. Olèkìígbégb/egravedotbelowdu.
No thief steals agb/egravedotbelowdudrum.
72 (One should
not attempt a risky business one has no hope
of pulling oﬀ. Compare 1130.)
1767. Olójútìlogunńpa.
It is those who worry about their image who
die in war. (Discretion and a thick skin are
sometimes much better than valor.)
1768. Olóògbéòj/eacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow;atannijẹbíorun.
The dozing person does not confess; noth-
ing deceives like sleep. (One can always feign
sleep to avoid engaging in discussions.)
1769. Olóòlàkìíkọàfín.
The facial scariﬁer does not scarify an
albino’s face. (There are some tasks that are
beyond the scope of experts.)
1770. Olórìṣágbéààjàsókè,w/oacutedotbelownníireni;bí
ireni,bíibini,wọnòm/ogravedotbelow.
The cult priest raises his divining wand and
7 2 .T h i sk i n do fd r u mi st o oh e f t yt oc a r r ya w a y ,
and where would the thief play it anyway?
the worshipers proclaim the omen good;
whether it is good or bad they do not know.
(It is foolhardy to presume to know what is
in other people’s minds.)
1771. Omilàńk/oacutedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowt/egravedotbelowkátótẹiyanrìn.
Water is the ﬁrst thing one’s foot encounters
before it encounters the sand. (One should
attend to the most urgent matters ﬁrst.)
1772. Òní,adìẹ/egravedotbelowmíṣìw/ogravedotbelow;/ogravedotbelowla,adìẹ/egravedotbelowmíṣìw/ogravedotbelow;
ọj/oacutedotbelowkanlaóòf/eacutedotbelowàìwọléadìẹkù.
Today, my chicken has gone to roost in the
wrong place; tomorrow, my chicken has
gone to roost in the wrong place; someday
soon the errant chicken will disappear per-
manently. (Little errors, if not checked, will
result in a major blunder. See the following
two entries.)
1773. Òní,babádákú;/ogravedotbelowla,babádáku;ọj/oacutedotbelowkan
niikúyóòdábaba.
One day, the patriarch collapsed; the next
day the patriarch collapsed; one day death
will throw the patriarch.
73 (Frequent close
calls with death will eventually lead to real
death. Compare the foregoing and following
entries.)
1774. Òní,ẹṣíndábaba;/ogravedotbelowla,ẹṣíndábaba;bí
babaòbáyéẹṣin-íngùn,ọj/oacutedotbelowkanlẹṣinóòdá
babapa.
One day, the horse threw the patriarch; the
next day the horse threw the patriarch; if
the patriarch does not stop riding the horse,
o n ed a yt h eh o r s ew i l lt h r o wh i mt oh i s
death. (One should take warning from little
disasters. See the foregoing two entries.)
1775. Onígbàjám/ogravedotbelowńfárífúnọ,òńfọw/oacutedotbelowkàn
ánwò;èwolómáakùfúnọníb/egravedotbelow.
73. Dákú,meaning ‘‘collapse’’ or ‘‘faint,’’ can also
be a contraction ofdáikú, meaning ‘‘throw death in a
wrestling match.’’
186 the good person


--- PAGE 200 ---
The hair scraper is scraping your head, and
you are feeling your scalp with your hand;
what do you expect will be left for you there?
(Once the end is clear, one should stop being
anxious about developments.)
1776. Oníléńreléw/oacutedotbelownníoǹdèńsá;oǹdèòsá,
ilé/egravedotbelowlólọ.
The homeowner heads for home and they
say the guard is on the run; the guard is not
on the run but merely heading home. (A
strategic retreat to regroup is not the same
as giving up the ﬁght.)
1777. Ònímónìí,ẹtújìnfìn;/ogravedotbelowlam/oacutedotbelowla,ẹtújìnfìn;
ẹranmìírànòsínígbóni?
Today, the antelope falls into a ditch; tomor-
row, the antelope falls into the ditch; is there
no other animal in the forest? (If the same
person gets into trouble every time, the per-
son needs to look to himself or herself. See
496.)
1778. Onínúfùfùníńwáoúnjẹfúnonínúw/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelow-
w/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelow.
Always it is the hot-tempered person that
ﬁnds food for the even-tempered person.
(The even-tempered person will always have
the advantage of the hot-tempered person.)
1779. Oníṣuníḿmọibiiṣúgbétasí.
The owner of the yams is the one who knows
where the mature yams are. (One should not
presume to know more about an aﬀair than
the person most intimately involved.)
1780. OnísùúrùníńṣeọkọọmọAláhúsá.
Only the patient person will win the daugh-
ter of the Hausa man. (Patience overcomes
all obstacles.)
1781. Oókanniw/oacutedotbelownńtaẹṣinl/oacutedotbelowrun;ẹnitíyólọ
òw/oacutedotbelown;ṣùgb/oacutedotbelownẹnitíyób/ogravedotbelowlókù.
Horses sell for only one cowrie in heaven;
there is no shortage of people who will go
there, but who ever returns from there? (Set-
ting out on dangerous ventures is the easiest
thing in the world, but their repercussions
prove to be unspeakable.)
1782. Oókan-ánsọnidahun;eéjì-ísọnidàpà.
One cowrie makes one a miser; two cowries
make one a spendthrift. (One who has little
seems a miser; one who has plenty becomes
careless with money.)
1783. Oorédiẹr/egravedotbelowlÁw/eacutedotbelow;àwọnigúnnugún
ṣoorew/oacutedotbelownpálórí.
A favor has turned to mud in Aw/eacutedotbelow town; the
vulture did a favor and went bald.
74 (One
should be careful about doing favors, lest
they come back to haunt one. Compare
1787.)
1784. Òòr/egravedotbelowníńṣ/eacutedotbelowgitíaóﬁwìí.
The porcupine itself will procure the wood
w i t hw h i c hi tw i l lb er o a s t e d .
75 (The incau-
tious person will provide the instrument for
his own undoing.)
1785. Oore/ogravedotbelowf/eacutedotbelowgùnjùwàásù.
The benediction is longer than the sermon.
(Said of people who are long-winded.)
1786. OoretíAgbéṣel/Oacutedotbelowfà,ódagbe.
The favor Agbe did in /Ogravedotbelowfà town reduced
him to begging. (One should learn from
Agbe’s example and be prudent in doing
favors.)
1787. Ooretíigúnnugúnṣetóﬁpálórí,tí
àkàláṣetóﬁyọg/egravedotbelowg/egravedotbelow,akìíṣeirú/egravedotbelow.
The sort of favor the vulture did by going
74. Aw/eacutedotbelow is a town near /Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow; the proverb refers to
an incident in which someone did a favor and reaped
disaster, as did the vulture; see note 72 to 1003 for the
story.
75. The porcupine’s quills are here likened to
kindling.
Oncaginess 187


--- PAGE 201 ---
bald, the sort of favor the ground hornbill
did by developing a goiter, one does not do
it. (One should not do favors that will result
in one’s own ruin. Compare 1326 and 1783.)
1788. Oorép/ogravedotbelow,afìkàsanán.
T h ef a v o rw a se x c e s s i v e ;i tw a sr e p a i dw i t h
wickedness. (Too great a favor provokes
enmity.)
1789. Oríejòòṣé-éhọimú.
The head of a snake is nothing to scratch
one’s nose with. (Never expose yourself to
unnecessary danger.)
1790. Orinníńṣíwájú/ogravedotbelowt/egravedotbelow.
Singing goes before plotting. (People about
to engage in a plot will ﬁrst spar to sound
one another out.)
1791. Orintíakọlánàá,t íaòsùn,t íaòwo,
akìítúnjíkọ/oacutedotbelowláàár/ogravedotbelow.
The song that we sang yesterday, without
sleep, without respite, we do not resume
singing in the morning. (Yesterday’s prob-
lems should be gone with yesterday.)
1792. Òrìṣàkékeréòṣé-éhánípárá.
A small god is not a thing to hang from the
rafters. (Some things may seem insigniﬁcant
yet must not be taken lightly.)
1793. Òròmọ-adìẹòmàwòdì;ìyá/egravedotbelowlómàṣá.
The young chick does not know the eagle;
it is its mother that knows the kite. (The
young are neither as experienced nor as
careful as the old.)
1794. Òṣéníńṣíwájúẹkún;àbám/ogravedotbelowníńgb/egravedotbelowhìn
/ogravedotbelowràn;gbogboàgbàìlúpé,wọnòríoògùn
àbám/ogravedotbelowṣe.
Hissing goes before crying, and had-one-
but-known comes at the conclusion of an
unfortunate matter; all the elders in the
town assembled, but they could ﬁnd no anti-
dote for had-we-but-known. (One can only
regret an error once it has been committed;
there is no undoing it.)
1795. Oúnjẹtíaójẹp/eacutedotbelow,akìíbuòkèlè-er/egravedotbelow
tóbi.
Food that one expects to last one does not
eat in huge handfuls. (Wise husbandry is the
medicine for lasting prosperity.)
1796. Owóòbáolègbé.
Money does not live with a thief. (A thief
and money are incompatible neighbors;
never trust a thief with money.)
1797. Òwúy/eacutedotbelow;a-ṣòro-ó-sọbí/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow.
Ah u s h - h u s hm a t t e r[ i s ]d i ﬃ c u l tt ou t t e ra s
s p e e c h .( T h em a t t e ru n d e rr e f e r e n c ei ss o
delicate it almost does not bear speech.)
1798. Oyúninú:akìíkàákúnọmọ-ọtil/egravedotbelow.
One does not count a pregnancy as a child
already delivered. (One should not treat
anything hoped for as though it were already
in hand.)
Ọ
1799. /Ogravedotbelowbánijàníḿmọìjagunẹni.
Only those we struggle with know our
strategies. (Only through close association
does one know other people.)
1800. /Ogravedotbelowbàràgbakù/mgravem/ogravedotbelow;ódÍfáfúna-láwìí-
ì-gb/oacutedotbelow.
/Ogravedotbelowbàrà received a cudgel blow; it consulted
the Ifá oracle for a disobedient child.
76 (The
obstinate person is asking for cudgel blows.)
1801. /Ogravedotbelowbàyéj/eacutedotbelow,tíńrugánganw/ogravedotbelowlú.
Purveyor of general disaster, who carries
76. /Ogravedotbelowbàrà is one of the subchapters of the Ifá corpus
(see note 3 to 22).
188 the good person


--- PAGE 202 ---
a gángandrum into town. (Apostrophe
addressed to troublemakers.)77
1802. ‘‘Ọb/egravedotbelowlọmúàgbà’’lópaonígbaǹso
Ògòdò.
‘‘Stew is the breast milk of adults’’ is what
killed the calabash repairer of Ògòdò town.
(Addiction kills.)
1803. /Ogravedotbelowbẹṣìlò-óḿbániṣeréaníkòmú,bíeré
bíeréóńpanil/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow.
The ṣìlòknife is playing with one, and one
says it is not sharp, just as in play it slashes
one’s hand. (Be careful not to underestimate
people who do not advertise themselves;
otherwise, they will have you prostrate
before you know what is happening.)
1804. Ọb/egravedotbelowtóosètíléﬁjónáwàásọ/oacutedotbelow.
The sort of stew you cooked and set the
house on ﬁre, you will explain. (You must
explain the unheard-of behavior that re-
s u l t e di ns u c had i s a s t e r . )
1805. /Ogravedotbelowbẹl/egravedotbelowwòbẹl/egravedotbelowwò;bíewúr/eacutedotbelowyóbàá
dùbúl/egravedotbelowabẹil/egravedotbelowib/egravedotbelowwò.
Inspector of the ground inspects the ground;
i fag o a tw i s h e st ol i ed o w n ,i tﬁ r s ti n s p e c t s
the ground. (Look well at the lay of the land
before engaging in any new venture.)
1806. /Ogravedotbelowbọniyopara/egravedotbelow.
T h em o n k e yw i l lb ei t so w nd e a t h .( F o o l s
will bring their own undoing upon them-
selves.)
78
1807. /Ogravedotbelowdarànẹyẹtíńmusàn.
Habitual criminal bird eats oranges. (Ad-
77. Apart from its noisiness, it is not clear why the
introduction of a gángandrum (the talking drum) into
town would be disastrous. One suggestion is that the
bearer carries the drum on his head to signal sorrow.
78. The Yoruba use the word/ogravedotbelowbọ,literally ‘‘mon-
key,’’ to designate fools.
dressed to any person whose actions are
likely to lead to some disaster.)
1808. /Ogravedotbelowdárayátíńﬁ/egravedotbelowgb/eacutedotbelownaigi.
Sprightly person hurls himself sidewise
against a tree. (Said of a too-cheerful person
whose excess energy is getting on others’
nerves.)
1809. Ọdẹa-ﬁ-fìlà-pa-erin:ọj/oacutedotbelowkanniòkìkí-i
r/egravedotbelowḿmọ.
The hunter who would kill elephants with
his cap: his fame lasts only one day. (Who-
ever promises to do the impossible enjoys
fame only as long as it takes for the impossi-
bility to be manifest.)
1810. /Ogravedotbelowgá-amáﬁẹs/egravedotbelowyíẹr/egravedotbelow,gbogboaraníńﬁ
yíi.
The never-soil-your-foot-with-mud dandy
eventually soils his whole body. (Too much
squeamishness is its own undoing.)
1811. /Ogravedotbelowgánìmàdòòṣéékòlójú.
A full-grown warthog is not something
to confront. (One would be wise to avoid
dangerous people.)
1812. /Ogravedotbelowg/egravedotbelowd/egravedotbelowḿbàj/eacutedotbelow;aníóńp/oacutedotbelown.
The banana is rotting; people say it is ripen-
ing. (It does not help to rationalize a brat’s
behavior with silly explanations.)
1813. /Ogravedotbelowg/ogravedotbelowńgbé/ogravedotbelowgọrù.
A fool carries a cudgel around. (A person
is cultivating the means to his or her own
ruin.)
1814. /Ogravedotbelowgbágbáwọl/egravedotbelow,ókuàtiyọ.
The iron stake has been driven into the
ground; the problem now is how to pull it
out. (Some ventures that are easy at the start
prove mightily intractable down the line.)
1815. Ọgb/oacutedotbelownàgb/oacutedotbelownjùníńpaòdù/ogravedotbelowyà.
It is excessive cunning that kills the mature
Oncaginess 189


--- PAGE 203 ---
cane rat. (Too much cleverness brings
trouble.)
1816. Ọgb/oacutedotbelownàgb/oacutedotbelownjùníńsọẹnidiwin;bí
oògúnbáp/ogravedotbelowláp/ogravedotbelowjùasọnidiwèrè;bóbìnrín
bágb/oacutedotbelownàgb/oacutedotbelownjù,péńpélaṣọọkọ/egravedotbelowḿmọ.
Excessive cleverness turns one into a phan-
tom; too much magical charm turns the
o w n e ri n t oa ni m b e c i l e ;i faw o m a ni st o o
cunning, her husband’s clothes wind up
ill-ﬁtting. (People who are too cunning
are headed for trouble; a man who mar-
ries too cunning a woman is headed for
trouble.)
1817. Ọgb/oacutedotbelownọdúnnìí,wèrè/egravedotbelowm/iacuteigrave.
Today’s wisdom, next year’s madness. (What
seems wise now may appear like lunacy in
hindsight.)
1818. Ọgb/oacutedotbelownp/egravedotbelowlú-usùúrùlaﬁḿmúerin
w/ogravedotbelowlú.
It is with cunning and patience that one
brings an elephant into town. (The most
diﬃcult tasks can be accomplished with
wisdom and patience.)
1819. Ọj/oacutedotbelowtíaóbàánù,gágálarańyáni.
The day one is destined to be lost one is
never able to contain one’s excitement.
(Disaster attends overenthusiasm.)
1820. Ọj/oacutedotbelowtíatoọkàaòtotièkútém/oacutedotbelowọ.
The day one arranged the corn in the gra-
nary, one did not think in terms of the rat.
(One hardly ever plans for trouble.)
1821. Ọj/oacutedotbelowtíàgb/egravedotbelowṣíṣe-ébádikíyèsíl/egravedotbelow,káṣíw/oacutedotbelow
okoríro.
The day farming entails being careful not
to hurt the soil, one should stop farming.
(If the basic condition for a trade is inter-
dicted, one should no longer engage in that
trade.)
1822. Ọj/oacutedotbelowtíelétutu-úbámáafò,ìjà/mgraveperekìí
rìn.
On the day the white ﬂying ants wish to
swarm, the worms that prey on them keep
still. (Only cunning will deliver one’s prey
into one’s hands.)
1823. /Ogravedotbelowkánjúwààgb/egravedotbelowtíńgbinòwúsóko
àkùr/ogravedotbelow.
[It is] an insatiable farmer who plants cotton
on a farm by the stream. (Greed some-
times makes people work against their own
interests.)
79
1824. /Ogravedotbelowkánjúwàbabaàrùn.
Covetousness, father of all diseases. (There is
no disease like greed.)
1825. /Ogravedotbelowkánjúwàbabaolè;àwòròǹṣoṣò-ówo
ohunolóhunmáṣ/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowjú.
Covetousness, father of thievery; bug-eyed
greedy person stares at another person’s
property without blinking. (Covetousness
leads to stealing.)
1826. /Ogravedotbelowkánjúwàèèyàn-ándéàwùjọ,ówòkè
yàn-yàn-àn-yàn.
The covetous person arrives in a gathering,
and his eyes dart about restlessly. (The cov-
etous person is always on the lookout for
something.)
1827. /Ogravedotbelowkánjúwàkìímu/egravedotbelowj/egravedotbelowẹlòmíràn;/egravedotbelowj/egravedotbelowara
/egravedotbelownáàníḿmu.
The greedy person does not drink other
people’s blood; he drinks only his own.
(Greed recoils on the greedy.)
1828. /Ogravedotbelowkánjúwàòṣééﬁwánǹkan.
Impatient envy is not a good state in which
79. Cotton will not thrive in too wet a condition,
but the avaricious farmer thinks the more moisture, the
better the yield.
190 the good person


--- PAGE 204 ---
to seek anything. (One should be patient in
seeking one’s fortune.)
1829. /Ogravedotbelowkánjúwàológbòtójókòós/eacutedotbelownu/ogravedotbelownà:ṣé
ekuelékulóf/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowpajẹ?
The insatiable cat that sits in the doorway:
does it want to kill cats in another house?
( G r e e d yp e o p l ea r en e v e rs a t i s ﬁ e dw i t hw h a t
they have.)
80
1830. /OgravedotbelowkánjúwàOníṣàngóníńsọọmọ-ọr/egravedotbelowní
Bámgbóṣé;ìw/ogravedotbelownoṣétíalègbélàńgbé.
It is an insatiable Ṣango priest who names
his son Bámgbóṣé; one should procure for
oneself a ritual rod one can carry.
81 (Avoid
avarice.)
1831. /Ogravedotbelowkánjúwàp/egravedotbelowlúolè,déédéniw/oacutedotbelownj/eacutedotbelow.
Covetousness and thievery are similar to
each other. (Covetousness is as bad as steal-
ing.)
1832. /Ogravedotbelowkánjúwà-ábuòkèlè,ojù/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowlami.
A greedy person takes a morsel of food, and
t e a r sg u s hf r o mh i se y e s .( G r e e dh a si t sp a i n s
also.)
82
1833. /Ogravedotbelowkánjúwà-ápínẹgbàafànínúẹgbàaje;
óníkíw/oacutedotbelownpínẹgbàákantókù,bóyáigbiwó
túnlèkanòun.
The insatiable person receives 12,000 cow-
ries out of 14,000; he asks that the remain-
ing 2,000 be shared, [so] perhaps 200 of
them will come to him. (Greed knows no
limits.)
80. The cat in the doorway is not paying attention
to the mice inside the house; its attention is directed
outside.
81. Oṣéis the ritual rod that Ṣango priests carry; it
is reputed to have the power to invoke lightning. The
name Bámgbóṣé means ‘‘Help me carry a ritual rod.’’
82. The morsel is evidently too big for him to
swallow without pain or eﬀort.
1834. /Ogravedotbelowk/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowgoríìrókò,ojúọd/eacutedotbelowdá.
The squirrel scrambles up theìrókòtree; the
ﬁre in the hunter’s eyes is doused. (When
aﬀairs have gone out of one’s control, one
should cease worrying.)
83
1835. Ọk/ogravedotbelowńjò,ọk/ogravedotbelowńjò!Ìgbàtóbárì,kòparí
ná?
The boat is leaking, the boat is leaking! After
it sinks, won’t matters end? (There is little
one can do about a problem whose outcome
is inevitable.)
1836. /Ogravedotbelowk/ogravedotbelow/ogravedotbelowkanlọw/ogravedotbelowńyọ.
Broomstraws drop oﬀ one by one. (Huge
problems usually build up gradually.)
1837. Ọkùnrintóf/eacutedotbelowòjòwúméjìsíléòr/eacutedotbelowniﬁ
ṣ/oacutedotbelowlé.
A man who marries two jealous women
has no one to tend his home in his absence.
(Jealousy is a terrible quality in a spouse.)
1838. /Ogravedotbelowkùn-únm/ogravedotbelownàt/eacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelowkójú/egravedotbelowtóf/oacutedotbelow.
The millipede knew the way before it went
blind. (The old knew how to live before they
became frail.)
1839. ‘‘/Ogravedotbelowlanimòńlọ,’’tíńﬁkotoṣeàmù.
‘‘Tomorrow I take my leave’’ uses a shallow
pot as his water jar. (Shortsighted people
make little provision for the future.)
1840. ‘‘Ọláòj/eacutedotbelowkínríran’’;ọmọÈwíAdótí
ńtannárìnl/oacutedotbelowsàn-án.
‘‘Greatness won’t let me see’’: the son of the
Èwí, king of Adó, lights a lamp to walk with
in broad daylight. (One should not allow
one’s good fortune to go to one’s head.)
1841. /Ogravedotbelowlàjàníńﬁorígbọgb/eacutedotbelow.
It is the person who separates two ﬁghters
83. It is taboo for hunters to shoot at anìrókòtree.
Oncaginess 191


--- PAGE 205 ---
who gets gashed on the head. (The peace-
maker is likely to suﬀer for his pains.)
1842. Ọl/oacutedotbelowdẹkìítoríat/eacutedotbelowgùnyìnbọn.
A hunter does not ﬁre oﬀ his gun because
of the wind. (One should be deliberate and
attentive in pursuing one’s profession.)
1843. Ọl/oacutedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelownbẹẹrẹ-/eacutedotbelowpèteìgárá.
The excessively cunning person is trying his
hand at stealing. (Too much cunning is like
thievery.)
1844. Ọmọadì/eacutedotbelowfò,aní‘‘Ẹránlọàk/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelow!’’
A chick ﬂies up, and we exclaim, ‘‘A game
animal has escaped, alas!’’ (Do not blow
matters out of all credible proportion.)
1845. Ọmọinúayòòṣéébábínú.
The seeds in an ayògame are not things to
be angry at. (One should not blame one’s
misfortune on innocent people.)
1846. Ọmọorogúnẹ-/eacutedotbelowkú,oníẹníríẹl/oacutedotbelowrunò
pur/oacutedotbelow;bítì/eacutedotbelowbákúńk/oacutedotbelow?
The child of your rival wife dies, and you say
the person who saw you in heaven did not
lie; what if your own child dies? (One should
not go overboard in sharing other people’s
sorrow.)
1847. Ọmọdébúìrókò,óbojúw/egravedotbelowhìn;òòj/oacutedotbelowní
ńjà?
A child insults an ìrókòtree and glances
back apprehensively; does it take revenge
immediately?
84 (The fact that there has been
no repercussion for a misdeed does not
mean one is home free; repercussions may
be delayed. Compare 658.)
84. The ìrókòtree is believed to house powerful
spirits; anyone who insults it is foolhardy.
1848. Ọmọdéjítiojúorunwá,óní‘‘Àkàrà
kéjìkéjì’’;w/oacutedotbelowntiḿmúuk/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowkótójí,ìkáká
ník/egravedotbelow?
Ac h i l dw a k e sf r o ms l e e pa n ds a y si nc o d e ,
‘‘Bean fritters two-by-two.’’ Had the others
been taking them thus before he woke,
would any have been left?
85 (Never misuse
what those before you made available to you
by their wise husbandry. Compare 1089.)
1849. Ọmọríodópanil/oacutedotbelowt/ogravedotbelow,kátówípékákùn
únlóògùn.
A pestle is a lethal weapon in itself, let alone
after rubbing poison on it. (Overkill is
pointless; if a situation is dangerous enough
as it is, one should not aggravate it by acting
provocatively.)
1850. /Ogravedotbelowmùtíòmuagbèjá.
The drunkard does not drink the gourd
through. (There is a limit to the pleasure a
drunk can get from a bottle.)
1851. /Ogravedotbelownà/egravedotbelowbùrúdáọw/oacutedotbelowolúwa-ar/egravedotbelowtẹl/egravedotbelow.
A shortcut causes a person to land on his
palms. (There are perils to taking paths one
is not familiar with.)
1852. /Ogravedotbelownàìgbàl/egravedotbelowamáajás/oacutedotbelowrun.
The road to the secret grove of theegúngún
cult may lead to heaven. (People who do the
forbidden may pay dearly for their temerity.)
1853. /Ogravedotbelownàlàńṣìm/ogravedotbelownà;bíaòbáṣubú,akìí
mọẹrù-údì.
It is by missing one’s way that one learns the
way; if one does not fall, one does not learn
85. The child’s real meaning isÀkàràméjì-méjì
(‘‘Bean fritters two at a time’’), and the rejoinder is
Wọntiḿmub/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowkótójíìbábáníl/egravedotbelow?(‘‘Had people
been grabbing them like that, would he have found any
left?’’). The child is using the sort of scrambled speech
known as ẹnà.
192 the good person


--- PAGE 206 ---
h o wt ot i eo n e ’ sl o a dp r o p e r l y .86 (Errors and
failures are opportunities to learn.)
1854. /Ogravedotbelownàniyómùúolè;ahéréniyómùú
olóko.
The road will eventually expose the thief; the
farm hut will eventually expose the farmer.
(When the habitual wrongdoer comes to
grief, it will be in the course of his wrong-
doing.)
1855. /Ogravedotbelownà/ogravedotbelowfun,/ogravedotbelownà/ogravedotbelowrun:méjèèjìbákannáà
niw/oacutedotbelownrí.
The pathway of the throat, the pathway to
heaven: the two are very much alike. (One’s
throat may lead to one’s death.)
1856. /Ogravedotbelowpáàgbéléjìká,a-t/egravedotbelowhìn-lójú.
The walking stick that is carried on the
shoulder has its eye pointed backward. (Said
of people who pay no attention to their
future.)
1857. /Ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowoògùnníńruọmọgàle-gàle.
It is a great deal of medicine that possesses a
child and robs it of all self-control. (A per-
son who lacks moderation is like someone
overpowered by bad medicine.)
1858. /Ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowlejòḿbùjẹ,tíàńwípéil/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowrorò?
Is it because a snake is biting a toad that one
says the earth portends disaster? (Do not
make too much of insigniﬁcant events.)
1859. /Ogravedotbelowrànkìíy/egravedotbelowlóríalábaun.
The responsibility for trouble never fails
to fall on the head of the tortoise. (Said
of people who are invariably the source of
problems.)
87
86. The second part is used as a proverb by itself.
87. This proverb is based on the fact thatalábaun
(or àjàpá) the Tortoise is the Yoruba trickster ﬁgure.
1860. /Ogravedotbelowrànńlá-ńláníḿbáàpá;/ogravedotbelowrànṣ/eacutedotbelowkú-
ṣ/eacutedotbelowkúníḿbáoṣè.
Only huge problems befall the mahogany-
bean tree; only minor problems befall the
baobab tree. (Diﬀerent people have diﬀerent
levels of vulnerability.)
1861. /Ogravedotbelowrànòdungb/ogravedotbelow/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow;adáaláàár/ogravedotbelow,óyọ
lál/eacutedotbelow.
Problems have hardly any eﬀect at all on the
pumpkin shoot; broken oﬀ in the morning,
it reappears the following night. (Said of
people who are unimpressed by correction
or punishment.)
1862. /Ogravedotbelowràn/ogravedotbelowg/egravedotbelowd/egravedotbelowòtóohuntíàńyọàdásí.
The problem posed by the banana tree is
nothing that calls for a machete. (Do not
make too much of a minor crisis.)
88
1863. /Ogravedotbelowrànọkà-áníìba;ayéníòṣùw/ogravedotbelown.
Am a t t e rp e r t a i n i n gt oc o r nh a sal i m i t ;l i f e
has its measure. (To everything there is a
proper limit.)
1864. /Ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowlọmọetíńjẹ.
Words are what the child of the ear eats.
(People who misbehave must endure tongue
lashing.)
89
1865. /Ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowòp/ogravedotbelow,àkàwé-er/egravedotbelowlóp/ogravedotbelow.
The matter in question is not overwhelm-
ing; it is the elaboration of it that is almost
forbidding. (Creating a problem is easy;
explaining it is not quite as easy.)
1866. /Ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowpúp/ogravedotbelowòkúnagb/ogravedotbelown;ir/oacutedotbelowníḿmúwá.
A lot of words will not ﬁll a basket; they
will only lead to lies. (Brevity is wise in
discussions; wordiness leads to invention.)
88. The trunk of the banana plant is so soft that it
does not take much eﬀort to cut it down.
89. Ọmọetí, literally ‘‘the child of the ear,’’ refers
here to the inner ear.
Oncaginess 193


--- PAGE 207 ---
1867. /Ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowtíadìnígbòdògì:bodéwéekókòyó
fàya.
Am a t t e rt h a ti sw r a p p e di ngbòdògìleaves
w i l l ,i fw r a p p e di nc o c o - y a ml e a v e s ,r i p
them to tatters. (If delicate matters are
handled carelessly, the result will be the
opposite of what was desired.)
90
1868. /Ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowtíòníohùnfíf/ogravedotbelow,dídák/eacutedotbelowlóyẹ/eacutedotbelow.
A matter that does not have a means to
voice itself had better be silent. (Matters
that should not be mentioned should be left
unbroached.)
1869. /Ogravedotbelowṣ/oacutedotbelowoníbùjéòpéisán;/ogravedotbelowṣ/oacutedotbelowonínàbìòju
ọdúnlọ.
The beauty bestowed by tattooing with the
juice of the bùjéplant does not last nine
days; a prostitute’s beauty does not last more
than a year. (Fast living plays havoc with
people’s looks.)
1870. /Ogravedotbelowt/ogravedotbelow/ogravedotbelowt/ogravedotbelowlàńtẹẹr/egravedotbelow;/ogravedotbelowt/ogravedotbelow/ogravedotbelowt/ogravedotbelowlàńtẹeruku.
One step after the other is the manner to
walk through mire; one step after the other
is how one walks through dust. (With great
care, one can extricate oneself safely from
any problem. Compare 1189.)
1871. /Ogravedotbeloww/oacutedotbelownyúnlé,/ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowyúnjà.
Expensive commodities come to the home;
inexpensive ones go to the market. (If one
overprices one’s goods, one will ﬁnd no
takers.)
1872. Ọw/oacutedotbelow-ọbabalẹwò,ẹòwo ẹs/egravedotbelow-ẹbaba.
Your eyes are on the patriarch’s hand, but
they ignore his feet.
91 (People who do not
90. Gbòdògìleaves are used for wrapping kola nuts
and are therefore well regarded; coco-yam leaves are for
all-purpose wrapping.
91. The underlying story is that a man entertain-
ing a guest sent his son out to buy a goat to kill for
the guest’s dinner. He indicated the size of the goat by
pay attention to details are likely to go
astray.)
P
1873. Pala-pálàkìíṣeẹranàjẹgbé;ẹṣáàmáa
muàgúnmu.
Stockﬁsh is not a meat one eats without
repercussions; keep on drinking herbal
remedies. (One pays for one’s indiscretions
by and by.)
1874. Pápátóníòunójòówọodò,/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowlóf/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelow
gb/oacutedotbelow.
The grassland that proposes to burn into the
river is asking for a lecture.
92 (Abstain from
actions that will provoke others’ ire.)
1875. Param/oacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowkọ/ogravedotbelowrànàfojúdi.
T h es e r p e n tr e f u s e st ob et r i ﬂ e dw i t h .( C e r -
tain situations are not to be taken lightly,
lest they result in painful repercussions.)
1876. P/egravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelow-p/egravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowlejò-óﬁńgunàgbọn.
It is very carefully and patiently that a snake
climbs the coconut palm. (Dangerous and
diﬃcult tasks should be attempted with care
and patience.)
1877. P/egravedotbelowt/egravedotbelowp/eacutedotbelowt/egravedotbelow/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow,a-ta-síni-lára-má-w/ogravedotbelown-/oacutedotbelown.
The soiling caused by speech stains a per-
son and cannot be removed. (Injury once
spoken cannot be recalled. Compare 550.)
1878. Píp/eacutedotbelowniyóp/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelow,agb/ogravedotbelownáboadìẹ.
It may take long, but the coop will eventu-
holding his hand at the midpoint of his thigh, but at the
same time he lifted his other foot just slightly above the
ground. The son returned with a rather small goat, and
the guest wondered why he did not pay attention to his
father’s instructions. The son replied with proverb.
92. If the bush were to burn into the river, there
would be a hissing sound when the water put the ﬁre
out.
194 the good person


--- PAGE 208 ---
ally cover the chicken. (One may put it oﬀ a
while, but one cannot avoid one’s fate. Com-
pare 1878–84, all with the same beginning.)
1879. Píp/eacutedotbelowniyóp/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelow,akólòlòápebaba.
It may take long, but the stammerer will
eventually manage to say ‘‘Papa.’’ (With
perseverance the most diﬃcult task will be
accomplished.)
1880. Píp/eacutedotbelowniyóp/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelow,ak/ogravedotbelowpẹyówàásíl/egravedotbelow.
It may take a while, but the palm-wine
tapster will descend from atop the palm
tree. (With patience, what one desires will
eventually happen.)
1881. Píp/eacutedotbelowniyóp/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelow,amòòkùnyójàádenínú
odò.
It may take a while, but the underwater
swimmer will eventually surface. (If one
is patient, what is bound to happen will
eventually happen.)
1882. Píp/eacutedotbelowniyóp/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelow,èkéòmúrá.
It may take a while, but the deceitful per-
son will not be undiscovered. (Truth will
unfailingly triumph in the end.)
1883. Píp/eacutedotbelowniyóp/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelow,ẹnílọsódòáb/ogravedotbelowwálé.
It may take a while, but the person who
went to the stream will return home. (There
is no journey that does not end sometime.)
1884. Píp/eacutedotbelowniyóp/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelow,/Ogravedotbelowrúnmìlàyójẹàgbàdo
dandan.
It may take a while, but /Ogravedotbelowrúnmìlà will surely
eat corn. (What one deserves will unfailingly
come one’s way in the end.)
R
1885. Ròókóotóṣeé;ósànjukóoṣékóotó
ròó.
Think it through before you do it; that is
better than doing it before you think it
through. (Plan ahead.)
1886. Rọradì,kálèbáọsá.
Pack judiciously that we may accompany
you while you escape. (A person who wants
other people’s help must lighten his or her
baggage.)
S
1887. Sàábíolóògùn-úntiwí.
Invoke it exactly as the maker of the charm
instructed. (Always follow instructions, and
do not presume to know better than your
instructor.)
1888. Sùúrùloògùnayé.
Patience is the talisman for living. (Patience
solves all problems.)
1889. Sùúrùòlópin.
There is no end to the need for patience.
(One must never tire of exercising patience.)
1890. Sùúrù-úlérè.
Patience has its proﬁts. (Patience is a useful
quality to cultivate.)
Ṣ
1891. Ṣàǹgbákóró,aníkòróore,Ṣàǹgbàkù-ú
gbèél/eacutedotbelows/egravedotbelow.
Ṣàǹgbákó makes a sound and we say the
sound is foul, and then Ṣàǹgbàkù lends its
voice in its support. (Do not choose to do
things that others before you have been
condemned for doing.)
1892. Ṣe-ká-rí-mi,alájátóso/egravedotbelowgim/oacutedotbelowrùn.
Exhibitionist: a dog owner who ties a sheep’s
mane around his own neck. (Do not go to
Oncaginess 195


--- PAGE 209 ---
too great lengths to call people’s attention to
yourself.)93
1893. ‘‘Ṣékínfìdíhẹ?’’làfòm/oacutedotbelowﬁńdionílé.
‘‘May I perch here awhile?’’ is the ruse by
which the climber-parasite becomes a per-
manent resident. (Give people an inch, and
they are likely to take several miles.)
1894. Ṣe-ǹ-ṣedìw/ogravedotbelowfà,bóṣeéyódẹrú-uwọn.
The habit that made a person a pawn, if the
person persists in it, will make him or her a
slave. (One should desist from pursuits that
have proved unproﬁtable.)
1895. Ṣe-ǹ-ṣeewúr/eacutedotbelowlàgùntànńﬁyèsí.
The habit of the goat is what the sheep pays
attention to. (One would be wise to learn
from the behavior and plight of fools.)
T
1896. ‘‘Taásíi’’kìíbániwáọfà.
‘‘Shoot at it’’ does not help one ﬁnd arrows.
(People are ever eager to goad one to action
but never to help one carry out the task.)
1897. TaníránAb/eacutedotbelowlùwọọk/ogravedotbelow,tóníọk/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowri
òun?
Who sent Ab/eacutedotbelowlu into a boat, as a result
o fw h i c ha c t i o nh es a y sh ew a sd r o w n e d ?
(People who get into trouble by their own
actions should complain to no one.)
1898. ‘‘Tànálàńjàlélórí’’lópaBaál/egravedotbelowẹ
Kòm/ogravedotbelowkan.
‘ ‘ I ti sy e s t e r d a y ’ sm a t t e rt h a tw ea r eﬁ g h t i n g
over’’ is what killed Chief Know-Nothing.
(It is wise to let the past alone.)
1899. Tantabùlù,aṣòróów/ogravedotbelowbí/egravedotbelowwùàṣejù.
An unbecoming thing is as unpleasant to
93. /Egravedotbelowgiis a ram’s mane used as an ornamental collar
around a dog’s neck.
wear as the garment of disgrace. (Disgrace is
not a pleasant thing to live with.)
1900. Tìjàtìjàníńṣeará/Ogravedotbelowp/oacutedotbelowndá.
Incessant proneness to ﬁghting is the aﬄic-
tion of /Ogravedotbelowp/oacutedotbelowndá people. (Said of people who
are always out for a ﬁght.)
1901. T/ogravedotbelowsánt/ogravedotbelowsánníńp/oacutedotbelownìtal/egravedotbelowlójú;bíl/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowbá
ṣúyódiolóńjẹ.
It is the persistence of daylight that imposes
suﬀering on the mud-ﬂoor worm; when
night falls, it will ﬁnd food. (Patience will
bring what one lacks.)
W
1902. Wàràòsílónìí,wàrà-áwàl/oacutedotbelowla.
No cheese today, but there will be cheese
t o m o r r o w .( T o d a y ’ sw a n tw i l lb ef o l l o w e db y
tomorrow’s plenty.)
1903. W/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbeloww/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelownikánńjẹlé.
Slowly, slowly is the manner in which ter-
mites consume a house. (Inconspicuous and
imperceptible problems in time become
huge disasters.)
1904. Wíwò-ótóìran.
Watching is enough for a spectacle. (One
would do well just to watch spectacles and
avoid becoming part of them.)
1905. ‘‘Wóiléẹkímbáọkọ’’:ẹrùikánkanní
ńpafúnni.
‘‘Demolish your house and I will help you
rebuild it’’: he will give one only one bundle
of thatching grass. (Never trust people who
goad you into trouble with promises of help
down the road.)
1906. W/ogravedotbelowbìà-áyótán,ópeẹgb/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowwá.
The greedy person fed to satiation, and
he summons his friends. (The freeloader
196 the good person


--- PAGE 210 ---
always seeks opportunities to take as much
as possible from his or her benefactor.)
1907. W/oacutedotbelownní,‘‘Ìbàrìbá,ọmọẹ-/eacutedotbelowjalè.’’Óní‘‘A
gb/oacutedotbelowtolètójà;èwolokùnọrùn-un/egravedotbelow?’’
People said, ‘‘Ìbàrìbá person, your child
stole something.’’ She responded, ‘‘That he
stole something I can understand, but I can-
not understand the rope around his neck.’’
(Punishment should ﬁt the oﬀense, not be
disproportionate.)
1908. W/oacutedotbelownpur/oacutedotbelowfúnọ,oògbà;olèdéìdí
òót/oacutedotbelow?
People lie to you and you do not accept
the lie; can you ever know what the truth
is? (Since one can seldom be sure what the
truth is, one would save oneself a great deal
of grief by not always insisting on it.)
1909. W/oacutedotbelowntoríajáńlóṣòólọfowór/ogravedotbelowbọ.
Because the dog sits on its haunches, they
went and spent their money on purchasing a
monkey. (One should not pass up something
useful for something useless simply because
the latter looks better.)
Y
1910. Yíy/oacutedotbelowẹkùn,tojok/oacutedotbelow;ohuntíyójẹníńwá.
The leopard’s stealthy gait is not a result
of cowardice; it is simply stalking a prey.
(Do not mistake people’s gentle nature for
spinelessness.)
1911. Yọkọlú-yọkọlú,kòhatánbí?Ìyàwó
gb/oacutedotbelowkọṣánl/egravedotbelow,ọk/oacutedotbelowyọké.
All your strutting and bragging, where is it
now? The wife threw the husband down so
hard that he grew a hump on his back. (Said
of braggarts who have been taken down a
few notches.)
Oncaginess 197


--- PAGE 211 ---
On perseverance, industry, resilience, self-
conﬁdence, self-reliance, resourcefulness,
daring, fortitude, and invulnerability
A
1912. Ahánìkokòl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow/ogravedotbelowtún,ahánìkokòl/eacutedotbelows/egravedotbelow
òsì;ókuẹnitíyókòólójú.
We lop oﬀ the hyena’s right forelimb; we lop
oﬀ the hyena’s left hind limb; the question is,
w h ow i l lf a c ei tn o w ?( I n ﬂ i c t i n gs u c hi n j u r i e s
on the hyena is no victory; it only makes the
animal more dangerous.)
1913. Akìídá/egravedotbelowrùokóńlábaarúgbó.
One should not attempt to scare an old
[woman] with a huge penis. (A person who
has seen everything is not easily frightened.
Compare 2273.)
1914. Akìídùbúl/egravedotbelowṣubú.
One does not fall from a prone position.
(Hunger cannot make one faint and fall if
one goes to sleep.)
1915. Akìíﬁojoojúm/oacutedotbelowríolèjàkódàbí-i
tọw/oacutedotbelowẹni.
One is never so fortunate at daily thievery
that it matches owning one’s own things.
(Self-suﬃciency is far better than fortunate
opportunism.)
1916. Akìíﬁojúolójú ṣòwòkájèrè.
One never trades with other people’s eyes
and proﬁt. (There is nothing like attending
to one’s business oneself.)
1917. Akìíﬁo júb/oacutedotbelowr/oacutedotbelowgbaọmọl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowèkùr/oacutedotbelow.
One does not easily or casually take the
child from the palm nut.
1 (It takes eﬀort to
accomplish a good end.)
1918. Akìígb/oacutedotbelow‘‘gbì’’ìràwé.
One does not hear the ‘‘thud’’ of a falling
leaf.
2 (Incantatory assertion that an accident
will not befall the subject.)
1919. Akìímọibitíàńlọkíọrùnówọẹni.
One does not, despite knowing where one
is going, suﬀer a constricted neck from
one’s heavy load. (If one knows the size of
the task, one should regulate one’s eﬀort
accordingly.)
1920. Akìísọpéọjà-ánígbà;bóbánígbà,
kíníṣetíw/oacutedotbelowntúnńnáa?
One does not say there is a time for the
market; if it were so, why would people con-
tinuously patronize it? (Any time is a good
time to trade.)
1921. Akìíṣe/ogravedotbelowj/egravedotbelowṣeojútìmí;konkolojú
alágbe.
One does not carry the/ogravedotbelowj/egravedotbelowmasquerade and
yet aﬀect bashfulness; the mendicant’s eyes
must always be like ﬂint.
3 (One must assume
the attitude one’s trade demands.)
1. The ‘‘child’’ in this case is the soft nut in the shell.
2 .I ti sn o ti nt h en a t u r eo fl e a v e st oc r a s h .
3. The /ogravedotbelowj/egravedotbelowmasquerader engages mainly in begging
for gifts.


--- PAGE 212 ---
1922. Akìíṣe/ogravedotbelowt/egravedotbelowerankogán-ń-gán;bíabá
heìgbínàdálàńnàá.
One does not conduct one’s feud with an
animal in a halfhearted manner; if one ﬁnds
a snail, one hits it with a machete. (Give
your all to every enterprise you embark
upon.)
1923. Akìíwal/egravedotbelowfúnadìẹjẹ.
One does not scratch the ground for the
chicken to ﬁnd food. (Each person is re-
sponsible for his or her own welfare.)
1924. Àńpa/egravedotbelowkukù,/egravedotbelowkukùńrúwé;àńyan
nínúaṣẹro,aṣẹrońdàgbà;àńkébòsíÒgún,
araÒgúnńle.
The more one weeds /egravedotbelowkukù,the more it
sprouts leaves; the more one tramplesaṣẹro,
the more it grows; the more one rails against
Ògún, the more he thrives. (Because the two
plants are hardy and virtually indestructible,
and Ògún is the formidable god of metals
and war, the proverb bespeaks resilience
and invulnerability. Compare the following
entry.)
1925. Àńpòyìkáapá,apáòkáapá;àńpòyì
káoṣè,apáòkáoṣè;àńpòyìkákàǹga,kòṣé
bínúkósí.
We make circles around the mahogany-bean
tree, but it is too much to handle; we make
circles around the baobab tree, but it is too
much to handle; we makes circles around
the well, but it is nothing to jump into in
anger.
4 (The three items listed are formi-
dable in their diﬀerent ways and have noth-
ing to fear from people. See the previous
entry.)
4. There is a play on the wordapá,w h i c hi st h e
name of a tree, Afzeliaafricana (Ceasalpinaceae; see
Abraham 57), and the word for ‘‘arm.’’ The expression
apákáa, ‘‘the arms can enfold it,’’ means that one can
deal with it. Both apá(the tree) and oṣè(baobab) are
reputed to be inhabited by powerful spirits and to be
favored as venues for witches’ covens.
1926. ‘‘Aòm/ogravedotbelowyíỌl/oacutedotbelowrunyóṣe’’kòj/eacutedotbelowkábínú
kú.
‘‘We know not what God will do’’ keeps one
from committing suicide. (Often it is hope
that keeps people going.)
1927. Apaẹm/oacutedotbelowlókoilá,ajùúsí/ogravedotbelowk/eacutedotbelowìlasa;ilé
ẹm/oacutedotbelowlẹm/oacutedotbelowlọ.
Ag i a n tr a ti sk i l l e do na no k r af a r ma n d
thrown into a sack containing okra leaves;
the giant rat has arrived at its home. (The
resourceful person will ﬁnd a way to adapt
to any situation.)
1928. Ààrẹàgòròtóbágbójú,tòuntolúwa-a
r/egravedotbelowlẹgb/eacutedotbelowra.
A subordinate military oﬃcer who is au-
dacious is the equal of his superior. (Auda-
ciousness will get one one’s way.)
1929. Ab/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowálọkí/ogravedotbelownàokùntódí.
The needle will pass before the way of the
thread is blocked. (Unlike the thread’s, the
passage of the needle through the cloth is
ever smooth.)
1930. Ab/egravedotbeloww/egravedotbelowńwá/ogravedotbelowtáfúnra/egravedotbelow.
He who summons others to render him
communal help seeks enemies.
5 ( I ti sb e s tt o
be self-suﬃcient.)
1931. Abiyamọ/ogravedotbelowtáàgàn;ẹníńṣiṣ/eacutedotbelow/ogravedotbelowtá/ogravedotbelowlẹ.
Nursing mother, enemy of the barren
woman; working person, enemy of the idler.
(The mother incurs the envy of a barren
woman; the hard worker incurs the hatred
of the idler.)
1932. Aboyúnbí,ìhátùú.
The pregnant woman delivered; her sides
5. /Ogravedotbeloww/egravedotbelowwas a traditional means of assuring a large
workforce for large projects: people pooled their re-
sources to help a colleague in need on his farm. The
custom was to provide such help when asked, but that
did not obviate secret grumblings.
Onperseverance 199


--- PAGE 213 ---
a r em u c he a s e d .( R e l i e fc o m e si nt i m et ot h e
persevering suﬀerer.)
1933. Àdántósùnsídìíọsànòríhe,áḿb/ogravedotbelowsì
oódẹtóníòúnjídé.
Bat, who slept by the orange tree, found no
orange to pick, let alone the parrot which
said it came over very early at dawn. (The
more persistent person will surely be re-
warded before the less persistent.)
1934. Adékànḿbíòduoyè;óbèèrèni.
Adékànḿbí is not contesting a title; he is
merely asking a question.
6 (One should not
be coy in demanding one’s rights.)
1935. Adùnníńgb/egravedotbelowhìnewúro.
The aftertaste of the bitterleaf is sweet.
(Sweetness and pleasure come after exer-
tion.)
7
1936. Adùn-úntánláraaṣọogóje;anàán
hanẹniméje;ab/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowwòaríináméje;ódiọj/oacutedotbelow
kejeófàya.
One’s delight in a cloth costing 140 cow-
ries is over; one spreads it out to show to
seven people, one ﬁnds seven lice, and on
the seventh day it is torn.
8 (One gets what
o n ep a y sf o r . )
6 .T h ep r o v e r bi sb a s e do nad e l i b e r a t em i s i n t e r -
pretation of the name, which is a contraction of the
sentence Adékànmíbí, meaning, ‘‘It is my turn to give
birth to a person destined to wear a crown.’’ The prov-
erb takes the name to be a contraction of the sentence
Adékànmíbí? in which bíis taken to be not the verb
‘‘to give birth to’’ but the interrogatory ‘‘is it that?’’ In
many instances, succession to Yoruba chieftaincies is
contested by many aspirants.
7. Ewúro,bitterleaf, one of the most popular stew
vegetables, is very bitter to the taste; all its juice must
be squeezed out before it is cooked. Then, although it is
s t i l lb i t t e ra tﬁ r s tt a s t e ,i t sa f t e r t a s t ei sq u i t ep l e a s a n t .
8. The proverb plays on the number seven.Ogóje
is a contraction ofOgúnméje, seven twenties, or 140;
140 cowries represent an inconsiderable amount in
traditional monetary terms.
1937. A-fàkàrà-j/egravedotbelowk/oacutedotbelowòmọiyìọb/egravedotbelow.
He-who-eats-corn-meal-with-bean-fritters
does not know the virtues of stew. (Whoever
leads a sheltered life misses out on some
great experiences.)
1938. Af/eacutedotbelowf/eacutedotbelowkìíf/eacutedotbelowkíomiinúàgbọndànù.
The wind does not blow against the liquid
inside a coconut and cause it to spill. (Cer-
tain people are not susceptible to certain
disasters.)
1939. Àfẹjútotoòmọọkùnrin.
Glaring wildly does not bespeak manliness.
(Action is more persuasive than appear-
ance.)
1940. Àf/eacutedotbelowkálàńf/eacutedotbelowiná.
Blowing from all directions is how one blows
a taﬁ r e[ t ok i n d l ei t ] .( O n es h o u l da p p l y
o n e ’ sb e s te ﬀ o r tt oa n yt a s k . )
1941. Agẹmọòṣé-éjẹl/eacutedotbelownu.
The chameleon is not a thing to eat in one’s
mouth. (Certain propositions are beyond
the pale.)
1942. Àgùdàòjẹláb/egravedotbelow-ẹG/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowsì.
The Catholic missionary is not in the pay
of the British administration. (An assertion
of nondependence on a supposedly higher
authority.)
1943. Àgbàtíkòtóọmọdé-éránníṣ/eacutedotbelowníńsọ
pékóbuomiwákájọmu.
It is an elder who lacks the authority to send
a child on an errand who tells the child to
go fetch water so they can drink it together.
(One who is sure of his or her authority does
not need to sweeten orders with incentives.
Compare 2104.)
1944. Àgbàb/oacutedotbelowòditẹni.
A foster child does not become one’s own
child. (There is nothing like having one’s
own.)
200 the good person


--- PAGE 214 ---
1945. Àgbàb/ogravedotbelow-ọṣòkòtò,bíkòfúnnil/eacutedotbelows/egravedotbelowaṣoni;
r/eacutedotbelowmú-r/eacutedotbelowmúniohunẹniḿbánimu.
Borrowed trousers, if they are not too tight
around the legs, will be too loose; one’s own
things ﬁt one exactly. (Borrowed articles are
never like one’s own.)
1946. Àgbàkálèéfíńgbaigbó.
It is completely that smoke ﬁlls the forest.
(Whatever is worth doing is worth doing
diligently and thoroughly. Compare 1950
and the following entry.)
1947. Àgbàkálẹs/egravedotbelowńgba/ogravedotbelownà.
It is completely that the feet take over a path.
(Indulge not in half measures. Compare the
preceding entry and 1950.)
1948. Àgbaǹgbáṣeb/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelow,ólàwolórísan-san.
Despite all diﬃculties, the animalàgbaǹgbá
sprouts prominent horns on its head. (Per-
severance overcomes all diﬃculties.)
1949. Àgbàrák/oacutedotbelowniyógbèéomilọ.
It is not the ﬂood that will make away with
the river. (The upstart cannot prevail against
the well-established person.)
1950. Àgbàtánnig/egravedotbelowg/egravedotbelowńgba/ogravedotbelowfun.
It is completely that goiter takes over the
neck. (One cannot stop matters from run-
ning their course. Compare 1946 and 1947.)
1951. Àgb/egravedotbelowgbókoróṣù.
A farmer remains on the farm and sees the
moon. (The conscientious farmer spends
long periods on the farm; persistence is the
k e yt os u c c e s s . )
1952. Àgbinsínúlegbinńgbin;àkùnsínúlẹkùn
ńkùn;hùnhùnhùnẹl/eacutedotbelowd/egravedotbelowinúẹl/eacutedotbelowd/egravedotbelowníńgbé.
Groaning internally is how an antelope
groans; rumbling internally is how a leopard
rumbles; the grunts of a pig stay inside the
pig. (People may grumble, but they dare not
voice their complaints openly.)
1953. Agbójúlógúnﬁara-ar/egravedotbelowfóṣìta.
He-who-places-his-hopes-on-inheritance
delivers himself to destitution. (One should
secure one’s own living.)
1954. Àgbólànitàgb/ogravedotbelownrín;ọj/oacutedotbelowtíàgb/ogravedotbelownrínbá
gbóniọj/oacutedotbelowikú-ur/egravedotbelowńy/egravedotbelow.
Baying-and-surviving is the fate of the deer;
whenever a deer bays, on that day its death
is averted. (Every reverse portends good
fortune in the end.)
1955. Àìdúrólàńpèníjó.
Not standing still is what is described as
dancing. (Continuous striving deserves
praise, whatever the outcome.)
1956. Àìtóehín-ínkániàńfọw/oacutedotbelowbòó.
It is not-having-attained-the-age-for-losing-
one’s-teeth that makes one cover [the
mouth] with one’s hand. (One should not
be reticient in asserting oneself. Compare
2455.)
1957. Ajáiléòmọdẹ-/eacutedotbelowṣe.
A domesticated dog does not know how to
hunt. (Pampering kills initiative.)
1958. Àjàkìíjìnm/oacutedotbelowológbòl/eacutedotbelows/egravedotbelow.
The snare does not snare a cat’s paw. (Some
people are immune to certain perils.)
1959. Ajátómáarúnọkàáláyà;ológbòto
máajẹàkèréákiojúbọomi.
Ad o gt h a tw i l lc h e wd r i e dc o r nm u s tb e
b r a v e ;ac a tt h a tw i l le a taf r o gw i l ld i pi t s
face in water.
9 (It takes a great eﬀort to
accomplish a great feat.)
9. Dogs’ teeth are not made for chewing corn; a
dog that will chew corn must, therefore, have fortitude.
Likewise, a cat with a taste for frogs must pay the price.
Onperseverance 201


--- PAGE 215 ---
1960. Ajáwéré-wéréníńpaikún.
It is an agile dog that kills a squirrel. (The
world belongs to the quick.)
1961. Ajáwoẹyẹláwòm/oacutedotbelowjú.
The dog looks at birds with eyes full of dis-
dain. (Against adversaries beyond one’s
powers, one must be satisﬁed with futile
gestures.)
1962. Ajésọọmọnùbíòkò.
Wealth throws a person away like a stone.
(The search for wealth takes one into distant
lands.)
1963. Àjẹgbénigúnńjẹbọ.
Eating without adverse eﬀects is the vul-
ture’s way of consuming sacriﬁcial oﬀerings.
(Some people can engage in daring and
dangerous behavior with impunity.)
1964. Ajìnfìn,mátaojúilé;/ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowl/ogravedotbelowjìnfìnmáta
ojúàtijáde.
You who have fallen into the dungeon, do
not be impatient to arrive home; when the
toad drops into a pit, it cannot be impatient
to get out. (Certain predicaments one does
not get out of in a hurry.)
1965. A-jókò-ó-kunkunòj/eacutedotbelowkía-jókòó-j/eacutedotbelowj/eacutedotbelowó
jókòo.
The sit-tight person denies the tentative sit-
ter a place. (The meek will not inherit the
earth.)
1966. Àjùm/ogravedotbelowbíòkantiàrùn;kíalápámú
apá-ar/egravedotbelowkóle.
Familial obligations do not extend to dis-
eases; let each person look well to his or her
arms. (Relatives will not bear your disease
for you.)
1967. A-ká-ìgbá-tà-ánáwóikú.
He-who-plucks-the-African-locust-bean-
tree-seeds-to-sell spends death’s money.
(Whoever engages in a dangerous venture
more than earns his or her pay.)
1968. Àkànṣelọfàìmàdò;jaganoróòranèse.
The arrow for a warthog is a major project;
an ordinary poison has no eﬀect on the
cat. (Certain tasks call for deliberate and
extraordinary eﬀorts.)
1969. Àkèekèéníòúnkúròníkòkòrò-okí
nìyí?
Scorpion says that its status transcends
what-type-of-insect-is-this? (Stature and
importance are not always commensurate;
some people should not be underestimated.)
1970. Àkèekèérìntapó-tapó.
The scorpion travels accompanied by
venom. (The stalwart is never unprepared to
answer a call.)
1971. Akíkanjú-kankan,ogunníńlọ;abù-
wàwà,ọjàníńná;àkànníòbúkọ,bóbátòṣìa
máaríjẹ.
For the exceptionally brave person the
proper profession is warring; for the gregari-
ous person, trading; the illustrious he-goat,
even when it is poor, ﬁnds enough to eat.
(Proper application of one’s talent makes
one prosper.)
1972. Àkótánnig/egravedotbelowg/egravedotbelowńkó/ogravedotbelowfun.
It is completely that goiter takes over the
throat. (Calamities give no quarter. This is
the same as 1950.)
1973. Àkùkọ-/oacutedotbelowkọ,/ogravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowpòṣé.
The cock crows, and the lazy person hisses.
(The coming of the morning is an annoy-
ance to the lazy person.)
1974. Alágẹmọ-/oacutedotbelowtibímọ-ọr/egravedotbelowná;àìm/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowjókù
s/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow-ọr/egravedotbelow.
The chameleon has given birth to its young;
inability to dance is the responsibility of the
202 the good person


--- PAGE 216 ---
child. (A parent has done his or her part by
having a child; the child’s fortunes are the
child’s responsibility.)
1975. Alágbàróòyege;aláṣọágbàábód/ogravedotbelowla.
She who borrows a wrapper skirt to wear is
not home free; the owner of the cloth will
take it back tomorrow. (There is nothing
like having one’s own.)
1976. Alákata/mgravepòojúòlètaẹranpa.
A person with crossbows in his eyes cannot
kill an animal. (Even the most vicious of
looks cannot kill.)
1977. Aláǹgbátójálátoríìrókòtíkòfẹs/egravedotbelowṣ/eacutedotbelow,ó
níb/eacutedotbelownìkanòyìnunòunóyinraòun.
The lizard that fell from atop theìrókòtree
without breaking its limbs says if no one ad-
mires his feat, he will do the admiring him-
self. (One should be self-conﬁdent enough
not to need validation by others.)
1978. Aláraníńgbára-ága;bádí/eacutedotbelowbámáa
w/ogravedotbelow/ogravedotbelowd/egravedotbelowab/egravedotbelowr/egravedotbelow.
It is the owner of the body that elevates the
body; when a chicken wishes to enter the
porch, it stoops. (One should sound one’s
own trumpet and not be unduly humble.)
1979. A-lèjà-má-lè-jà-p/eacutedotbelow:ẹlẹgb/eacutedotbelowojo.
He-who-can-ﬁght-but-cannot-ﬁght-for-
long: the equal of a coward. (Ability to start
a ﬁght is nothing like the ability to see it
through.)
1980. Àlejòorínikókó.
The lump is only the head’s visitor. (One
should learn to live with aﬄictions.)
1981. Apálará;ìgb/ogravedotbelownw/oacutedotbelowniyèkan.
One’s arms are one’s relatives; one’s el-
bows are one’s siblings by the same mother.
(Even more reliable than one’s relatives and
siblings are one’s own resources.)
1982. Àpáàdì-ígbókokòrà.
The potsherd lives on the farm but does not
decay. (Resilience is a fortunate quality to
have.)
1983. ÀpagbélOròńpagi.
Killing-without-recourse is Orò’s way of
killing trees. (When unanswerable disaster
befalls a person, there is neither recourse
nor response.)
1984. Apáríníńfojúdiabẹ.
It is a bald person who may be disdainful of
the razor. (The bald person has no use for
razors. Compare 1345.)
1985. Ap/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowjẹkìíjẹìbàj/eacutedotbelow.
A person who waits patiently for a long
time before eating will not eat unwholesome
food. (Those who are patient will have the
best of things.)
1986. Àpọntánkòwípékíodòmásun.
Scooping a spring dry does not stop more
water from collecting. (If one’s resources are
limitless, some use will not exhaust them.)
1987. Arakìíwúwokíaláramálègbe.
A body cannot be too heavy for the owner
to lift. (Whatever others might feel, a person
is never put oﬀ by himself or his own habits.
See 2096.)
1988. Ara-àmígbaòtútù,ógba/ogravedotbelownini.
My body can endure chills and can endure
coldness. (I am long-suﬀering.)
1989. Àràbàńláfojúdiàáké.
The huge silk-cotton tree belittles the axe.
(It takes a mighty person to defy a powerful
force.)
1990. Àríṣelàríkà.
Having an opportunity to act is also having
an opportunity to tell stories. (Whoever
Onperseverance 203


--- PAGE 217 ---
accomplishes something worthwhile has a
story to tell.)
1991. Ariwoàjìjàníńd/oacutedotbelowrun.
It is only the noise of the whirlwind that
reaches heaven. (One’s enemies may be
clamorous, but all they are capable of is
noise.)
1992. Àro-óp/eacutedotbelowlóko,kòtúnmọìlù-úlù.
Àro stayed so long on the farm that he for-
got how to beat the drum. (If one neglects
one’s specialty long enough, one becomes
incompetent at it.)
10
1993. Asúréteteníńwojúọj/oacutedotbelow.
It is the person in a hurry who studies the
complexion of the day. (When one has im-
portant tasks at hand, one pays particular
attention to impinging conditions.)
1994. Àṣáògbádìẹník/ogravedotbelowk/ogravedotbelow;gbangbalàṣá
ńgbádìẹ.
The kite does not snatch chicks in secret; it
snatches them openly. (What one dare do,
one does openly. Compare 1956.)
1995. Àṣáòlèbal/egravedotbelowkógbéwúr/eacutedotbelow.
The kite cannot swoop down and carry oﬀ
a goat. (Whoever attempts the impossible
deceives himself or herself.)
1996. Àṣáwoahuntítí;àwòdíwoahuntítí;
idìbabaàṣá,kílólèﬁahunṣe?
The kite looks long at the tortoise; the eagle
looks long at the tortoise; what can the
hawk, father of the kite, do to the tortoise?
11
10. Àrois one of the titles of the secret order of
Ògbóni;the proverb suggests that the member, from
lack of practice, has forgotten the funerary rites of the
order.
11. The words àṣá,idì, and àwódìsignify the same
bird for the purposes of this proverb; the availability
of diﬀerent designations for the same subject makes
(When the prey’s defenses are impenetrable,
the predator can only glare. See the next
entry.)
1997. Àṣáwoìgbínk/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow;ìkaraun-unr/egravedotbelowòj/eacutedotbelowkó
gbée.
The kite looks slyly at the snail, but its shell
stops the bird from snatching it. (This is
a more mundane version of the previous
entry. See also 132.)
1998. Àṣáw/ogravedotbelowbọkòr/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowgbée.
The kite watches the monkey but has no
hands to carry it oﬀ. (A monkey is no prey
t oak i t e . )
1999. Àṣíríìkokò,aják/oacutedotbelowniyótùúu.
The secrets of the hyena’s being will not
be revealed through the actions of the dog.
(The stalwart’s comeuppance will not hap-
pen at the hands of a no-account person.)
2000. Àt/eacutedotbelowlẹw/oacutedotbelowẹnikìítanni.
One’s palm does not deceive one. (One’s
trust is best placed in one’s own resources.)
2001. Àyèkìíháadìẹkómádèéìdíàba-ar/egravedotbelow.
The space is never so tight that a chicken
will not be able to reach its incubating nest.
(No obstacle should keep one from one’s
duty.)
B
2002. Bíabáńpaèpooṣè,ṣeníḿmáaásanra
síi.
The more one peels the bark of the baobab,
the fatter it becomes. (The more a certain
person is misused, the more successful he or
she becomes.)
possible the lexical shifts that constitute one of the
characteristic elements of Yoruba poetry.
204 the good person


--- PAGE 218 ---
2003. Bíakòbájìyàtókúnagb/ogravedotbelown;aòlèjẹ
ooretókúnahá.
If one does not experience enough suﬀering
to ﬁll a basket, one cannot enjoy enough
good to ﬁll a cup. (Suﬀering precedes plea-
sures.)
2004. Bíakòbáṣebíẹl/eacutedotbelowd/egravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelownàÌkòròdú,aò
lèṣebíAdégbọr/ogravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowjàọba.
If one does not act like a pig on the way
to Ikòròdú, one cannot act like Adégbọr/ogravedotbelow
at the king’s market.
12 (Before one can live
in luxury, one must soil one’s hands with
work.)
2005. Bíebíbáńpa/ogravedotbelowlẹ,àj/eacutedotbelowkókú.
If a lazy person is suﬀering from hunger, he
or she should be left to die. (Shiftless people
deserve no sympathy.)
2006. Bíẹk/eacutedotbelow-ẹtálákàòtólówùúr/ogravedotbelow,átólál/eacutedotbelow.
If a poor person’s forked stake is not long
enough in the morning, it will be long
enough at night.
13 (The things one rejects
when the choice is abundant will become
acceptable when there is no choice.)
2007. Bíẹnìkanòkíni‘‘Kú-ù-jokòó,’’kíkí
Ọl/oacutedotbelowrun-únjutiigbaèèyànlọ.
If a person does not extend greetings to you,
God’s greetings are worth more than those
of two hundred people. (Being snubbed by
people matters nothing, as long as God does
not snub you.)
2008. Bíẹrúyóbàájẹìfun,ibi/egravedotbelowd/ogravedotbelowní-ítí
ḿb/egravedotbelowr/egravedotbelow.
A slave that would eat intestines must begin
12. Ìkòròdú is a town a few miles from Lagos (the
reference is to a farm on the way to the town). The
name Adégbọr/ogravedotbelow means ‘‘The crown[ed head] receives
riches.’’
13. Ẹk/eacutedotbelowi saf o r k e dp o l eu s e da sas u p p o r tw h i l e
building a house.
with the liver. (One must endure unpleas-
antness before achieving one’s ends.)
2009. Bí/egravedotbelowyábádẹkùn,ẹranníńpajẹ.
When the cub becomes a grown leopard,
it kills animals for food. (When the child
becomes an adult, he adopts adult ways.)
2010. Bíìbíbát/egravedotbelow,bíìbíbáw/oacutedotbelow,oníkálukúa
máaṣebabaníléara-ar/egravedotbelow.
If the pedigree is bent, if the pedigree is
crooked, each person will play the father in
his own home. (In diﬃcult times, each per-
son has the solace and security of his own
home.)
2011. Bíil/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowbám/oacutedotbelow,ojúorunl/ogravedotbelowlẹńwà.
When day breaks, the lazy person will still
be asleep. (Lazy people will not rouse them-
s e l v e st od oa nh o n e s td a y ’ sw o r k . )
2012. Bíinákòbátánláṣọ,/egravedotbelowj/egravedotbelowkìítán
léèékánná.
If lice are not completely gone from one’s
clothing, one’s nails will not be free of
blood. (If the causes of one’s problems are
not removed, the problems will persist.)
2013. Bíìṣ/eacutedotbelowbáńṣ/eacutedotbelow/ogravedotbelowd/oacutedotbelowláṣ/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowjù,kólọsígbó
erin:bóbápaerinìṣ/eacutedotbelow-ẹr/egravedotbelowatán;bíerínbápá
a,ìṣ/eacutedotbelow-ẹr/egravedotbelowatán.
If a youth is in the grip of excessive priva-
tion, he should go after an elephant: if he
kills an elephant, his privation will be over;
if an elephant kills him, his privation will
be over. (People in desperate straits should
resort to desperate remedies; whatever the
outcome, they will be no worse oﬀ than
before.)
2014. Bíiwájúòbáṣeélọsí,/egravedotbelowhìnaṣeépadà
sí.
If one cannot go forward, one will be able
to retreat. (If a goal proves impossible of
achievement, one can at least abandon it.)
Onperseverance 205


--- PAGE 219 ---
2015. Bímàlúù-útómàlúù,/ogravedotbelowpákanniFúlàní
ﬁńdàw/oacutedotbelown.
However numerous the cattle might be, it is
with only one staﬀ that the Fulbe man herds
them. (The good worker needs no elaborate
tools.)
2016. ‘‘Bímolèkúmakú’’lọmọkùrínﬁ
ńlágbára;‘‘Ngòlèwáákú’’lọmọkùnrínﬁńlẹ.
‘‘If I must die, let me die’’ is what makes a
man strong; ‘‘I simply will not court death’’
is what makes a man lazy or cowardly.
(Daring makes the man; caution unmakes
the man.)
2017. Bíóp/eacutedotbelowtítí,akólòlòápebaba.
However long it may take, the stammerer
will eventually say, ‘‘Father.’’ (With persever-
ance, the most diﬃcult task will eventually
be accomplished.)
2018. Bíóp/eacutedotbelowtítí,àlejòádionílé.
In time, a sojourner becomes a native. (Per-
sistence leads to success.)
2019. Bíótiwunilàńṣeìmàleẹni;bówu
Lèmámùafẹl/eacutedotbelowd/egravedotbelowjẹsààrì.
One practices one’s Islam as one pleases; if
the imam wishes, he may break his fast with
pork. (One lives one’s life as one sees ﬁt.)
2020. BíÒgúnẹníbádánilójú ,àﬁg bárí.
If one is sure of one’s Ògún cult object, one
taps one’s head with it. (If one is sure of
one’s position, one conﬁdently swears by
anything. Compare 1436.)
2021. Bíojúkòp/oacutedotbelownnibíosùn,akìíheohun
pupabíidẹ.
If one’s eyes do not become as red as cam-
wood stain, one does not come by some-
thing as red as brass. (Unless one endures
some hardship, one does not reap great
beneﬁts.)
2022. Bíojúowóẹniòyóni,ènìòlèyóni.
If what one bought for money does not ﬁll
one, neither will a little extra thrown into
the bargain. (A person who cannot survive
on his main occupation cannot survive on
his sideline.)
2023. Bíojúm/oacutedotbelowm/oacutedotbelowlékèélékèéayaléẹl/eacutedotbelowfun,
agbeayaléaláró,àlùkòayaléolósùn.
When day dawns, the cattle egret makes for
the home of the dealer in chalk; the blue
touraco heads for the home of the indigo
dealer; the purple àlúkòbird seeks out the
dealer in camwood resin. (Diligent people
never dally in pursuing their trade.)
2024. Bíọw/oacutedotbelowkòsinil/egravedotbelow,tíkòsinẹnu,ayoní
ńj/eacutedotbelow.
If the hand does not cease going down and
going to the mouth, satiation results. (If
one keeps at a task, it will eventually be
accomplished.)
2025. BíṢàǹgóbáńpaàràbà,tóńpaìrókò,bíi
tigińlák/oacutedotbelow.
Even though Ṣango kills the silk-cotton tree
and kills the ìrókòt r e e ,n os u c hf a t ec a nb e -
fall the huge tree. (A boast that the person
being referred to is mightier than even the
mightiest other person around.)
D
2026. Dàńdógókìíṣe/egravedotbelowwùọmọdé.
Dàńdógois not a garment for the young.
(Certain feats are beyond certain people.
Compare 1460.)
2027. Dídánlàńdán/ogravedotbelowrànwò;bíolówóẹní
kú,àlọṣúpó.
O n es h o u l dg i v ee v e r y t h i n gat r y ;i fo n e ’ s
owner dies, one goes to claim his wife. (One
should attempt even the impossible.)
206 the good person


--- PAGE 220 ---
2028. Dídánlẹyẹléńdánkú.
A perpetually shining appearance is what
characterizes the pigeon even until death.
(Either an observation that a person’s repu-
tation cannot be tarnished or a wish that it
never become tarnished.)
2029. Dí/egravedotbelow-dí/egravedotbelowlekuńjawọ.
It is bit by bit that rats eat leather. (With
slow and steady application, even a diﬃ-
cult task will be done. See the following two
entries.)
2030. Dí/egravedotbelow-dí/egravedotbelowlẹyẹńmuọsàn.
It is bit by bit that a bird eats an orange.
(Easy does it. See the preceding and follow-
ing entries.)
2031. Dí/egravedotbelow-dí/egravedotbelowníńtánṣ/eacutedotbelow.
Gradual eﬀorts complete a task. (The biggest
task is accomplished with gradual and steady
attention. See the previous two entries.)
2032. Dùndúnf/ogravedotbelowràngbogboṣàpam/oacutedotbelowra.
The talking drum endures all matters with-
out complaint.
14 ( I ti sb e s tt ob es t o i c a l l y
resilient.)
E
2033. Ebèkanṣoṣoàkùr/oacutedotbelowkúròní‘‘Mof/eacutedotbelowr/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelow
ṣíw/oacutedotbelow.’’
A single heap on the farm does not warrant
‘‘I am just about done.’’ (The ﬁrst step is not
nearly the completion of a long journey.)
2034. Ebiniyók/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowwèrèl/oacutedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelown.
It is hunger that will force sense into the
14. A reference to the cords, bells, and bands tied
around the drum, as well as to the beating it takes from
the stick used in playing it.
imbecile. (Even an imbecile must heed hun-
ger.)
2035. Ebíńpaejò,ahúnńyan.
The snake is hungry, and the tortoise saunt-
ers by. (If one is invulnerable, one may
strut.)
2036. Ebiòj/eacutedotbelowkápaọw/oacutedotbelowm/oacutedotbelow;ebíṣẹnúpapala.
Hunger keeps one from folding one’s hands;
hunger causes the mouth [or cheeks] to
shrink. (One must work in order to eat.)
2037. Èdìkìímúọj/oacutedotbelowkómálà.
No charm can act upon the day and keep it
from dawning. (What is inevitable will come
to pass, willy-nilly.)
2038. Èébúkìíso.
Insults do not attach to one’s body like pods.
(Insult ignored is insult defused.)
2039. Eégúntíńjẹoríẹṣin,oríàgbòòlèkòó
láyà.
T h em a s q u e r a d e rw h oi sa c c u s t o m e dt o
eating horse heads will not be daunted by
ram heads. (A person who has faced down
serious challenges will not be defeated by
a slight inconvenience. Compare 2272 and
2273.)
2040. Èèw/ogravedotbelownitọw/ogravedotbelow;akìíﬁgiọw/ogravedotbelowdáná.
As far as the broom is concerned, it is taboo;
one does not make kindling of broom-
sticks. (Come what may, a threatening or
threatened disaster will not happen.)
2041. Èèyànìbáàkúrú,ìbáàbúr/eacutedotbelowwà,gbèsèò
sí,ìtìjúòsí.
Whether a person be short or ugly, if there
is no debt, there can be no disgrace. (As
long as one is debt-free, other details of
one’s personal circumstances are of little
consequence.)
Onperseverance 207


--- PAGE 221 ---
2042. Èkóilágbaara/egravedotbelowl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow/ogravedotbelowbẹ.
Okro that has gone ﬁbrous has delivered
itself from the knife. (At some point, one
outgrows some dangers.)
2043. Èminrinńjẹni,òtóìyà.
Being bothered by sandﬂies is no misfor-
tune. (Whatever one’s problems, they can
always be worse.)
2044. Èpèìbínúòpaodì.
An angry curse does not kill an enemy. (One
gets only psychological satisfaction from
cursing one’s enemy.)
2045. Èpèìlasakìíjaàgb/ogravedotbelownrín.
The curses of okro leaves do not aﬀect the
deer.
15 (One cannot be at risk for what one
cannot help doing.)
2046. Èpòìbúl/egravedotbelowkìípair/eacutedotbelow.
Creeping weeds cannot kill the silk-rubber
tree. (A puny person is no threat to a mighty
person.)
2047. Erínj/egravedotbelowj/egravedotbelowj/egravedotbelowkòfọw/oacutedotbelowk/oacutedotbelowaṣá;ẹf/ogravedotbelown-/oacutedotbelownj/egravedotbelowj/egravedotbelow
j/egravedotbelowkòkiẹs/egravedotbelowwọpòòlò;ẹyẹkékèkéńfòlókèwọn
òforígbági.
The elephant forages a long time without
cutting its hand on a spear; the buﬀalo for-
ages a long time without falling into a trap;
numerous small birds ﬂy across the sky
without colliding with trees. (Despite the
ubiquitousness of danger, one can be safe.)
2048. Èṣìòr/oacutedotbelowbadádé;Ògúnṣọṣ/eacutedotbelowòróòrùn
w/egravedotbelowwù/egravedotbelowj/egravedotbelow;òdòdóòróòrùnp/oacutedotbelown;iléọmọlọm/oacutedotbelow
tip/oacutedotbelownwá.
Error does not await the king before it dons
a crown; Ogunṣọṣẹ
16 does not wait for the
15. Okro is the favorite food of deer; for that reason,
if okro curses deer, the curse is in vain.
16. The name means ‘‘Ògún [the god of iron] has
caused a disaster.’’
sun before it dons a bloody cloak; the ﬂower
does not wait for the sun before it bright-
ens; brightness comes with the child from
its house. (Native genius needs no external
cultivation.)
2049. Eṣinṣínńpọntí;ekòlóńṣú/ogravedotbelowl/egravedotbelowl/egravedotbelow;kantí-
kantíníkáwáǹkandíagbèl/eacutedotbelownukíǹkankan
mákòósíi.
The ﬂy is procuring wine while the worm is
cooking bean meal, and the sugar ﬂy asks
them to ﬁnd something to cork the gourd so
nothing will enter into it. (The idler seeks to
ﬁnd more work for those already fully and
usefully employed.)
2050. Eṣújẹokotáneṣúlọ;eṣúlọWata,ilé-e
r/egravedotbelow.
The locusts are done feeding; the locusts
have departed; the locusts have gone to
Wata, their home. (When one’s task is com-
pleted, one returns to one’s home. Or, the
marauder has done his damage and has gone
back where he came from.)
2051. Ewuinákìípaàwòdì.
The African black kite is never killed in a
brushﬁre emergency.
17 (The bird is beyond
any harm the ﬁre might do.)
2052. Ewúr/eacutedotbelowńṣọdún;àgùtángbàlùs/eacutedotbelowhìn;
òbúkọ-/oacutedotbelowníkásinòunlọsíléànaòun.
The goat is celebrating an event; the sheep
i si nap r o c e s s i o nw i t hd r u m s ;a n dt h eh e -
goat asks to be accompanied to its in-law’s
home. (A person who has made no invest-
ment should not expect to reap the beneﬁts
of the venture.)
2053. Ewúr/eacutedotbelowòlèríewéọdánòkèﬁṣenǹkan.
A goat can in no wise take the ﬁg tree’s
leaves aloft for any purpose. (Certain people
17. This statement is used in the context of an
incantation to ward oﬀ all disaster.
208 the good person


--- PAGE 222 ---
are beyond the reach of other people’s
machinations.)
2054. Ewúroòﬁtojokorò.
The bitterleaf did not become bitter as a
result of cowardice. (One does what one
must, regardless of the actions or wishes of
others.)
Ẹ
2055. Ẹbọjíjẹkìípaigún.
The consumption of sacriﬁcial oﬀerings will
not kill the vulture. (One cannot be hurt by
one’s natural calling.)
2056. Ẹgb/egravedotbelowrúneèràòlègbéṣúgà;w/oacutedotbelownókàn
tòyíikálásánni.
A thousand ants cannot lift [a cube of]
sugar; they can only mill around it in vain.
(Some tasks are beyond certain people.)
2057. Ẹgb/egravedotbelowrúnẹjaòlèd/eacutedotbelowrùpaodò.
A thousand ﬁshes will not overload a river.
(It is futile to attempt to overwhelm an
invincible person.)
2058. /Egravedotbelowhìnológbòkìíbal/egravedotbelow.
A cat’s back never touches the ground.
( O n e ’ so p p o n e n ti naﬁ g h tw i l ln e v e rs u c c e e d
in throwing one.)
18
2059. Ẹj/oacutedotbelowẹl/eacutedotbelowj/oacutedotbelow,l/oacutedotbelowyàńròó,áḿb/ogravedotbelowǹtoríẹj/oacutedotbelow
ara-ar/egravedotbelow.
The lawyer argues other people’s cases,
much more his own. (One who is conscien-
tious on behalf of others can be expected
1 8 .T h i si sar e f e r e n c et ot h ec a t ’ sa b i l i t yt or i g h t
itself and land on its feet, however much one tries to
drop it on its back. The saying is most often used by
wrestlers as an incantation to prevent their opponents
from throwing them.
to be even more conscientious on his or her
own behalf.)
2060. Ẹl/eacutedotbelowmùn-únòmúeégún.
An apprehender does not apprehend a
masquerader. (Certain people are beyond
anyone’s control.)
2061. /Egravedotbelowlukútíkòníèlèlẹgb/eacutedotbelow-ẹr/egravedotbelowńṣápa.
It is the /Egravedotbelowlukúmasquerader without a ma-
chete that is hacked to death by his col-
leagues.
19 (Whoever goes into a contest less
prepared than his or her adversary is in for
trouble.)
2062. /Egravedotbelowlúlùúníkàkàkíòunmádunọb/egravedotbelow,òun
árúnwọrúns/egravedotbelowsíi.
The lark-heeled cuckoo vows that rather
than not being delicious in the stew, it will
crush its arms and legs in pursuit of that
end. (One vows that even up to the cost of
one’s life, one will give everything one has to
achieve an end.)
2063. Ẹníbáńjẹòbúkọtógbójú,yójẹàgùtàn
tóy/ogravedotbelowwo.
W h o e v e ri su s e dt oe a t i n gf u l l - g r o w nh e -
goats will eat lambs that have sprouted
horns. (A person known for daring deeds
can always be expected to defy custom; one
cannot cure people of ingrained habits.)
2064. Ẹníbáńṣiṣ/eacutedotbelowkìíṣ/ogravedotbelowlẹ;bóríbátúnniṣea
kìít/eacutedotbelowb/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow.
Whoever has a job should not malinger; if
Providence smiles, one can hardly fail. (Dili-
gence in one’s pursuit will certainly result in
prosperity. Compare 1517.)
2065. Ẹníbáyẹ/ogravedotbelownàÌj/egravedotbelowbútìniyóy/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowtán.
The same person who weeds the road to
19. /Egravedotbelowlukúor Àlukúis a fearsome masquerader,
one of whose props is a machete supposedly used
indiscriminately as a weapon.
Onperseverance 209


--- PAGE 223 ---
Ìj/egravedotbelowbú without carrying oﬀ the weeds will
eventually remove them. (The shirker will
sooner or later be forced to do his or her
duty; one should do a thing eﬃciently, not
halfheartedly.)
20
2066. Ẹnièèyànòkíkóy/ogravedotbelow;ẹniỌl/oacutedotbelowrunòkíkó
ṣ/oacutedotbelowra.
Whoever is shunned by people should re-
joice; whoever is shunned by God should
look out. (God’s favor is preferable to that of
other people.)
2067. Ẹnígbaniláyaòníkírúẹnimárà.
The person who takes one’s wife cannot stop
one’s locust-bean seeds from fermenting.
(A person who injures you cannot stop you
from pursuing your destiny.)
21
2068. Ẹnímáajẹoyininúàpátakìíwoẹnu
àáké.
W h o e v e rw i l le a tt h eh o n e yi nar o c kd o e s
not worry about the edge of the axe. (One
should be prepared to make the sacriﬁces
necessary to achieve a worthy goal.)
2069. Ẹnímáajẹunkunkunatìl/egravedotbelowkùnkun-
kun.
Whoever wishes to eat heartily must lock his
door ﬁrmly. (To prevent intrusion into one’s
aﬀairs, one should keep them well guarded.)
2070. Ẹnímáaríàtisùnakànáp/eacutedotbelowlétíisà.
W h o e v e rw i s h e st os e eac r a bg ot os l e e pw i l l
stay long by its hole. (Whoever seeks the
20. The proverb is probably based on the commer-
cial importance of the road, which ensures the keen
interest of the authorities (of Ibadan presumably) in
seeing that whoever is responsible for keeping it open
and clean does so eﬃciently.
21. Irúis the fermented condiment derived from
the seeds of the locust-bean tree. The suggestion seems
to be that the man deprived of a wife can still cook his
stew, since hisirúcan still ferment even in the absence
of a wife (who would normally cook the stew).
impossible will wait forever.22 See also the
following entry.)
2071. Ẹnímáaríàtisùn-unp/eacutedotbelowp/eacutedotbelowyẹájẹgbèsè
àdín.
W h o e v e rw i s h e st os e ed u c k sg ot os l e e pw i l l
go into debt paying for [fuel] oil. (Who-
ever awaits the impossible will wait forever.
23
Compare the preceding entry.)
2072. Ẹni/ogravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowpa-áre/ogravedotbelowrunòṣì;ẹniiṣ/eacutedotbelowpa-áre
/ogravedotbelowrun/egravedotbelowyẹ.
W h o e v e rd i e sf r o mp o v e r t yd i e sam i s e r a b l e
death; whoever dies from work dies a noble
death. (Better to die on one’s feet than to
give in to reverses.)
2073. Ẹnitíàḿb/oacutedotbelowòm/ogravedotbelowpéìyàn-ánmú.
A person fed by others is never aware that
there is famine. (A person who has no re-
sponsibilities does not appreciate the eﬀorts
of those who do.)
2074. Ẹnitíeégúnńlékómáar/oacutedotbelowjú;bótińrẹ
aráayé,b/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowníńrẹará/ogravedotbelowrun.
T h ep e r s o nb e i n gc h a s e db yam a s q u e r a d e r
should persevere; just as an earthling tires,
so does the being from heaven.
24 (Persever-
ance solves all problems.)
2075. Ẹnitíiṣ/eacutedotbelowńpa-áyájuẹnitíìṣ/eacutedotbelowńpa.
A person dying fom overwork is better than
a person dying of destitution. (Better to suc-
cumb to overwork or occupational hazards
than to succumb to poverty.)
22. The proverb is based on the fact that crabs’ eyes
never close, because they have no lids.
23. This proverb is based on the supposition that
ducks never sleep.Àdínis oil made from palm kernels,
used to fuel lamps and as a body lotion.
24. Because eégún(masqueraders) are believed to
be reincarnated dead ancestors, they are thusará/ogravedotbelowrun,
‘‘heavenly beings.’’ Some chase people and belabor
them with whips.
210 the good person


--- PAGE 224 ---
2076. Ẹnitíkíkí-ir/egravedotbelowòyóni,àìkí-ir/egravedotbelowòlèpani
lébi.
A person whose greetings do not ﬁll one’s
stomach cannot cause one to starve by with-
holding the greetings. (A person whose
benevolence has little eﬀect on one’s for-
tune cannot aﬀect one with malevolence.
Compare 5033.)
2077. Ẹnitíńgb/eacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelowníńsìnkú;ẹnitíńsunkún
ariwolóńpa.
The person digging a grave is the one per-
forming his or her funerary duties; the per-
son crying is merely making a noise. (Tan-
gible help is better than useless sympathetic
gestures.)
2078. Ẹnitíóbáníìtaralóníàtètèbá.
It is the industrious person who wins the
spoils. (Industry ensures success.)
25
2079. Ẹnitóbáńjẹláb/eacutedotbelow-ẹJ/eacutedotbelowg/eacutedotbelowd/eacutedotbelowlóńpèénÍgi
Àràbà.
Only those whose livelihood depends on
Jẹgẹdẹ call him a silk-cotton tree.
26 (Only
those beholden to a person are compelled to
ﬂ a t t e rh i mo rh e r . )
2080. Ẹnitíóbáp/eacutedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowhìnniàńy/oacutedotbelowomiọb/egravedotbelowdè.
Those who arrive late are the ones who
ﬁnd the watery residue of the stew awaiting
them. (Timeliness earns one the best choice,
tardiness the worst.)
2081. Ẹnitíóbáwoojúìyàwóníńm/ogravedotbelowpé
ìyàwóńsunkún.
Only a person who looks at the bride’s face
knows that the bride is crying. (It is futile
25. Ìtara(industry or sharpness) is equated here
with àtètèbá,a charm ensuring that the user will be the
ﬁrst to come upon a valuable thing.
26. Àràbà,the silk-cotton tree—Ceibapentandra
(Bombaceae)—is the largest African tree (see Abraham
61–62), while the sound of the name J/eacutedotbelowg/eacutedotbelowd/eacutedotbelow suggests
someone of insubstantial physical stature.
to seek sympathy when no one is paying
attention.)27
2082. ẸnitíóbẹÌgèÀdùbíníṣ/eacutedotbelow,ara-ar/egravedotbelowló
b/egravedotbelow;ÌgèÀdùbíònííj/eacutedotbelow,b/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelownikòníík/ogravedotbelow.
Whoever assigns a task to Ìgè Àdùbí as-
signs it to himself or herself; Ìgè Àdùbí
will neither agree to do the task nor will he
refuse.
28 (One should expect little from a
spoiled child.)
2083. Ẹnitíófòsókè-éb/eacutedotbelowijólórí.
Whoever leaps up decapitates dance. (Noth-
ing more can be expected from a person
who has given the ultimate eﬀort.)
29
2084. Ẹnitíóforísọl/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowgbìyànjúikú.
Whoever dives headﬁrst to the ground
has made a creditable attempt at suicide.
(One should acknowledge people’s sincere
eﬀorts.)
2085. Ẹnitíógbál/egravedotbelowniil/egravedotbelowḿm/oacutedotbelowfún.
It is for the person who sweeps the ﬂoor
that the ﬂoor is clean. (Those who exert
themselves are the ones who reap rewards.)
30
2086. Ẹnitíógbinọrúnèbùtópèénígba,tó
bájẹọg/oacutedotbelowrùn-únòtít/oacutedotbelowtán,áwájẹọg/oacutedotbelowrùn-ún
ir/oacutedotbelow.
27. Traditionally, brides cried, as a matter of form,
on their departure for their future homes; onlookers
made light of these supposedly crocodile tears.
28. Ìgè is the name usually given to a child born feet
ﬁrst, and Àdùbí means someone everyone would like
to have given birth to. The suggestion is that the child
so named is excessively pampered and can therefore get
away with anything.
29. A dancing leap is regarded as the supreme ﬁgure
in dance.
30. The expression Il/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowm/oacutedotbelowmeans both ‘‘the ﬂoor
is clean’’ and ‘‘morning has broken.’’ The proverb thus
also carries the suggestion that a new day, supposedly
an auspicious day, dawns for those who sweep the ﬂoor,
especially since sweeping is one of the ﬁrst orders of
duty for conscientious housekeepers every morning.
Onperseverance 211


--- PAGE 225 ---
The person who plants a hundred yam seed-
lings and says he planted two hundred, after
he has eaten a hundred truths, will come to
eat a hundred lies. (A person who overstates
his investment will still not earn more than
the investment can generate.)
2087. Ẹnitíópam/eacutedotbelowfàlógun/Ogravedotbelowla:w/oacutedotbelownní
‘‘Háà,hà,háà!’’Óníkíw/oacutedotbelowngbéọp/oacutedotbelownayò
wá,ótúnpam/eacutedotbelowfà;óníbíojúkòtót/egravedotbelowgi,ojú
kòtótilé?
The man who [claimed to have] killed six
people during the Ọla war: people exclaimed
in disbelief, ‘‘Ha, ha, ha!’’ He asked them to
bring an ayòboard, and he won six games.
He said, if there were no witnesses for what
happened in the secluded forest, aren’t there
witnesses for what happens in the house?
(One may not believe what one was not wit-
ness to, but what one sees, one must believe;
seeing is believing.)
31
2088. Ẹnití/ogravedotbelowṣ/oacutedotbelowbáwùkóṣòwò;ẹniajéyalé-e
r/egravedotbelowlógb/oacutedotbelown.
Whoever likes ﬁneries should engage in
at r a d e ;i ti st h ep e r s o nb l e s s e db yr i c h e s
who is wise. (Good things come only to the
industrious.)
2089. ẸníyáralÒgúnńgbè.
Ògún is on the side of the swift. (The swift
are justiﬁed in taking advantage of the
tardy.)
2090. Ẹnúdùn-únròf/oacutedotbelow;agadaọw/oacutedotbelowdùn-ún
ṣánko.
The mouth cooks vegetable stew most ex-
pertly; the hand emulating a machete cuts
31. The humor, even the wit, of this proverb resides,
more than in anything else, in the play onpa,which in
t h ec o n t e x to fa nayògame means ‘‘to win’’ but in the
context of a war means ‘‘to kill.’’ The stalwart in ques-
tion settles the argument about whether he could have
killed six people in a war by winning sixayògames.
a ﬁeld most eﬀortlessly. (A person’s mouth
may boast of anything, and his or her hand
may claim to be able to do anything until
put to the test.)
2091. Ẹnuiṣ/eacutedotbelowẹniniatiḿmọẹnil/oacutedotbelowlẹ.
It is at one’s occupation that one proves
oneself an idler. (One reveals one’s mettle at
one’s place of employment.)
2092. Ẹnuòfìfokìídúnyànmù-yànmù.
Empty mouths do not make chewing noises.
(If one has not ﬁlled others’ mouths with
food, one cannot expect them to be full of
one’s praise.)
2093. /Egravedotbelowrùkìíbaigbó,b/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelownikìíbaodò;/egravedotbelowrù
kìíbaọlọlójúata.
The forest knows no fear, and neither does
the river know fear; the grindstone never
shows fear in the face of pepper. (A worthy
person should not give way to fear.)
2094. /Egravedotbelowrùkìíbaoríkósáwọnú.
The head is never so frightened that it dis-
appears into the shoulder. (One should be
brave enough to meet one’s fate.)
2095. /Egravedotbelowrùogunkìíbajagun-jagun.
Fear of battle never aﬄicts a warrior. (One
should be bold in pursuing one’s goals.)
2096. Ẹs/egravedotbelowkìíwúwokíẹlés/egravedotbelowmálègbée.
The feet are never so heavy that the owner
cannot lift them. (Each person must live
w i t hh i so rh e ro w np e c u l i a r i t i e s .C o m p a r e
1987.)
2097. Ẹṣinkìídanikíámátúngùnún.
Do not refrain from mounting a horse that
has thrown you. (A failure should not stop
you from making further attempts.)
2098. Ẹṣinkìíjákójáèkejì-ir/egravedotbelow.
A horse does not get loose and stop to free
212 the good person


--- PAGE 226 ---
its companion. (Each person must look to
his or her own salvation.)
2099. /Egravedotbelows/ogravedotbelow/egravedotbelows/ogravedotbelowniìgbínﬁńgbàgunigi.
Slowly, slowly is the way a snail climbs a
tree. (With dogged persistence, one accom-
plishes the most diﬃcult of tasks.)
2100. /Egravedotbelowt/eacutedotbelowbá/ogravedotbelowlẹ.
Disgrace comes upon the shiftless. (Disgrace
attends shiftlessness.)
2101. Ẹyẹòsọfúnẹyẹpéòkòḿb/ogravedotbelow.
A bird does not tell a bird that a stone is on
its way. (Each person looks out for his or her
own safety.)
F
2102. Fig/ogravedotbelowg/ogravedotbelowsíl/egravedotbelowfún/ogravedotbelowdáwé;ﬁọkọsíl/egravedotbelowfún
onílara.
Leave the hooked stick alone for the leaf
plucker; leave the husband alone for the
jealous woman. (One should simply shun
persons who will not share what they have.)
2103. Fíf/eacutedotbelowlaf/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowf/oacutedotbelowtíàńpè-éní/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowkọ;tiilé
oge-étóoge-éjẹ.
It is only because one loves spinach that
one calls it a friend of corn loaf; what the
dandy has at home is enough food for him
or her. (That one delights in another per-
son’s company is not to say that one cannot
do without it. Compare 3374.)
2104. ‘‘F/oacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowkọkájọmuú,’’kòtóọkọlóbìnrin-
ínṣeni.
‘‘Prepare the corn pap and let us eat it
together’’ is an indication that the speaker
lacks what it takes to be a husband. (One
should not be tentative in exercising one’s
authority. Compare 1943.)
Gb
2105. Gb/eacutedotbelowdó-gb/eacutedotbelowdókanòlèﬁ/ogravedotbelowg/egravedotbelowd/egravedotbelowṣenǹkan.
No carver of mortars can do a thing to the
banana stem. (Certain people and certain
objects have nothing to fear from certain
types of adversaries.)
I
2106. Ìb/egravedotbelowrùejòòj/eacutedotbelowkátẹọmọejòm/oacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelow.
Fear of the snake keeps one from stepping
on the young of the snake. (One usually
beneﬁts from the stature or position of one’s
parents or protector.)
2107. Ibigbogboníńrọàdàbàl/oacutedotbelowrùn.
Every place is hospitable and comfortable
for the dove. (Said to mean that no cir-
cumstance will be beyond one’s ability to
cope.)
32
2108. Ibigbogbonil/egravedotbelow/ogravedotbeloww/ogravedotbelow.
E v e r yp l a c ed e s e r v e st ob et r e a t e dw i t hr e -
spect and reverence. (Decorous behavior is
not for certain occasions only.)
2109. Ibitíaníkígbégbémágbèé,ib/egravedotbelowní
ńgbé.
The spot one cautions thegbégbéplant not
to inhabit, there it will surely inhabit. (One
will fulﬁll one’s destiny, whatever others
m i g h td ot op r e v e n ti t .C o m p a r et h ef o l l o w -
ing entry.)
2110. Ibitíaníkít/egravedotbelowt/egravedotbelowmát/egravedotbelow,ib/egravedotbelowníńt/egravedotbelow.
Wherever one orders wild spinach not to
step, there it will surely trample.
33 (The des-
32. It is also used in the context of a prayer to wish
that wherever the addressee goes, he or she will always
ﬁnd ease and comfort.
33. The proverb is often used in a sort of incan-
tation or prayer to wish (or assert) that a person will
Onperseverance 213


--- PAGE 227 ---
tinies of certain people defy manipulation by
adversaries. Compare the preceding entry.)
2111. Iboniimúwàs/eacutedotbelownu?IboniLàǹlát/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowwà
síÈrúwà?
How much distance exists between the nose
and the mouth? How much distance exists
between Làǹlát/egravedotbelow and Èrúwà? (One should
not make a fuss over running an errand that
is not a great imposition.)
34
2112. Idàkìílọkídàmáb/ogravedotbelow.
The sword never departs without returning.
(Said in the context of a prayer that a person
departing on a journey might return safely.)
2113. Ìdẹraòkanàgbà.
Ease has nothing to do with age. (Industry
pays oﬀ more surely than longevity.)
2114. Igikìídálókokópaaráilé.
A tree does not snap in the forest and kill
a person at home. (Disaster cannot befall a
person who is not in an exposed position.)
2115. Igúnnugúnpaguurumádìẹ;kòleègbe.
The vulture rushes at the chicken, but it
cannot carry it oﬀ. (One should not attempt
what one knows one cannot accomplish.)
2116. Igbaeṣinṣinkìídènàdeọw/ogravedotbelow.
Two hundred ﬂies will not lie in ambush for
ab r o o m .
35 (Despite their number, one’s ad-
versaries are no match for one. Compare the
next entry.)
never be vulnerable to his or her enemies. The verbt/egravedotbelow
means ‘‘to step’’ as on a spot; it is used here in a play on
words, because the name for wild spinach seems to be a
reduplication of the verb.
34. Làǹlát/egravedotbelow and Èrúwà are neighboring villages in
the Ibadan orbit. The proverb suggests that since they
are as close together as the mouth and the nose, a per-
son sent on an errand from one to the other should not
complain.
35. A broom is a favorite weapon for killing ﬂies.
2117. Igbaẹrankokìídènàdeẹkùn.
Two hundred animals will not lie in ambush
for a leopard. (Exercise prudence and rec-
ognize an adversary that is more than your
match. Compare the preceding entry.)
2118. Ìgbàyílàár/ogravedotbelow?Arúgbóńkọgba.
Is it just morning now? The old man is striv-
ing to make two hundred heaps a day. (The
eﬀorts that would have been commendable
if timely are now worthless.)
2119. Ìgbàyílàár/ogravedotbelow?Arúgbóńṣoge.
Is it just morning now? The old person is
grooming himself or herself. (Never wait
until it is too late before you look to your
well-being.)
2120. Ìgbéagbéìyàwókòṣéégbéowó.
The strategy one adopts in acquiring a wife
will not do with regard to money. (What
suﬃces in one situation may not be appli-
cable in another.)
2121. Igbekí-ni-ngó-jẹ-sùnníḿp/ogravedotbelowlẹ.
T h ec r y‘ ‘ W h a ts h a l lIe a tf o rs u p p e r ? ’ ’i s
what kills the lazy person. (The lazy person
would rather put eﬀort into lamenting his or
her fate than into gainful employment.)
2122. Ìgbínkìítẹnum/oacutedotbelowgikómágùnún.
The snail will not fasten onto a tree and fail
to climb it. (Once one takes on a job, one
should see it through.)
2123. Ìgbínkọmímìejò.
The snail rejects the fate of being swallowed
by a snake. (There are some perils to which
one is immune.)
2124. Ìjàòmọ/egravedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelown,ósọàbúròdakin.
Fighting knows not who is the elder; it
makes a hero of the younger. (In certain
situations, prowess is more important than
age. Compare 2320.)
214 the good person


--- PAGE 228 ---
2125. Ìjeòunooreníḿmúọmọṣiṣ/eacutedotbelow.
Competition and reward are the induce-
ments for a child to work hard. (It is the
wish to at least keep up with others or the
hope for a reward that makes one work
hard.)
2126. Ìjèṣàòníìdììṣáná;ilélọmọỌwáti
ńfọnnálọsóko.
The Ìjèṣà [person] does not need matches; it
is from the home that the scion of Ọwa takes
burning faggots to the farm. (Said to assert
self-suﬃciency, that one does not need the
aid of other people.)
36
2127. Ìjẹkújẹkìípaahanrandi.
Careless eating does not kill the wormahan-
randi.(One can do what one pleases without
fear of repercussion.)
2128. Ikánòlèríṣeláraìgànná.
The termite can have no adverse eﬀect on
a wall. (Certain things are invulnerable to
certain disasters.)
2129. Ìk/oacutedotbelowkìík/oacutedotbelowejòl/eacutedotbelows/egravedotbelow.
A snare never catches a snake in the leg.
(One will remain invulnerable to any dan-
ger.)
37
2130. Ik/ogravedotbelowtíòmọiṣ/eacutedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowj/eacutedotbelowníńj/eacutedotbelowẹl/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowmejèe.
It is the messenger who does not know how
to deliver a message properly that delivers
it seven times over. (Incompetence imposes
additional burdens on a person.)
2131. Ìkòkòtíyójẹata,ìd í/egravedotbelowágbóná.
The pot that wishes to eat pepper [stew] will
36. Before the white man came with his matches,
people knew how to make ﬁre. This is obviously a prov-
erb coined in Iléṣà, home of the Ìjèṣà, whose king is
the Ọwá. Thenídìí(níìdí)t r a n s l a t e sl i t e r a l l ya s‘ ‘ h a v ea
reason for,’’ but it is a play on the English ‘‘need.’’
37. This is used in the context of prayers.
ﬁrst endure a scalded bottom. (Good things
come only after great labor or suﬀering.)
2132. Ilákìígajuakórèlọkómát/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowká.
The okro plant is never so much taller than
the harvester that he or she cannot bend it
to harvest. (The conscientious worker will
always ﬁnd the means to complete the task.)
2133. Ilétíatólọsùnl/oacutedotbelowsàn-án,akìítóòrulọ
sùnún.
A house one has the right to sleep in during
the day, one does not wait for the cover of
night to go sleep in it. (One should not be
coy about doing what one has the right to
do. Compare the following entry.)
2134. Ilétíatóókun,akìíboìtùfù-ur/egravedotbelow.
A house one is in a position to burn, one
does not conceal the torch to set it ablaze.
(One need not be coy in doing what one has
the authority or standing to do. Compare
the preceding entry.)
2135. Ìl/egravedotbelowk/egravedotbelow/ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowòyíolèlójú.
Frogs’ eggs do not attract the attention of
the thief. (If one has nothing for others to
c o v e t ,o n ei ss a f ef r o me n v y . )
2136. Ìl/egravedotbelowk/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowgbéoríàtẹwu/ogravedotbelowlẹ.
Beads remain on the display tray and from
there attract the admiration of the feckless
person. (The feckless person can admire
desirable things but will not have the means
to purchase them.)
2137. Ìléríadìẹ,asánnilójúàwòdì.
The chicken’s boasts are unavailing before
the kite. (The puny person who threatens a
formidable person fools himself or herself.)
2138. Ìlọrinòlóòṣà;ẹnulòòṣàÌlọrin.
The Ìlórin person has no god; his or her
mouth is his or her god. (The person under
reference is all mouth and no substance.)
Onperseverance 215


--- PAGE 229 ---
2139. Ìmúmúnàáabìdísembé-sembé;ìmúmú-
nàáòdánárí,tiná-tináníḿbákiri.
Fireﬂy with its rear ablaze: the ﬁreﬂy has
never kindled a ﬁre but carries ﬁre with it
wherever it goes. (Said of people who want
results without making any eﬀort.)
2140. Inákìíjókíògirisá.
Fire does not rage and cause a wall to ﬂee.
(Certain entities are invulnerable to certain
dangers.)
2141. Inákìíjókówọléakàn.
A ﬁre does not rage and enter the home of
the crab. (An incantatory observation in-
voking immunity for a person from some
danger.)
2142. Ìpaàńpoṣèaralóﬁńsan.
Our attempt to kill theoṣètree only makes it
fatter. (Some people prosper in spite of their
enemies’ machinations.)
2143. Ìp/egravedotbelowtalọṣẹàp/oacutedotbelown.
The sap of the violet tree is what the bache-
lor uses for soap. (A person who lacks the
means to provide properly for himself or
herself must be resourceful at making do.)
2144. Ìpil/egravedotbelowọr/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowgbin.
The beginning of wealth is chock-full of
ﬁlth. (Success comes after great eﬀort and
much headache. This is a variant of 2155.)
2145. Ìp/oacutedotbelownjúàgb/egravedotbelowòjuọdúnkan.
A farmer’s suﬀering will not last longer than
a year. (Every reversal has its end.)
38
2146. Ìp/oacutedotbelownjúlọmọdéﬁńk/oacutedotbelowFá,ìgb/egravedotbelowhìn-inr/egravedotbelowa
dẹni.
A child’s learning of Ifá is full of privations,
but the outcome is a life of ease. (The ease
38. The annual ripening of the harvest will end the
suﬀering.
that comes in the end makes up for the eﬀort
to achieve one’s goal.)
2147. Iretíọw/oacutedotbelow-/ogravedotbelowmiòtó,maﬁg/ogravedotbelowǹg/ogravedotbelowfàá.
The good my hand cannot reach, I will pull
down with a hooked stick. (I will spare no
eﬀort in pursuit of my goals.)
2148. Ìrèkétiládùnlát/ogravedotbelowrun.
The sugarcane came with its sweetness from
heaven. (An illustrious person’s qualities are
native, not conferred by admirers.)
39
2149. Ìríkúrìíkìíf/oacutedotbelowojú.
Evil sights do not make the eyes go blind.
(There is nothing in the oﬃng that one
cannot withstand.)
2150. Irínwóẹf/ogravedotbelown,ẹgb/egravedotbelowrinìwo;ogún-unFú-
làní,ójì-ibàtà:Ògídíolúòw/egravedotbelowhìntóﬁléAdalo
lùgb/eacutedotbelow.
Four hundred buﬀaloes with eight hundred
horns; twenty Fulbe men and forty shoes:
Ògídíolú did not look back until he had
chased Adalo into the bush. (Comment on a
formidable man who does not ﬂinch before
any enemy.)
2151. Ìròjúbaba/ogravedotbelowlẹ.
Shirking work [is the] father of laziness.
(The person who will not work is worse than
a lazy person.)
2152. Ìrókòo-nígun-m/eacutedotbelowrìn-dín-lógúnòtó
erin-íngbémì,áḿb/ogravedotbelowǹtoríìtóòa-lára-bóró-
bóró.
An ìrókòstick with sixteen edges is nothing
for an elephant to swallow, much less the
melon fruit with a smooth body. (A per-
son not defeated by a formidable obstacle
will certainly not be stopped by a minor
irritant.)
39. The formulation applies to the sugarcane plant
the belief that heaven is where all things were created.
216 the good person


--- PAGE 230 ---
2153. Ìrònúìkokòníyópaajá.
Worrying about the wolf is what will kill the
dog. (Some people are already vanquished
by the mere anticipation of a struggle.)
2154. Ìr/oacutedotbelowjúniohungbogbo;ojoojúm/oacutedotbelowní
ńrẹni.
Perseverance is everything; one gets tired
daily. (One should not fold up in the face of
the ﬁrst trial. Compare 2172.)
2155. Ìsàl/egravedotbelowọr/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowgbin.
The dregs of wealth are ﬁlthy. (Wealth
comes only after one has endured a great
deal of rubbish. This is a variant of 2144.)
2156. Isánḿb/oacutedotbelowjú,ìtàláńwẹs/egravedotbelow.
Nine days wash the face, thirteen days wash
the feet. (Said of a person who takes an
eternity to do simple things.)
2157. Iṣ/eacutedotbelowajéle,ótóọpa.
Gainful employment is tough, as tough as a
supple pole. (Gainful work is not easy.)
40
2158. Ìṣ/eacutedotbelowkìíṣeohunàmúṣeré;ìyàkìíṣeohun
àmúṣàwàdà.
Destitution is not something to treat with
levity; mysery is nothing to joke about. (One
should not triﬂe with one’s problems.)
2159. Iṣ/eacutedotbelowloògùnìṣ/eacutedotbelow.
Work is the antidote for destitution. (One
must work in order to better one’s condi-
tion.)
2160. Ìṣ/eacutedotbelowníòunókòówó;ìyà-áníòunó
singbà;réderède-éníòunóṣeonígb/ogravedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow:taní
j/eacutedotbelowrerenínú-uwọn?
Destitution proposes to trade its services
for money; suﬀering proposes to pawn itself
40. Ọpa,translated here as ‘‘supple pole,’’ can also
refer to a masquerade in the Ìj/egravedotbelowbú area; carrying it is no
easy task either.
for money; wretchedness proposes to stand
surety for them: which of them has any-
thing going for it? (In a community of losers
no one person can be expected to turn the
situation around.)
2161. Ìṣ/eacutedotbelowńṣ/eacutedotbelowọòńrojú;taniyófùn-únọni
oògùn-unr/egravedotbelow?
Destitution grips you and you sit scowling;
who will give you the antidote? (One should
take practical steps to solve one’s problem
rather than sit around moping.)
2162. Ìṣ/eacutedotbelowògb/eacutedotbelowkún,ebíjàre/ogravedotbelowlẹ.
Destitution does not yield to tears; hun-
ger has a claim on the shiftless. (One does
not end destitution by simple lamentation;
whoever does not work is a fair victim to
hunger.)
2163. Iṣ/eacutedotbelow/ogravedotbelowgẹr/ogravedotbelowl/ogravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowm/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowṣe;kòj/eacutedotbelowwáiṣ/eacutedotbelow
agbára.
The lazy person knows how to do only
things that call for little eﬀort; he or she
never seeks out work that demands strength.
(Said of those who always look for the easi-
est way out of a dilemma.)
2164. Ìṣ/eacutedotbelowtóṣ/eacutedotbelowọmọlógúnọdún,ìyàtójẹọmọ
l/oacutedotbelowgb/ogravedotbelownoṣù,bíkòpaọmọ,asìl/eacutedotbelowhìnọmọ.
The poverty that has plagued a child for
twenty years, the suﬀering that has been the
f a t eo fac h i l df o rt h i r t ym o n t h s ,i fi td o e s
not kill the child should leave the child in
peace. (Perseverance puts an eventual end to
all suﬀering.)
2165. Iṣ/eacutedotbelow-ajé-ò-gbé-bòji,ọmọ/egravedotbelowÒjíkùtù.
Gainful-work-does-not-keep-to-the-shade;
his or her child is named First-up-at-dawn.
(Success in life calls for self-sacriﬁce.)
2166. Iṣuàtẹnum/oacutedotbelowkìíjóná;/ogravedotbelowkààtẹnum/oacutedotbelowkìí
mẹrẹ;àwòdìkìígbéadìẹà-tẹnu-kunkun-m/oacutedotbelow.
The yam one does not stop speaking about
Onperseverance 217


--- PAGE 231 ---
will not get burned; the corn meal one
speaks constantly about does not become
too well done; a chicken that is the subject
of constant caution does not get snatched up
by a hawk. (Anything that is the subject of
constant attention will not be ruined.)
2167. Iṣuẹnikìíﬁnipeọmọdékómáta.
One’s yam will not, because one is only a
youth, refuse to grow to maturity. (Even
a youth can accomplish much if he or she
makes an eﬀort.)
2168. Iṣúwàl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowẹ;/ogravedotbelowb/eacutedotbelowwàl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowẹ.
The yam is in your hand, and the knife is
in your hand. (Said to encourage one to do
what he or she has to do without further
delay, especially when all requisite condi-
t i o n sh a v eb e e nm e t . )
2169. Ìwà/ogravedotbelowlẹḿba/ogravedotbelowlẹl/eacutedotbelowrù;/ogravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowpàdánù,óní
aráyéòf/eacutedotbelowrànòun.
The lazy person’s character ﬁlls him or
her with fear; the lazy person loses all and
complains that the world hates him or her.
(Each person is more the architect of his or
her own fortune than the victim of others’
machinations.)
2170. Ìwòyíèṣíewùrà-ababa-àmítita:
ìrègúnrereòsíníb/egravedotbelow.
‘‘By this time last year my father’s water-yam
had grown huge’’: that is nothing good to
reminisce about. (One should look to the
present instead of dwelling on past achieve-
ments, and others’ at that.)
2171. Ìyàtóńjẹ/ogravedotbelowlẹòkéré:a-lápá-má-ṣiṣ/eacutedotbelow.
The malaise that aﬄicts the lazy person
is not triﬂing: [it is] one-who-has-arms-
that-will-not-work. (Laziness is a great
aﬄiction.)
2172. Ìyànjúlàńgbà;b íaògbì yànjúbí/ogravedotbelowlẹlà
ńrí;ojoojúm/oacutedotbelowníńrẹni.
One simply makes an eﬀort; if one does not
make an eﬀort one seems like a shiftless per-
son; one copes with weariness daily. (In spite
of weariness, one must still make a decent
eﬀort at one’s calling. Compare 2154.)
2173. Ìyáw/oacutedotbelow,ìyás/egravedotbelowlajáﬁńpaehoro;wàrà-
wàràlẹkùnńgùn.
Nimble hands and nimble feet make it pos-
sible for a dog to kill a rabbit; the leopard
attacks its prey with lightning speed. (One
should be brisk about what one has to do.)
J
2174. Jagajìgìòmọogun;ogunńpaelégbèje
àdó.
Loading the body down with charms has
no eﬀect in a war; war kills even the per-
son carrying 1,400 juju gourdlets. (One
should trust in one’s arms rather than in
one’s charms.)
K
2175. Kàkàkíil/egravedotbelowkú,ṣíṣániyóṣàá.
Rather than die, the earth will only become
bare. (One may be inconvenienced by one’s
enemies’ machinations, but one will not be
destroyed by them.)
2176. Kíágbéọk/oacutedotbelowsosájàkápèteìm/eacutedotbelowl/eacutedotbelow,
ojúgun-únyótánóﬁkùns/eacutedotbelowhìn.
Hiding the hoe in the loft and contriving to
shirk work, the shin ate its ﬁll and devel-
oped a stomach at its back. (Said of people
who shirk work but eagerly partake of the
rewards.)
2177. Kíáránniníṣ/eacutedotbelowòtókám/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowj/eacutedotbelow.
To be sent on an errand is nothing com-
pared to knowing how to carry it out. (The
good servant is the one who can perform his
or her tasks well.)
218 the good person


--- PAGE 232 ---
2178. Kíareodòkásùn;kíniaráiléyómu?
If we go to the river and sleep there, what
will the people left at home drink? (We must
not fail those who depend on us.)
2179. Kíátóbíọmọdé,ẹnìkanlàḿbáṣeré.
Before the child was born, one had someone
as a playmate. (Message to someone that
before he or she came around, one got along
rather well and would do so again if that
person were to disappear from the scene.
Compare 2187 and 2242.)
2180. KíeégúntódélAlágbaà-átińf/ogravedotbelowl/egravedotbelowl/egravedotbelow
j/egravedotbelowkọ.
Long before the arrival of masqueraders the
Alágbaà had been eating corn meal with
steamed bean loaves. (One got on very well
before the other person happened on the
scene.)
41
2181. Kìíkanẹnikáyẹrí.
When a duty is one’s turn, one does not
duck it. (One must step up and carry out
one’s responsibility when the time comes.)
2182. Kìírẹòòr/egravedotbelowkórẹsinsinìdí/egravedotbelow.
The porcupine may tire, but never the quills
at its rear. (One can never be so tired that
one will leave oneself defenseless.)
2183. Kìítánnígbáosùnkámárìíﬁpaọmọ
lára.
The calabash of camwood is never so empty
that one does not ﬁnd enough in it to rub
on a baby. (One may lack many things but
never the means to fulﬁll one’s obligations.
Compare 1659 and 4617.)
2184. Kínieégúnńwòtíkòﬁòwúr/ogravedotbelowjó?
What was the masquerader looking at that
41. Alágbaàis the title of the chief of theeégún
(masqueraders), who are supposed to be partial to/ogravedotbelowl/egravedotbelowl/egravedotbelow
(steamed bean loaf).
he did not take advantage of the morn-
ing to dance? (One should not dawdle but
rather do things at the most opportune
moment.)
42
2185. Kíníḿbẹnínúisàtíyóbaòkúl/eacutedotbelowrù?
What is there in the grave to frighten a
corpse? (There is nothing in the oﬃng that
one cannot cope with.)
2186. Kíniọmọẹyẹóṣefúnìyá/egravedotbelowjupékó
dàgbàkófòlọ?
What will a nestling do for its mother other
than become mature and ﬂy away? (People
who are powerless to help one cannot hurt
one by witholding their support.)
2187. Kíòyìnbótódélatińwọaṣọ.
Long before the white man came, we were
wearing clothes. (One got along pretty well
before a certain person came on the scene.
Compare 2179 and 2242.)
2188. Kíkúajá,ngkòníomitooro/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowlá;àìkú
/egravedotbelowngkònípèéránníṣ/eacutedotbelow.
When the dog dies, I will not lick the stew
made with it; alive, I will not send it on an
errand. (One has absolutely no use for the
person at whom the proverb is directed.
This is a variant of 169.)
2189. Kìnìúnònííṣàgbákòẹkùn.
A lion does not face peril from a leopard.
(The stronger person has nothing to fear
from the weaker.)
2190. Kòkaikú,àdàbàsùú-sùútíńj/egravedotbelowláàrin
àṣá.
It fears not death, the pigeon that forages
among hawks. (Said of people who habitu-
ally court danger.)
42. As the day wears on and the sun beats down, the
masquerader’s shroud would become uncomfortably
hot and strenuous exertions that much more of a trial.
Onperseverance 219


--- PAGE 233 ---
2191. Kòsíalápatàtíńpaigún.
There is no butcher who slaughters the
vulture for sale. (Certain actions are forbid-
den. Or, one is beyond the power of one’s
enemies.)
2192. Kòsíbíigbóṣelètakókótó,erinóò
kọjá.
No matter how knotty the bush might be,
the elephant will ﬁnd a way through it. (No
obstacle can stop a resourceful and formi-
dable person. Compare 1504.)
2193. Kòsíèrènínú-u‘‘Gbaowókà.’’
There is no proﬁt in ‘‘Take this money and
count it [for me].’’ (One cannot depend on
proﬁting from others’ industry.)
2194. Kòsíewulóko,àﬁgìrìàparò.
There is no danger on the farm except for
the sudden noise of partridges taking to the
air. (An incantatory wish that all dangers
will stay well away from oneself or some
subject of one’s wishes.)
2195. KòsíẹnitíỌl/oacutedotbelowrunòṣefún,àﬁẹnitóbá
nítòunòtó.
There is no one to whom God has not been
generous, only those who will say he has
not been generous enough. (Everyone has
something to be thankful for.)
2196. Kòsíibitíkògba/ogravedotbelowg/ogravedotbelow;/ogravedotbelowlẹlayéògbà.
There is no place where a fool is not wel-
come; the world rejects only shiftless people.
(People may be foolish, but they had better
not be shiftless.)
2197. Kòsíibitíọw/oacutedotbelow-/ogravedotbelowjàerinòtó.
There is no place an elephant’s trunk cannot
reach. (There is no place beyond a person’s
reach or inﬂuence.)
2198. Kòsíikútíkòrọadìẹl/oacutedotbelowrùn.
There is no manner of death that is incon-
venient for the chicken. (One is game for
whatever propositions another might make.)
2199. Kòsíohuntíńtiòkèb/ogravedotbelowtíil/egravedotbelowògbà.
There is nothing dropping from above that
the earth cannot withstand. (There is no
eventuality that one cannot cope with.)
2200. Kòsíoúnjẹtíḿmúaralókunbíèyítía
jẹs/eacutedotbelownuẹnilọ.
There is no food that nourishes one’s body
like what one puts in one’s own mouth. (The
only thing one can be sure of is what one
has in one’s possession.)
2201. Kówó,kówó,àràbàòwó;ojútìrókò.
‘ ‘ M a yi tc r a s h !M a yi tc r a s h ! ’ ’T h es i l k -
cotton tree does not crash; theìrókòtree is
shamed.
43 (The person whose enemies have
been wishing and expecting him or her to
fail has not failed; the enemies are shamed.)
2202. K/ogravedotbelowǹk/ogravedotbelowṣ/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowníbíatiṣeòuntóyìí,òúnṣì
ńkuèlùb/oacutedotbelow.
The sieve says despite all that has been done
to it, it still manages to sift yam ﬂour.
44 (De-
spite all vicissitudes placed in one’s path,
one was still able to do what was expected.)
2203. Kùtù-kùtùkìíjínil/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowmejì;kùtù-kùtù
níńj/eacutedotbelowòwúr/ogravedotbelow;biriníńj/eacutedotbelowal/eacutedotbelow.
Early dawn does not wake one twice; early
dawn is the morning; deep darkness is night.
(The morning comes only once; whoever
wastes it will discover too late that night has
fallen.)
43. Both trees are huge, and there is supposedly
some rivalry between them.
44. The sieve’s complaint would be either that it
is incessantly agitated or that it has been made full of
holes.
220 the good person


--- PAGE 234 ---
L
2204. Lab/eacutedotbelow-lab/eacutedotbelowòbátìjàwáodò;kanna-
kánnáòbáti/egravedotbelowkọwáoko.
The lab/eacutedotbelowlab/eacutedotbelowplant45 did not come to the
river looking for a ﬁght; the crow did not
come to the farm in search of corn gruel.
(One may be minding one’s business when
one is provoked but should nevertheless be
prepared to respond. The next entry is a
version of the same proverb.)
2205. Lab/eacutedotbelow-lab/eacutedotbelowòb/egravedotbelowrùìjà.
The lab/eacutedotbelowlab/eacutedotbelowplant is not afraid of a ﬁght.
(One is prepared for whatever trouble might
come one’s way. See the previous entry.)
2206. Lékèélékèégbàràdá,ógbatẹlòmíràn
mọ.
The cattle egret borrows wonders to per-
form and performs enough for itself and
others. (Said of people who have done far
more than anyone expected of them.)
2207. Lójú-lójúlàńwoẹnitíaóòkéwìfún.
It is directly in the eyes that one looks at the
subject of the praise poem one is perform-
ing. (One should squarely face the person
with whom one has business.)
M
2208. ‘‘MákọjámiOlùgbàlà’’kìíṣeorin
à-kúnl/egravedotbelow-kọ.
‘‘Pass me not by, dear Redeemer’’ is not a
song one sings on one’s knees. (The Re-
deemer helps only those who make an eﬀort
on their own behalf.)
2209. Máàgbíyèlógún;tiọw/oacutedotbelowẹniníńtóni.
Place not your hopes in inheritance; the
45. A sharp prickly plant found near rivers. It is
presumed to be ever ready to attack.
product of one’s hand labor is what sustains
one. (Whoever trusts in inheritance courts
disasater.)
2210. Màrìwòòwífúnrawọnt/eacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelowtíw/oacutedotbelownﬁ
ńyọ.
Palm fronds do not consult with one an-
other before they sprout. (Each person is
responsible for his or her own decisions.)
2211. Màrìwòòwojúẹnìkan,àﬁỌl/oacutedotbelowrun.
Palm fronds look up to no one except God.
( O n e ’ st r u s ti si nG o do n l y . )
2212. Modiarúgbóọdẹtíńtuolú,modi
àgbàlagbàọdẹtíńwaògòǹgòláàtàn;modi
ògbólógbòóakítìtíńgbaìbọnl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowọdẹ.
Ih a v eb e c o m ea na g e dh u n t e rr e d u c e dt o
gathering mushrooms; I have become an old
hunter good only for digging palm weevils; I
have become an aged monkey that snatches
the gun from the hunter’s grip. (A helpless
person pushed to the wall will somehow ﬁnd
the means to put up a ﬁght.)
2213. ‘‘Mokúgbé’’lehorońdúnlóko;‘‘Mo
mówórá’’làparòńdúnlábà-abàbà.
‘‘I have perished!’’ is the cry of the hare in
the bush; ‘‘I have destroyed things worth a
lot of money!’’ is the cry of the partridge in
the guinea-corn ﬁeld. (A worthless person
can also be counted upon to destroy things
of value.)
2214. ‘‘Moṣeétán’’lóníyì;akìídúp/eacutedotbelow
aláṣekù.
‘ ‘ Ih a v ec o m p l e t e dt h ej o b ’ ’i sw h a td e s e r v e s
praise; one does not thank people who
leave a job only half done. (Whatever one
embarks upon, one should see it through.)
2215. Múlelemúlèle:ilátíòmúleleòléèso;
ikàntíòmúleleòléèw/egravedotbelowwù/egravedotbelowj/egravedotbelow.
High potency upon high potency: the okro
that lacks high potency cannot fruit; the
Onperseverance 221


--- PAGE 235 ---
bitter tomato that lacks high potency can-
not achieve the blood-red complexion.
(Sharpness is a requisite quality for success.)
N
2216. ‘‘Ngólọ,ngólọ!’’lobìnrínﬁńd/eacutedotbelowrùba
ọkùnrin;‘‘Bóolèlọolọ’’lọkùnrínﬁńd/eacutedotbelowrùba
obìnrin.
‘‘I will leave you, I will leave you!’’ is the
threat a woman ﬂings at a man. ‘‘If you have
a mind to leave, go ahead and leave!’’ is the
retort a man throws at a woman. (Every per-
son in a relationship has something he or
she can hold over the others.)
2217. Níinú/egravedotbelowgún,níinú-ug/ogravedotbelowg/ogravedotbelow,ọmọayòa
ṣarabòró.
In the midst of thorns, in the midst of
crooked twigs, the ayòseeds remain smooth.
( Ap e r s o nw h ow i l lt h r i v ew i l ld os oi ns p i t e
of adversities.)
2218. Níinúòf/iacuteigraveàti/ogravedotbelowláà,ọmọpáńd/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowńgbó.
Despite being blown hither and thither in
the gale, the fruits of the sausage tree survive
to maturity. (Some people will thrive despite
adversities.)
2219. Níinúòwúlatiḿbùṣènìòwú.
It is out of one’s stock of cotton that one
takes some for makeweight. (It is to one’s
treasury that one resorts for investments to
build the treasury further.)
2220. Níọj/oacutedotbelowerénìyàńdun/ogravedotbelowlẹ;kàkàkówọlé
kójádeafọw/oacutedotbelowrọigi,apòṣéṣàrà.
It is on the day of festivities that the lazy per-
son is miserable; instead of going inside his
room and emerging again [in other words,
fetching gifts for the revelers], he leans his
arms against a tree and hisses incessantly.
(Shiftless people eventually reap the disgrace
of their laziness when they are unable to do
what is socially expected of them. Compare
2341.)
2221. Níteere,nítèèrè,Ṣàngóṣeb/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowójó
wọjà.
Erratically, with almost imperceptible for-
ward movement, just so Ṣango danced until
he was at the market. (If unimpeded or
unattended to, a seemingly negligible devel-
opment will eventually assume proportions
one cannot ignore.)
46
O
2222. Òbáàkúrú,òbáàpárí,gbèsèòsí,/egravedotbelowsín
òsí;onígbèsèlólèﬁniṣ/egravedotbelowsín.
One may be diminutive, and one may be
bald, but without debt one has not earned
ridicule; only one’s creditor has grounds
to poke fun. (However much one might be
devoid of accomplishments, as long as one
stays out of debt, one’s dignity is intact.)
2223. Ódiọj/oacutedotbelowtíàkàràìyákùtàkátómọọmọ
tólèj/egravedotbelowkọ.
It is only on the day when the mother’s bean
fritters do not sell that one knows which
child can consume large quantities of corn
meal.
47 (One knows the good worker not at
the time of boasting but when there is work
to be done.)
2224. Ógb/oacutedotbelowtiyánsògìrìm/oacutedotbelowdìí;ógb/oacutedotbelowtokosọ
àdánù.
On hearing about pounded yam he girded
himself with cooked melon seeds for stew
46. The proverb refers to the sometimes sedate,
sometimes erratic dancing of the cultists of the god
Ṣango.
47. Àkàràand /egravedotbelowkọare meals that most often go
together.
222 the good person


--- PAGE 236 ---
seasoning; on hearing about farm work he
threw his cutlass away. (The lazy person will
eagerly heed the summons to eat but not to
work.)
2225. Okògunẹṣinl/oacutedotbelowsàn-án,oògun èèyàn
lóru,oòdunǹkankàr à-kàrà;báwoloṣelèní
káyémáf/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelow?
You do not ride a horse by day; you do not
ride people by night; and you do not make
great exertions to achieve any goal. How
could you have a say in saving the world
from disaster? (A person who makes no
eﬀort cannot aﬀect human aﬀairs.)
2226. Okòṣáigil/oacutedotbelowgb/eacutedotbelow,oòsọògùr/ogravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowfà,o
dédìí/ogravedotbelowpẹogb/eacutedotbelownusókèòńretí;/ogravedotbelowf/eacutedotbelowníńro?
You did not slash the trunk with a cutlass;
you did not shoot an arrow at the top of the
palm-wine-producing palm tree; you come
to the foot of the palm tree and raise your
open mouth. Does it drip all by itself? (Said
of people who expect to reap beneﬁts where
they have not made any eﬀort.)
2227. ‘‘Ókùdí/egravedotbelowkínwí’’:ojoníńsọnida.
‘‘I was just on the verge of speaking my
mind’’: it only makes one into a coward.
(One should either engage or refrain from
making excuses.)
2228. Óníibitíóńdé,it/oacutedotbelow-dídámìnínúààw/egravedotbelow.
It goes some way [in assuaging hunger],
saliva swallowing during a fast. (Every little
eﬀort helps.)
2229. OníkíogbóogbóOlúàṣo;olèjìyàbí
Olúàṣo?
You pray to live as long as Olúàṣo, but can
you endure the trials of Olúàṣo?
48 (Who-
48. Olúàṣo was a king (Aláàﬁn) of /Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow reputed to
have lived for 320 years and to have sired 1,460 children
(Johnson 158).
ever wishes for the sort of glory another
person enjoys must also be willing to en-
dure whatever tribulations that person has
endured.)
2230. Ópaobì,óyọabidún-unr/egravedotbelow.
He split the kola-nut pod open and also re-
moved the bad among the seeds. (Said of a
person who has fulﬁlled an obligation to the
utmost.)
2231. Obìnrint/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowyẹọkọ/egravedotbelowníj/oacutedotbelowijó,obìnrin
gìdìgbáyẹọkọ/egravedotbelowníj/oacutedotbelowèbù;bóbáruọg/oacutedotbelowrùn-ún
èbùtánakókébé-kébéníwájúọkọ.
A slender woman is the joy of her husband
on a day of dancing, but a hefty woman
is her husband’s joy on the day of yams
quartered for planting; after she has toted
a hundred yam pieces, she walks smartly
[toward the farm] ahead of her husband.
(Good looks are not all that make a good
wife.)
2232. Obìnrintíyóf/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowalágbára,ọkànkanní
ḿmú.
A woman who would marry a formidable
man must have an unwavering mind. (Once
one has made a decision on an important
matter, one should remain resolute.)
2233. Òbúr/eacutedotbelowwàẹni,tòrìṣàni;àìraṣọlò,tolú-
war/egravedotbelowni.
A person’s ugliness is the god’s doing; the
person’s lack of clothing is his or her own
fault. (One must take responsibility for
some conditions, but cannot be blamed for
others.)
2234. Odídẹr/eacutedotbelowkìíkúsókoìwájẹ.
The parrot never dies in the grazing ﬁeld. (A
prayer that just as the parrot always returns
home from grazing, the subject of the prayer
will return safely from a business venture
away from home.)
Onperseverance 223


--- PAGE 237 ---
2235. Odòkìíkúnboẹjalójú.
Ar i v e rd o e sn o ts os w e l la st ob eo v e rt h e
head of the ﬁsh. (A statement that an adver-
sary at his most powerful can never pose a
threat.)
2236. Odòtíabámọorísun/egravedotbelowkìígbénilọ.
A river whose source one knows does not
carry one away. (A person whose beginning
one knows cannot pose a great threat.)
2237. Odótóbátojúẹnikúnkìígbénilọ.
A river that swells in one’s presence does not
carry one away. (A danger that one sees in
the making can be avoided. Compare 1723.)
2238. OgunkìíjàkówọléAs/eacutedotbelowyìn.
War does not rage and destroy the home
of the As/eacutedotbelowyìn.
49 (Certain personages are
beyond the reach of misfortune.)
2239. Ogunkìírí/egravedotbelowhìnogun.
An army does not see the rear of an(other)
army. (One should face one’s adversary
squarely.)
2240. Ogúnọdúntíebítińpa/ogravedotbelowgà,ìrìn-in
fàájìòpadàl/eacutedotbelows/egravedotbelow-ẹr/egravedotbelow.
In all the twenty years that the chameleon
has been in the throes of hunger, its digni-
ﬁed gait has not deserted it. (The digniﬁed
person never allows himself or herself to be
ruﬄed by adversity.)
2241. Ògbógbóàw/ogravedotbelownníḿbiajáko.
It is a mighty net that can trip the civet cat.
(It takes extraordinary eﬀorts or capabilities
to accomplish extraordinary tasks.)
2242. Ohunkanladìẹńjẹkágbàdotódé.
The chicken had something to eat before
there was corn. (A statement that one does
49. As/eacutedotbelowyìnis the title of the chief of Ìs/eacutedotbelowyìn, a town
north of Ọy/oacutedotbelow.
not depend on somebody else, since one
survived before his or her arrival. Compare
2187.)
2243. Ohuntíabágbìnlaókàá.
What one plants is what one reaps. (Every
action has its proper reward. Compare the
following entry.)
2244. Ohuntíabágbìns/eacutedotbelowhìnlaópadàbá.
W h a t e v e ro n es o w sb e h i n do n ei sw h a to n e
will return to ﬁnd. (One reaps whatever one
sows. Compare the preceding entry.)
2245. Ohuntíafún/egravedotbelowṣ/oacutedotbelowṣ/oacutedotbelowni/egravedotbelowṣ/oacutedotbelowńṣ/oacutedotbelow.
Whatever one hands to a warrior to look
after is what he looks after. (One should
concentrate on the duty entrusted to one.)
2246. Ohuntítánlọdúneégún.
The annual egúngúnfestival is not endless.
(Every condition ends sometime. Sometimes
t h ep r o v e r bi sr e n d e r e dOhuntítánleégún
ọdún,meaning, ‘‘The outing of the annual
egúgúnis something that has an end.’’)
2247. Ohuntóṣeìjímèrètóﬁgungi/egravedotbelowg/egravedotbelow:bíkò
báríohuntójùb/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowlọkònís/ogravedotbelowkal/egravedotbelow.
Whatever it was that sent the brown mon-
key climbing to the top of the thorny acacia
tree, unless it sees something even more
terrifying, it will not climb down. (It takes
a threatened catastrophe to make one look
kindly on minor inconveniences.)
2248. Ohuntóṣeìw/ogravedotbelowfàtíkòﬁwásókoolówó,
bójúbákanojúyósọfúnolówó-or/egravedotbelow.
Whatever caused the pawned worker to stay
away from the creditor’s farm, when the two
come face to face, he or she will have some
explaining to do. (Whoever shirks his or her
duty will eventually have to explain why.)
2249. Òjìjiòb/egravedotbelowrù/ogravedotbelowfìn.
The shadow has no fear of the gully. (One
has no need to fear a harmless adversary.)
224 the good person


--- PAGE 238 ---
2250. Òjìjíṣel/eacutedotbelowg/eacutedotbelow-l/eacutedotbelowg/eacutedotbelowmáwòó.
The shadow lacks substance but it never
crashes. (Apparent fragility may mask real
resilience.)
2251. Òjòìbár/ogravedotbelow,kílad/eacutedotbelowt/egravedotbelowìbágbìn?Ọw/oacutedotbelow
ad/eacutedotbelowt/egravedotbelowòkáẹyọàgbàdom/eacutedotbelowwàá.
Were it to rain, what would the leper have
planted? A leper’s palm cannot scoop ten
grains of corn. (Said of people who blame
their deﬁciencies on ﬂaws in Nature.)
2252. Òjójìyàgbé;alágbára-ábúu,ógun
àjà;at/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelow.
Òjó is victimized without recourse; a bully
insults him, he goes to hide in the rafters,
and his nemesis follows him there. (Said
of poeple who are powerless to stop being
victimized.)
2253. Òjòpamí,òjòpaère-èmi;òjòòpaẹwà
ara-àmidànù.
The rain may beat me, and the rain may
beat my statue; the rain cannot wash away
my good looks. (Adversity will not get the
better of me.)
2254. Òjòjò/ogravedotbelowlẹòtánb/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow;/ogravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowbàátìódáná
orí.
A lazy person’s illness is not soon over; the
lazy person ﬁnds no way out and prepares a
ﬁre to warm his head.
50 (A lazy person will
use every excuse to avoid any obligation,
and when he cannot avoid it, his fulﬁllment
of it is always pitiable.)
2255. Òjò-ópaalágùn-úndì,àgúndìídomi;
ìyàwóńretíàgúndì,ọk/oacutedotbelowsùnsóko.
50. The point of lighting a ﬁre to warm his head is
obscure. Another possibility, dánáori, ‘‘oﬀer a feast of
corn meal,’’ would suggest a laughable endeavor, since
ori(/egravedotbelowkọ) is not a particularly popular meal. A third
possibility, equally problematic, isdánáòrí, ‘‘make ﬁre
using shea butter as fuel,’’ or ‘‘make ﬁre for shea butter.’’
Rain beats the man carrying pounded yams
wrapped in leaves, and the pounded yams
become waterlogged; the wife awaits the
pounded yams; the husband sleeps on the
f a r m .( W h e no n ef a i l st od e l i v e ro nap r o m -
ise, one is hardly able to show one’s face
before those one has betrayed.)
2256. Òjò-ópaodídẹàlùkòńy/ogravedotbelow,àlùkò-óròpé
ìkóbàj/eacutedotbelow;òjómúìkówọṣọ.
Rain beats the parrot and the touraco re-
joices, thinking that the parrot’s tail feather
is ruined; the rain only makes the tail feather
brighter. (The occurrence one’s adversaries
hoped would destroy one only improved
one’s fortunes.)
2257. Òjò-ópọnmifún/ogravedotbelowlẹ,kòṣ/eacutedotbelowgifún/ogravedotbelowlẹ.
The rain provides water for the lazy person,
but it does not fetch ﬁrewood for the lazy
person. (Parasites can have only so much
done for them, never everything.)
2258. Ojúabanij/eacutedotbelowp/oacutedotbelown,kòlètanfìtílà.
The detractor’s eyes glow red, but they can-
not light a lamp. (A detractor’s slanderous
eﬀorts are in vain.)
2259. ‘‘Ojúàna-àmiòsunw/ogravedotbelown’’;kòjukógba
ọmọ/egravedotbelowlọ.
‘‘The look on my parent-in-law’s face is
baleful’’; the worst he or she can do is take
his or her daughter back. (There is a limit
to which a benefactor’s withdrawal of his or
her beneﬁcence can hurt one.)
2260. Ojúkìíp/oacutedotbelowniṣinkámábàáwórónínú
/egravedotbelow.
The Akee apple is never so blighted that one
does not ﬁnd a seed in it. (Whatever befalls,
one will be left with some residual property.)
2261. Ojúkìíp/oacutedotbelowniṣinkómálà.
The Akee apple is never so blighted that it
does not eventually split open. (Whatever
Onperseverance 225


--- PAGE 239 ---
misfortune might befall, one would be able
to do those things that are second nature.)
2262. Ojúlàńr/oacutedotbelow;ògóṣòro-óṣe.
One only tries one’s best; heroic deeds do
not come easy. (One’s best is enough. Com-
pare 2172.)
2263. Ojúlakàn-ánﬁńṣ/oacutedotbeloworí.
T h ec r a bw a t c h e sa f t e ri t sh e a dw i t hi t se y e s .
(One should have one’s eyes open to protect
one’s interests.)
2264. Ojúm/eacutedotbelowwàákòjọojúẹni.
Ten eyes are not like one’s own. (Seeing
something oneself is far better than hear-
ing a report of it from ten people. Compare
2267.)
2265. ‘‘Ojúòf/eacutedotbelowrakù’’tíńtaajáẹlókòó;ófowó
ṣíyánjẹ.
‘‘We might see each other again’’ sold his
dog for 20 cowries and spent the money
on pounded yams to eat.
51 (A footloose
person will part with valuables for little or
nothing.)
2266. Ojúolójúkìígba/ogravedotbelowrànfúnniwò.
Other people’s eyes will not look after mat-
ters for you. (No one else will take care of
your aﬀairs. Compare 2264 and the follow-
ing entry.)
2267. Ojúolójúòjọojúẹni;a-ṣ/ogravedotbelowràn-deniò
w/oacutedotbelowp/ogravedotbelow.
Other people’s eyes are nothing like one’s
own; minders of other people’s business are
few. (No one can look after one’s aﬀairs as
one would oneself. Compare the foregoing
entry and 2264.)
51. Ojúòf/eacutedotbelowrakùis an expression people use on part-
ing; it means, literally, ‘‘Our eyes are not giving up the
sight of one another.’’
2268. Ojúp/oacutedotbelownkokomáf/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelow;/ogravedotbelowg/egravedotbelowd/egravedotbelowp/oacutedotbelownkoko
már/ogravedotbelow;/ogravedotbelowránﬁnidùgb/egravedotbelow-dùgb/egravedotbelowyunninù;/ogravedotbelowràn
tíńﬁnniòleèpani.
The eyes go red but do not go blind; the
banana goes brilliant yellow but does not
rot; a problem rattles one to the founda-
tions and lets one go; a problem that rattles
one will not kill one. (Every problem soon
comes to an end in time.)
2269. Ojúr/eacutedotbelowgbinkòf/oacutedotbelow,a-j/ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelow-ìyà-má-rù.
The eye looks on a ﬁlthy sight and does not
go blind, [like] one who sustains a succes-
sion of suﬀerings without wasting away.
(With resilience one will overcome all prob-
lems.)
2270. Ojútikókó,ojútieéwo;ojútiaáràgbá
ìdíp/egravedotbelowlú.
The lump that attacks the head is shamed,
the boil is shamed, and the hardened tis-
sue on the buttocks is shamed also. (An
assertion of deﬁance in the face of adversity.)
2271. Ojútíńp/oacutedotbelownawoàp/oacutedotbelownkúk/oacutedotbelow;ìyàtíńjẹ
awoàjẹlà;ìṣ/eacutedotbelowtíńṣ/eacutedotbelowawoà-ṣ/eacutedotbelow-ṣ/eacutedotbelow-obì-jẹni.
The suﬀering that the babaláwois experi-
encing is not something that leads to death;
t h eh a r dt i m et h a tt h ebabaláwois going
through is one that leads to riches; the vicis-
situdes that now befall thebabaláwoleave
room for taking a bite of kola nut.
52 (One’s
present troubles will lead to even better
times.)
2272. Ojútótirígb/egravedotbelowl/egravedotbelowd/eacutedotbelowtirópinìran.
T h ee y e st h a th a v es e e ngb/egravedotbelowl/egravedotbelowd/eacutedotbelowhave seen
the ultimate in sights.
53 (Having passed the
52. Babaláwo,literally ‘‘father of mysteries,’’ is the
title of the priests of Ifá, who are diviners, healers, and
general-purpose medicine men.
53. Gb/egravedotbelowl/egravedotbelowd/eacutedotbelowis probably a corruption of G/egravedotbelowl/egravedotbelowd/eacutedotbelow,
a women’s secret cult, since there is no such word as
gb/egravedotbelowl/egravedotbelowd/egravedotbelow,as far as I know, in current Yoruba.
226 the good person


--- PAGE 240 ---
ultimate test, one will have little diﬃculty
with lesser ones. Compare the next entry
and 2039.)
2273. Ojútótirókunòníír/oacutedotbelowsàkób/egravedotbelowrù.
The eyes that have seen the ocean will not
tremble at the sight of the lagoon. (Once
one has survived a grave peril, small incon-
veniences will not be unduly impressive.
Compare the previous entry.)
2274. Ojúm/oacutedotbelowkìím/oacutedotbelowkíọw/oacutedotbelowmáyùn-únẹnu.
Never a day dawns that the hand does not
make a trip to the mouth. (Certain obliga-
tions are unavoidable.)
2275. Ojúoróníńlékèomi;òṣíbàtàníńlékè
odò.
The water lettuce always winds up on the
surface of the water; the waterlily always
winds up on the surface of the stream. (Just
as those plants remain on top of their habi-
tats, so one will remain triumphant over
one’s adversaries.)
54
2276. Òkèlẹyẹńfọhùn.
It is from aloft that the bird sounds oﬀ. (It is
time for one to rise up.)
2277. Òkèméjìkìíbínúẹni;bíabágun/ogravedotbelowkan,
àsìmáarọ/ogravedotbelowkan.
One cannot be bedeviled by two hills; if one
a s c e n d sah i l l ,o n ed e s c e n d sah i l l .( E v e r y
h i l lo n em u s tc l i m bh a sad e s c e n to nt h e
other side.)
2278. Òkétéfìjàs/eacutedotbelowhìn;ód/oacutedotbelowjàtánókáw/oacutedotbelowlérí.
The giant bush rat turns its back at the
place where it has a quarrel; after getting
to the market it clamps its hands on its
head.
55 (The moment and the place to act
54. Ojúoró is Pistiastratiotes (Arcideae), and
òṣíbàtàis Nymphaealotus (Abraham 463, 491).
55. The ﬁght here refers to the circumstances in
are when and where the matter is taking
place, not when all is over and everybody
has dispersed.)
2279. Òkìkíajákìípaoṣù.
A dog’s howling will not kill the moon. (The
threats of ineﬀectual enemies amount to
nothing.)
2280. Òkìkíòpoṣù;ariwoòpagún;ibiẹríẹ
kíbòsí-ìmilọ.
Being widely reputed does not kill the
moon; being noised about does not kill the
vulture; wherever you please, make a noise
about me. (A statement that one is not both-
ered by people who spread stories about
one.)
2281. Okoetíléladì/eacutedotbelowlèro.
The chicken is good at cultivating only the
soil close by the home. (Said of people who
boast when in the safety of their rooms but
can do nothing once outside.)
2282. Òkòkanigi;òkòpadàs/eacutedotbelowhìnkíorebio
tiwá.
Stone, hit a tree; stone, retrace your steps
and return to whence you came. (Something
of an incantation to send evil wishes back
toward those who sent them.)
2283. Òkúòmoyeàńràg/ogravedotbelow.
The corpse does not know the cost of the
shroud. (The person who does not have to
pay the bills does not care how expensive the
things he wastes are.)
2284. Òkúọdúnm/eacutedotbelowta-ákúròníàlejò-osàréè.
A three-year-old corpse is no longer a new-
which the bush rat is captured. After hunters kill a giant
bush rat, they gut it and aﬃx it to a stake that runs
the length of its body, through the head, and, ﬁnally,
through the forelimbs, which are clasped together above
the rodent’s head. A common gesture people visited by
misfortune use is clamping their head in their hands.
Onperseverance 227


--- PAGE 241 ---
comer to the grave. (In time, a sojourner
becomes a native.)
2285. Òkú/ogravedotbelowlẹònípósí.
A lazy person’s corpse does not merit a
coﬃn. (One does not receive in death a
treatment one’s life has not earned. Or, one
reaps what one sows.)
2286. Olójúkìífojú/egravedotbelowsíl/egravedotbelowkítàlùb/oacutedotbelowków/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelow.
The owner of the eyes will not neglect them
and watch foreign matter lodge in them.
(One does not simply look on as one’s inter-
ests are jeopardized.)
2287. Olówókìíﬁowó/egravedotbelowfúnabòṣìna.
T h er i c hp e r s o nw i l ln o tg i v eh i so rh e r
money to a poor person to spend. (Gener-
osity has its limits.)
2288. Olówómọòwò.
The rich person is an expert at trading.
(Success comes from expertise.)
2289. Olúmọ/Egravedotbelowgbáòṣéégbé.
The Olúmọ of the /Egravedotbelowgbá territory is impos-
sible to carry.
56 (Some tasks are absolutely
impossible.)
2290. Omiadágúnòlègbémàlúùlọ.
A stagnant pool cannot carry oﬀ a cow.
(Some adverse situations are annoyances
only and pose no danger.)
2291. Omilódànù,agbèòf/oacutedotbelow.
It is the water that is spilled; the water gourd
is not broken. (A proverb usually used to
console parents who have lost a child: the
child is likened to the water, and the mother
to the vessel.)
2292. Omiḿbẹlát/oacutedotbelow.
There is water in the long-necked calabash.
56. Olúmọ is an imposing inselberg near Ab/eacutedotbelowòkúta.
(One has resources that others may not
know about.)
2293. Omiṣ/eacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelowrúòmuakèrègbè.
The water from a new spring will not cover a
gourd to the top. (An upstart cannot defeat
a veteran.)
2294. Omíw/oacutedotbelowyanrìngbẹrẹrẹ,b/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowniomiò
l/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow,omiòl/eacutedotbelows/egravedotbelow.
Water drags the sand about, and yet water
lacks hands and lacks legs. (One may not
have a great deal but can nevertheless per-
form wonders.)
2295. ‘‘Onílóḿmọ,’’ìjà/ogravedotbelowlẹ.
‘‘It will all end sometime today’’: a lazy per-
son’s motto in a ﬁght. (The idler or shirker
forced to perform some task is always eager
for the day’s end.)
2296. Òní,‘‘Mòńlọ’’;/ogravedotbelowla,‘‘Mòńlọ, ’’kòj/eacutedotbelowkí
àlejògbinawùsá.
Today ‘‘I am leaving’’ and tomorrow ‘‘I am
leaving’’ prevents the sojourner from plant-
ing awùsá.(Constant awareness of one’s
sojourner status prevents one from engaging
in long-term projects or establishing roots
in a place.)
57
2297. Òní/ogravedotbeloww/egravedotbelow,/ogravedotbelowlaàro:iṣ/eacutedotbelowoníṣ/eacutedotbelowòj/eacutedotbelowkáráàyè
ṣetẹni.
Today, a communal project; tomorrow,
group work on a somebody’s farm: other
people’s work prevents one from doing one’s
own. (Too many communal responsibilities
take one from one’s own aﬀairs.)
58
2298. Oníbàj/eacutedotbelowòlódó;ẹnugbogbolodó-owọn.
Detractors of others have no pestles; their
57. Awùsáis the creeper that yields fruits known
locally as wallnuts.
58. /Ogravedotbeloww/egravedotbelowand àroare both names for the traditional
arrangements through which a group of people take
turns working together on one another’s projects.
228 the good person


--- PAGE 242 ---
mouths are their pestles. (Detractors have
no weapons other than their mouths.)
2299. Oníbànàníńt/oacutedotbelowjúòro/mgravebó;onídẹní
ńt/oacutedotbelowjúawẹde.
It is he who has copper ornaments who must
procure oranges; whoever has brass orna-
ments must procure the herbawẹdẹ.(Each
person must see to procuring whatever he or
she needs.)
59
2300. Onígbèsèèèyàn-ántikú ;aòt/iacuteigravesìnkú
/egravedotbelowni.
The habitual debtor is already dead, except
that he has not yet been buried. (Some-
one always in debt is no better than a dead
person.)
2301. OníṢàngóòmẹnitíòúnńwàlóògì
dànù.
The Ṣango worshiper knows not whose
ground corn he is spilling. (One does not
care who is aﬀected by one’s actions.)
2302. Oníṣekìífìṣe/egravedotbelowsíl/egravedotbelowreibi;óńreàjòó
múìṣe/egravedotbelowl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowgírígírí.
The owner of a habit will not go on a jour-
ney and leave his habit at home; when he
goes, he takes his habit along with him. (One
cannot escape from one’s character.)
2303. Oníṣòwówàlóòrùn;náwónáwówà
níbòji.
The person who does the trading is in the
sun; the person who spends the money is
in the shade. (A criticism of people who ex-
pend no eﬀort but take advantage of other
people’s exertions. Compare 2317.)
2304. Oníṣúﬁṣuẹse/egravedotbelowbẹ;ojútiatèèpojẹ.
The owner of the yams makes yam pottage
out of the yams; the person who eats the
59. The proverb refers to the materials needed for
cleaning the metals.
yam scrapings oﬀ the peels is shamed.60 (The
parasite is shamed when the host ﬁnds a way
to shut him out.)
2305. Oògùnkìígbéinúàdój/eacutedotbelow.
A magical charm does not work from within
its gourdlet. (One cannot expect any bene-
ﬁt from one’s resources without deploying
them.)
2306. Oòrùnòkanàtàrí,ọw/oacutedotbelowòdá.
The sun has not risen directly above the
head; working hands cannot cease their toil.
(The day is for working.)
2307. Oòrùnòpa/oacutedotbelow,òjòòpa/oacutedotbelow,oníòńṣiṣ/eacutedotbelowajé.
The sun does not beat you; the rain does not
beat you; yet you say you are engaged in a
gainful pursuit. (Proﬁtable labor is seldom
pleasurable.)
2308. Oríad/eacutedotbelowtùńpèteàrán;oríadáràn-án
ńpèteàtijọba.
The head that wears a cloth cap strives to
wear a velvet cap; the one that wears a vel-
v e tc a ps t r i v e st ob e c o m eak i n g .( E v e r y o n e
hopes for a better tomorrow.)
2309. Oríiṣ/eacutedotbelowlaagońkúlé.
It is while at work that a clock dies. (A vow
never to stop working until death.)
2310. Oríkìítóbikólórímálègbée.
A head is never so heavy that the owner can-
not carry it. (One should always be capable
of taking care of one’s aﬀairs.)
2311. Oríńlákìípátán.
A huge head does not go completely bald.
60. In the preparation of/egravedotbelowbẹ(or àṣáró)n oy a m
remnant is left on the peels for a parasite to take advan-
tage of; roasting and later peeling yams, on the other
hand, for example, would leave something for such a
parasite.
Onperseverance 229


--- PAGE 243 ---
(The more one has in abundance, the more
cushion one has against reverses.)
2312. Oríolóríkìíbánigb/eacutedotbelowrù.
Other people’s heads will not carry one’s
load. (Each person must bear his own bur-
den.)
2313. Òrìṣàtíńgb/ogravedotbelowlẹòsí;apáẹniníńgbeni.
No god comes to the aid of shiftless people;
only their arms aid them. (One’s well-being
is in the muscular strength of one’s arms.)
2314. Orítam/eacutedotbelowtaòkọnnúẹbọ.
Ac r o s s r o a d sw h e r et h r e er o a d sm e e ti sn o t
afraid of sacriﬁcial oﬀerings. (One does not
fear any eventuality.)
61
2315. Òruniìnàhìnàgb/egravedotbelow.
N i g h t t i m ei saf a r m e r ’ st i m et os t r e t c ht h e
back. (As long as the day lasts, there will be
w o r kt od o . )
2316. Òṣìṣ/eacutedotbelowl/ogravedotbelowtá/ogravedotbelowlẹ.
The industrious person is the enemy of the
shiftless person. (People with ﬂaws hate
those who might show them up.)
2317. Òṣìṣ/eacutedotbelowwàlóòrùn;ẹnímáaj/eacutedotbelowwàníbòji.
The laborer is in the sun; the person who
will reap the fruit is in the shade. (Quite
often those who do the work are not the
ones who gain the beneﬁts of the labor. This
is a variant of 2303.)
2318. Oṣùm/eacutedotbelowtalebińpàgb/egravedotbelow.
The farmer’s hunger lasts only three
months.
62 (The hardship an industrious
person experiences does not last long.)
61. The favorite spots for leaving sacriﬁces are
crossroads, especially the conﬂuence of three roads.
62. The period between harvests (of one crop or
another) is seldom more than three months.
2319. Òwòàdákìípaàdá;òwòọk/oacutedotbelowkìíyọ
ọk/oacutedotbelowl/eacutedotbelownu.
A machete’s trade does not kill the machete;
a hoe’s trade does not cause problems for the
hoe. (A person’s forte does not constitute a
problem for him or her.)
2320. Owóòmọ/egravedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelown,ósọàbúròdàgbà.
Wealth does not know who is the elder; it
makes a senior of the younger person. (Suc-
cess does not depend on age or maturity.
Compare 2124.)
2321. Owóòníranàﬁẹnitíkòbáṣiṣ/eacutedotbelow.
Money has no lineage, except for the person
who will not work. (Money does not restrict
itself to certain families; only the shiftless
are shunned by money.)
2322. Owóolówóleégúnńná.
Other people’s money is what the masquer-
ader spends. (The parasitic person always
relies on other people’s largesse.)
2323. Òwòtíabámáaṣeàṣelà,akìíríàpá/egravedotbelow
láraẹni.
The trade that one will pursue and that will
make one prosper does not leave scars. (A
pursuit that is destined to make one pros-
perous will not cause unbearable hardship.)
2324. Òwòtíafowórà,owólaﬁńpa.
Merchandise that one buys with money, one
earns money for. (One does not give away
merchandise for which one paid money.
Compare 2337.)
2325. Òwòtíaóṣelàńt/oacutedotbelowjú;Òjífabẹhọra.
The trade one will pursue is the one one
protects; Òjí scratches his body with a razor.
(The gadgets people favor give away their
trade.)
2326. Òyìnbóbaba/ogravedotbelownájà;ajébabaténí-téní.
The white man is the past master of trading;
money is the guarantee of fashionableness.
230 the good person


--- PAGE 244 ---
(Without money one cannot be fashion-
able.)
2327. Òyìnbótaọjàtaorúkọ;Ègúntajàta
èdìdì.
The white man sells merchandise with the
name brand still attached; the Ègún person
sells cloth still in its bundle. (One deals with
matters wholesale, as it were, not retail.)
Ọ
2328. Ọbatóﬁiyùnbọl/egravedotbelow,ọbatówúu,àwọn
méjèèjìlaómáasọorúkọ-ọwọn.
The king who buries coral beads, the king
who digs them up: both will have their
names remembered by posterity. (Whoever
performs an unprecedented feat, whatever it
might be, will be remembered by posterity.
The following entry is a variant.)
2329. Ọbatósọẹgàndierùfù,ọbatósọerùfù
dẹgàn:àwọnméjèèjìlaómáasọorúkọ-ọ
wọn.
The king who turned a forest into a sandy
plain, the king who turned a sandy plain
into a forest: both their names will be re-
membered by posterity. (Whoever performs
a great feat will be remembered. See the
previous entry.)
2330. Ọb/egravedotbelowtódùn,owólópaá.
A delicious stew was procured with money.
(Nothing good happens without money.)
2331. Ọb/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowtutùtán,adaw/oacutedotbelowbùúlá.
The stew having cooled, one hollows one’s
palm to eat it. (When the back of a diﬃcult
task has been broken, people are eager to
tackle it.)
2332. /Ogravedotbelowdájúlóbíowó;ìtìjúlóbígbèsè.
It is brazenness that gives birth to wealth;
it is excessive reticence that gives birth to
poverty. (Nothing succeeds without some
audaciousness.)
2333. Ọdọọdúnlàgb/egravedotbelowńníyì.
It is every year that the farmer receives
praise. (Statement or prayer that some
person will receive perennial praise, just
as the annual harvest brings praise to the
farmer.)
2334. Ọdúnnìíọd/eacutedotbelowpaerin;/egravedotbelow/egravedotbelowmírànọd/eacutedotbelowpa
ẹf/ogravedotbelown,ọdúnm/eacutedotbelowfàọd/eacutedotbelowpaòló;ọláńrewájú,tàbí
ọláńr/egravedotbelowhìn?
This year the hunter kills an elephant; the
next year the hunter kills a buﬀalo; two years
h e n c et h eh u n t e rk i l l sag r a s sm o u s e :i sh i s
glory increasing or decreasing? (One should
always strive for greater accomplishments,
not lesser.)
2335. /Ogravedotbelowg/egravedotbelowd/egravedotbelowdúdúòṣéébùṣán;ọmọburúkúò
ṣéélùpa.
An unripe plaintain is not something to eat;
a useless child is not something to beat to
death. (Certain problems one simply has to
live with.)
2336. Ọgb/oacutedotbelownòyìnbótiojúòkunlàwá;aṣọkí
nióboríakẹsẹ?
The white man’s wisdom shines even across
the seas; what cloth, though, is better than
akẹsẹcloth?
63 (Despite the appeal of foreign
goods, local wares are preferable.)
2337. Ọjàtíafowórà,owólaﬁńpa.
One makes money from goods one pur-
chased with money. (Do not make gifts of
commodities purchased for trade. Compare
2324.)
2338. /Ogravedotbelow-jẹ-w/ogravedotbelowmù-w/ogravedotbelowmù-kú-w/ogravedotbelowmù-w/ogravedotbelowmù
lorúkọtíàpàńj/eacutedotbelow.
One-who-eats-recklessly-and-dies-recklessly
63. Akẹsẹis local yellow cotton cloth.
Onperseverance 231


--- PAGE 245 ---
is the name one calls a wasteful person.
(Wasteful people will never learn the value
of things.)
2339. Ọj/oacutedotbelowabák/oacutedotbelow/ogravedotbelowlẹlàńk/oacutedotbelowinúrír/oacutedotbelow.
The day one learns laziness is the day one
should learn how to endure a painfully
empty stomach. (The lazy person should
not expect to be fed by others.)
2340. Ọj/oacutedotbelowabáríìbínìbíńwọl/egravedotbelow.
The day one sees the afterbirth is the day
it enters the earth. (Once one perceives a
threat, one can deal decisively with it.)
2341. Ọj/oacutedotbelowerél/ogravedotbelowrànńdun/ogravedotbelowlẹ.
It is on the day of relaxation that the lazy
person experiences regret. (People who did
not save for a rainy day will be sorry when
those who did save enjoy the beneﬁts of
their foresight. Compare 2220.)
2342. Ọj/oacutedotbelowtíadókolàńjìjàil/egravedotbelow.
The day one gets to the farm is the day one
ﬁghts over boundaries. (Do not procrasti-
nate.)
2343. Ọj/oacutedotbelowtíańk/oacutedotbelowṣ/eacutedotbelowlàńk/oacutedotbelowìyára.
The day one learns a trade is the day one
learns to be quick at it. (Whatever one does
should be done thoroughly and expertly.)
2344. /Ogravedotbelowkàràkàràńké,ẹnu/egravedotbelowḿb/eacutedotbelowj/egravedotbelow;óníbíẹnu
òúnyadéìpàk/oacutedotbelow,òunósàáàmáawítòun.
/Ogravedotbelowkàràkàrà is calling and blood drips from
its beak; it says even if its mouth tears to
the occiput, it will continue its calling.
64
(As long as a serious problem persists, one
should not stop calling for help.)
2345. Ọl/eacutedotbelowbàátì,ókósíléIfá.
The lazy person fails at everything, where-
64. /Ogravedotbelowkàràkàrà is an obscure name for a kind of
animal that makes loud noises.
upon he becomes an Ifá acolyte.65 (The lazy
person ﬁnds easy tasks to do. The following
entry is a variant.)
2346. /Ogravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowbàátì,ókósílé-ekéú.
The lazy person fails at everything, where-
upon he goes to a Koranic school.66 (The
lazy person always seeks out the easiest
employment. Compare the previous entry.)
2347. /Ogravedotbelowlẹ,babaàrùn.
Laziness, father of all diseases. (Laziness is
worse than any disease.)
2348. /Ogravedotbelowlẹèèyànòríayéwá.
A lazy person has found no world to come
to. (The lot of a lazy person in this world is
misery.)
2349. /Ogravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowf/eacutedotbelowàrùnkù,óbúpùrùs/eacutedotbelowkún.
[If] the lazy person cannot ﬁnd a disease to
contract, he bursts into tears. (A lazy person
would rather catch a disease than submit to
work.)
2350. /Ogravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowﬁ/ogravedotbelowràngbogboṣe‘‘hòo.’’
The lazy person replies ‘‘yes’’ to all proposi-
tions. (You will get no argument from a lazy
person.)
2351. /Ogravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowjogúnìbànúj/eacutedotbelow,óníòúnjogúnìran
òun.
The lazy person inherits unhappiness; he
says he has inherited the fate of his lineage.
(The lazy person has himself to blame, not
his destiny.)
2352. /Ogravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowjogúnìbáwí.
The lazy person inherits recriminations.
(The lazy person is a tempting scapegoat.)
65. The chief task of the Ifá pupil is to memorize the
huge texts associated with it.
66. Pupils in Koranic schools recite the Koran all
d a y ,as u p p o s e d l ye a s yt a s k .
232 the good person


--- PAGE 246 ---
2353. /Ogravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowkákò,ódiòjòjò.
The lazy person curls up, and his condition
becomes a serious ailment. (The simplest
tasks become impossible undertakings for
the lazy person.)
2354. /Ogravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowkúnàár/egravedotbelowl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow.
Laziness lends weariness a hand. (Laziness is
often a contributor to weariness.)
2355. /Ogravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowmọèèw/ogravedotbelowìjà:óníbàbáòúnníkóun
májàl/oacutedotbelownàoko.
The coward knows the preventive for ﬁght-
ing: he says his father has ordered him not
to ﬁght on the way to the farm. (The coward
will use every excuse to get out of a ﬁght.)
2356. /Ogravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowníọj/oacutedotbelowtíikúbápaòun,inúòhuná
dùn.Ikúníòunój/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowkíojú/egravedotbelowrímàbo.
The lazy person says on the day he dies, he
w i l lb eh a p p y .D e a t hs a y sh ew i l lv i s i th i m
[the lazy person] with suﬀering that is out of
this world. (There is no way for the lazy per-
son to avoid suﬀering. The following entry is
a variant.)
2357. /Ogravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowníọj/oacutedotbelowtíòúnbákúòunóy/ogravedotbelow;ohuntí
ojú/ogravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowmáaríkótókúńk/oacutedotbelow?
The coward says he will rejoice on the day
he dies, but what about the woes he will ex-
perience before he dies? (Death may oﬀer
the coward a respite, but he will suﬀer before
death comes. Compare the preceding entry.)
2358. /Ogravedotbelowlẹòyẹ/eacutedotbelowníl/oacutedotbelowmọ.
A lazy person is not something one wants as
a child. (Who wants a lazy child?)
2359. /Ogravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowwáṣ/eacutedotbelowrír/ogravedotbelowṣe.
The lazy person seeks out an easy task to
do. (Trust the lazy person to ﬁnd the easiest
tasks.)
2360. Ọlọgb/oacutedotbelownkìíkúsóko/ogravedotbelowlẹ;bíọlọgb/oacutedotbelownbá
kúsóko/ogravedotbelowlẹ,/ogravedotbelowrànnáà-ánídìí.
The wise will not die on a farm for the lazy;
if a wise person dies on a farm for the lazy,
there must be some explanation. (The re-
sourceful person will always ﬁnd a way out
of a predicament.)
2361. Ọl/oacutedotbelowmúdáọmúìyá/egravedotbelowgbé.
Each child must lift its mother’s breast by
itself. (Every person to his or her own re-
sources.)
2362. Ọl/oacutedotbelowrunyópèsè;kìíṣebíèsèoríta.
The Lord will give alms, but not the sort one
comes upon at crossroads. (One wishes for
good gifts from God, not just any sort of
leavings.)
2363. Ọmọtíyój/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowàṣàmú,kékeréníńtiíṣẹnu
ṣámú-ṣámú.
A person who will become exemplary begins
showing precociousness from childhood.
(Childhood shows the adult.)
2364. Ọmọtókáw/oacutedotbelowsókèlóf/eacutedotbelowkágbéòun.
It is the child who raises its arms that in-
duces people to lift it. (If you want people to
come to your aid, ﬁrst lift a ﬁnger on your
own behalf. Compare the next entry.)
2365. Ọmọtóṣípáfúnnilàńgbéjó.
It is the child who lifts its arms that one
picks up and dances with. (One makes
friends with people who oﬀer friendship.
Compare the preceding entry.)
2366. Ọmọdéòmọibitíàńpọnòunrè.
A child does not know where the person
who carries it on her back is headed. (People
who depend on others do not know what
those others have in mind for them.)
2367. /Ogravedotbelowmuníńgbé/ogravedotbelowmumì.
It is drunkenness that swallows [or drowns]
a champion drinker. (Only an intrepid con-
Onperseverance 233


--- PAGE 247 ---
testant can match another intrepid contes-
tant.)
2368. /Ogravedotbelownàkìídím/oacutedotbelowaládàá.
The path does not close on a man carrying
a machete. (No problem is insoluble for a
resourceful person.)
2369. /Ogravedotbelowrànbúburúkìíbáikúnnílé.
An evil event never ﬁnds the squirrel at
home. (A statement that one will never be
around when disaster occurs.)
2370. /Ogravedotbelowrànﬁnidùgb/egravedotbelow-dùgb/egravedotbelowyinninù;/ogravedotbelowràn
ﬁnidùgb/egravedotbelow-dùgb/egravedotbelowbíẹnipékòníítán;/ogravedotbelowràn
ḿb/ogravedotbelowwátán;ojúátẹl/eacutedotbelowgàn,asìtiẹnití
ńyọnusọ.
A problem shakes one up vigorously and
lets one go; a problem shakes one up vigor-
ously as though it will never end; the trouble
will end, deﬂating the ill wishers and also
those who will not mind their own business.
(However terrible one’s problems, they will
cease and leave one in better shape than
one’s enemies would like.)
2371. Ọrùnkìíwọòṣùká;ẹl/eacutedotbelowrùlọrùnńw/ogravedotbelow.
The pad placed on the head to soften the
friction of the load on the head does not suf-
fer from the weight; the person carrying the
load is the one whose neck suﬀers under the
weight. (Commiserators and people lending
a hand do not suﬀer the troubled person’s
pain; the troubled person is the one who
bears it all.)
2372. Ọw/oacutedotbelowat/eacutedotbelowgùnòkágẹdú.
The wind is no match for timber. (Even
powerful forces come up against objects they
cannot move.)
2373. Ọw/oacutedotbelowẹnilaﬁńtúìwàaraẹniṣe.
One’s own hands are what one uses to mend
one’s fortune. (Each person’s fortune is in
his or her own hands.)
2374. Ọw/oacutedotbelowẹniniyóyòóni.
One hands are what feed one to satiation.
(Your hands are your best resources.)
2375. Ọw/oacutedotbelowníńtúnaraṣe.
The hands are the agents for grooming the
body. (One’s well-being is in one’s hands.)
2376. Ọw/oacutedotbelowtódil/egravedotbelowlàńﬁlérán.
It is on an idle hand that one rests one’s
chin. (It is when one has nothing to do that
one engages in mischief.)
2377. Ọy/eacutedotbelowniyókìl/ogravedotbelowfúnonítòbí.
It is the harmattan that will teach the person
who has only a loincloth a lesson. (People
w h od on o tp r o v i d ef o rt h er a i n yd a yw i l l
pay when the storm does come.)
P
2378. Paáníńj/eacutedotbelowọgb/eacutedotbelow,tiiriníńjẹọfà;bíabá
taáṣelàńwáa;bíaòbáwáaadẹranìdin.
A sharp report is what accompanies a ma-
chete wound; a ﬂying motion is the charac-
teristic of an arrow; if you hit your prey, you
should go in search of it; if not, it becomes
meat for maggots. (Always follow through in
your pursuits.)
2379. Páńd/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowjá,arárọìyá/egravedotbelow.
The fruit of the sausage tree drops, [and] its
mother knows relief. (Relief is sweet after
one’s burden has been lifted.)
2380. Pà-pàlójúl/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowkínní,pà-pàlójúl/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowkejì:
bójúnáàòbáf/oacutedotbelow,bàì-bàìníńdà.
A blow to the eye the ﬁrst time and a blow
to the eye a second time: if the eye does not
go blind, it will see only dimly. (Continual
attacks will eventually leave their mark on
the victim.)
234 the good person


--- PAGE 248 ---
Ṣ
2381. Ṣàngóòlèpaigińlá.
Ṣango cannot destroy a huge tree. (The sub-
stantial and well-established peron is better
able to withstand adversity than weaklings.)
2382. Ṣekóoní;àbáòditẹni;èèyànòṣoògùn
ọr/ogravedotbelow.
Work in order to have; intentions do not be-
come possessions; no one makes money by
magic. (Labor, not idle thought, produces
wealth.)
2383. Ṣiṣe-érorò,jíjẹ/ogravedotbelowf/eacutedotbelow.
Working is diﬃcult; one would rather free-
load. (Few people enjoy labor; all would like
to live the good life for free.)
2384. Ṣòkòtògbọọrọòdọlà;abínilÉkòóò
dowó.
Long trousers do not amount to wealth;
being born in Lagos does not ensure riches.
(Wealth does not come from dressing well
or living in a big city.)
2385. Ṣòkòtòtíńṣiṣ/eacutedotbelowàrán,okoníńgbé.
The pants that do the work that purchases
the velvet fabric stay on the farm. (The
real workers and producers of wealth are
likely to be less in the public eye than their
beneﬁciaries.)
T
2386. TàkútétíyópaAláginjùáp/eacutedotbelowlókokí
w/oacutedotbelowntógbéewálé.
The snare that will capture the lord of the
wilderness will stay long in the bush before
returning home. (Whoever attempts the
impossible is in for long frustration.)
2387. Tàpò-tàpòlàńyọjìgá;tewé-tewélà
ńyan/egravedotbelowkọ.
With their sac and all is how to remove
chiggers; with its wrapping-leaves is the
way to buy corn meal. (One must do things
thoroughly, not by halves.)
2388. T/egravedotbelowt/egravedotbelow/egravedotbelowgúntilómit/eacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelowkójòtór/ogravedotbelowsíi.
The prickly spinach was succulent before
the rain fell on it. (A statement that one
does not depend on largesse from other
people.)
2389. Títarírolàńkọlà,bóbájinnáaditẹni.
Facial scariﬁcation causes with a great deal
of pain; when it heals, its beauty becomes
one’s pride. (Good things come with some
pain.)
2390. Tojútìy/eacutedotbelowlàparò-óﬁńríran.
It is with both its eyes and its feathers that
the partridge sees. (A statement that some-
one is all eyes.)
2391. T/ogravedotbelowsántòru,imúògbél/egravedotbelow;bóbádák/eacutedotbelow,a
j/eacutedotbelowpéópin.
Day or night, the nose does not rest; if it
stops, that means the end. (Some things are
so reliable that they never fail.)
W
2392. Wàhálàlóbíìrọra;òṣìlóbíwàhálà.
Struggle gives birth to ease; destitution gives
birth to struggle. (He who exerts himself will
ﬁnd ease in the end; he who avoids exertions
is doomed to struggle in the end.)
2393. Wèrèèèyànníńruẹrùwòran;ẹníru
ẹrùwòranniwèrèèèyànńwò.
Only an imbecile carries a heavy load and
stops to watch a spectacle; such a heavily
laden spectacle watcher is the sort of spec-
tacle that attracts the attention of imbeciles.
(Only a fool neglects pressing duties to
dawdle.)
Onperseverance 235


--- PAGE 249 ---
2394. Wèrèpèòníbìkanàgbámú;gbogboara
níńﬁ-íjóni.
The cow-itch oﬀers no place to be handled;
it stings with its whole body.
67 (Said of prob-
lems that present no visible means of solu-
tion, or people who show no visible signs of
vulnerability.)
2395. Wíw/egravedotbelowlàńw/egravedotbelowkátójàreọy/eacutedotbelow.
Only by taking a cold shower can one shake
oﬀ the chill of the harmattan. (The solu-
tion to a problem may require some initial
unpleasantness.)
2396. W/oacutedotbelownní,‘‘Àparòaṣọẹ/eacutedotbelowṣep/oacutedotbelownbáyìí?’’
Óníìgbàwolaṣọòunònííp/oacutedotbelown?Kóuntó
kọigbaláàár/ogravedotbelow,kóuntóhọil/egravedotbelowkùr/egravedotbelow-kùr/egravedotbelow
lábùsùndájí.Ìgbàwolòunóràáàyèfọṣọ?
People asked the partridge, ‘‘Why is your
clothing so dirty?’’ He responded, ‘‘Why
would my clothing not be dirty? Given the
time it takes me to make a hundred heaps
in the morning, and the time I need to
scratch the ground at dawn, what time is
left for me to wash my clothes?’’ (The shift-
less can always ﬁnd excuses to explain their
predicament. Compare 2616.)
67. Wèrèpè(cow-itch) isMucunaﬂaggelipes (Papilo-
naceae), a creeper whose seed pods are covered with
ﬁne stinging hairs. If one’s skin comes in contact with
the dry pods, the hairs attach to the skin, causing
almost unbearable irritation—worse than poison ivy.
Y
2397. ‘‘Yánsíi,yánsíi’’níńpaalákàràl/eacutedotbelowrìn-
ín.
‘‘Sell more to me, sell more to me’’ is what
brings smiles to the face of the bean-fritters
seller. (Good fortune always makes people
happy.)
2398. Yànmù-yanmulàńj/ogravedotbelowg/egravedotbelowd/egravedotbelow.
Gracelessly is the way one eats bananas.
(Certain activities do not permit graceful-
ness.)
2399. Yànmùyánmúńṣefújàláìlápa.
The mosquito brags despite its lack of arms.
(Insigniﬁcant pests can still be the source of
considerable annoyance.)
2400. Yímisébè,kínyíọsípóróoko.
Throw me on the heaps, and I will throw
you into the furrows. (To whatever attack
you mount against me, I will respond in
kind.)
236 the good person


--- PAGE 250 ---
On consistency, honesty, openness,
plain speaking, and reliability
A
2401. Akìípèél/eacutedotbelowrú,kápèélóbí.
One does not call it a slave and also call it a
child of the house. (One must be clear about
one’s attitude toward a thing or person;
ambivalence causes trouble.)
2402. Akìípèél/eacutedotbelowrùkápèél/oacutedotbelowṣ/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelow.
One does not call it a burden and also call it
an adornment. (An event is either a boon or
a disaster, never both.)
2403. Akìíríẹṣinníìso.
One does not ﬁnd a horse on tether. (Too
easy and too convenient a ﬁnd suggests
stealing.)
2404. Akìíríikátúnsọpéaòrim/oacutedotbelow.
One does not see a thing and then say
one does not see it. (Always stand by your
word.)
2405. Akìíróaṣọajésídìíkádáj/oacutedotbelowòdodol/eacutedotbelowbi.
One does not wear the ritual loincloth for
presiding over a trial-by-ordeal and judge
the righteous guilty. (One must not violate
the oath one is sworn to observe.)
2406. Akìísoẹranm/eacutedotbelowrankókànánpa.
One does not tie a goat with another goat
and keep one from butting the other to
death. (One must not injure a person com-
mitted to one’s protection.)
2407. Akìís/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowìk/ogravedotbelowk/ogravedotbelowkómádiyànnígba-n-
gba.
One does not conspire in secret without
having the matter eventually cause a public
argument. (Whatever is done in secret soon
becomes exposed.)
2408. Akìíṣeẹl/eacutedotbelowj/oacutedotbelowní‘‘Ngb/oacutedotbelow?’’
One does not ask the main litigant, ‘‘How
about it?’’ (Do not expect impartial witness-
ing from an interested party.)
2409. Àbàtápani;àbàtápani;káṣásọpé
odò-ógbénilọ.
He died in the mire, he died in the mire; let
us simply say that the person drowned. (One
should prefer plain talk to euphemisms.)
2410. Àb/egravedotbelowt/eacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelowníńf/oacutedotbelowjúonídàáj/oacutedotbelow.
It is bribery that blinds a judge. (Bribery
beclouds judgment.)
2411. Adánutíńjẹilá:óní‘‘Ẹòríil/egravedotbelowbáyìí?’’
Cleft-lipped person eating okro complains,
‘‘Can you believe what a mess the ﬂoor is?’’
(The culprit complains about a condition as
though he or she had nothing to do with it.)
1
2412. Àdàpèolèníńj/eacutedotbelowàfọw/oacutedotbelowrá.
It is simply a euphemism for theft to say
àfọw/oacutedotbelowrá[literally, causing to disappear
1. Okro, because of its sliminess, is diﬃcult enough
for a person with no labial deformity to eat.


--- PAGE 251 ---
through the operations of the hand]. (The
use of a euphemism does not change the na-
ture of a thing. See the following entry and
2422.)
2413. Àdàpèolèníńj/eacutedotbelow‘‘ọmọ-/ogravedotbelowmińf/eacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow.’’
It is a euphemistic description of stealing to
say, ‘‘My child’s hands are uncontrollably
nimble.’’ (One should face facts and not skirt
them. Compare the preceding entry.)
2414. Àdàpè/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowòj/eacutedotbelowkámọìtum/ogravedotbeloworúkọ.
Riddling makes it impossible for one to
know the meanings of names. (Circuitous
talk can lead to confusion.)
2
2415. Ad/eacutedotbelowt/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelows/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowméjì,ofìkanpur/oacutedotbelow;óní
nígbàtíòúnluọmọòunlábàrá,òúnja
léèékánnápàtì.
The leper said two things, one of them
b e i n gal i e ;h es a i da f t e rh eh a ds t r u c kh i s
c h i l dw i t hh i sp a l m ,h ea l s op i n c h e dh i m
severely with his ﬁngernails. (One fools only
oneself when one claims to have done the
impossible.)
2416. A-d/oacutedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelown-pàgùntàn-jẹÌlárá,óníojú/egravedotbelow
ḿbaòunl/eacutedotbelowrù.
Person-who-schemes-to-kill-a-sheep-to-
eat, native of Ìlárá, says that he is afraid of
its eyes. (One should avoid dissembling.
Compare 2446.)
2417. Afas/eacutedotbelowgbèjòńtanara-ar/egravedotbelowjẹ.
He who would collect rainwater in a sieve
deceives himself. (The shiftless person hurts
himself more than others.)
2. People are likely to be cryptic in naming their
children. The Yoruba give names that indicate the cir-
cumstances of the family, comment on the hopes of the
family, or otherwise express its chief concerns at the
time of the birth. Usually, of course, only those who are
intimate with the family understand the full import of
such names, because they are not always explicit.
2418. Afatar/eacutedotbelownilójú,alè-ebaále.
One-who-smears-one’s-eyes-with-pepper:
one’s husband’s concubine. (The illicit lover
of a woman’s husband is no friend of hers.)
2419. Af/eacutedotbelownilóbìnrinòroiresíni.
He-who-has-an-aﬀair-with-one’s-wife har-
bors no good will toward one. (One knows
one’s friends by their behavior.)
2420. Afìk/ogravedotbelowk/ogravedotbelowjalè,bíọbaayéòríọ;t/ogravedotbelowrúnrí
ọ.
You-who-steal-in-secret, if an earthly king
does not see you, the heavenly king sees you.
(Nothing is hidden from God.)
2421. Af/oacutedotbelowjúàjànàkú,kòmọigi,kòmọèèyàn.
A blind elephant does not know a man from
at r e e .( F a t ei sn or e s p e c t e ro fp e r s o n s . )
2422. Àfọw/oacutedotbelowráníńj/eacutedotbelowolè.
Employing-the-hands-to-make-things-
disappear is called stealing. (Euphemistic
circumlocution does not relieve a crime of
its true nature. Compare 2412.)
2423. Agadaòmoríalágb/egravedotbelowdẹ.
The sword cannot tell the smith’s head
from others. (Natural justice does not play
favorites.)
2424. Àgbàdokìíṣeèèyàn;taníńríọmọ
l/eacutedotbelowhìneèsún.
The maize plant is not human; whoever
saw children on the back of elephant grass?
(One should not overestimate the value of
things.)
3
3. When the maize plant develops fruits the Yoruba
say Óyọọmọ, ‘‘It is carrying a child.’’ The literal expres-
sion does not, however, mean that the people believe
the plant is human. Elephant grass is almost identical to
maize in size and looks, even though it bears no fruit.
238 the good person


--- PAGE 252 ---
2425. Àgbàkálodińgbaìlú.
It is completely that a fortiﬁcation wall
encircles a town. (Brook no half measures.)
2426. Àgbàkánigbàńgba/ogravedotbelowpẹ.
It is completely that the climbing rope en-
circles the palm tree. (What is worth doing
at all is worth doing well; there will be no
obstacle in the way of one’s ventures.)
4
2427. Àgb/egravedotbelowgbókoróṣù.
A farmer stays on the farm and sees the
moon. (The conscientious farmer spends
long periods on the farm; persistence is the
k e yt os u c c e s s . )
2428. A-gb/eacutedotbelowj/oacutedotbelow-ẹnìkan-dáj/oacutedotbelow,òṣìkàèèyàn.
He-who-decides-a-case-after-hearing-only-
one-side [is] the dean of wicked persons.
(Justice requires considering both sides of a
case.)
2429. Àgb/oacutedotbelowìgb/oacutedotbelowtánÈgùn,ìjàníńdásíl/egravedotbelow.
Imperfect understanding of Ègùn [a lan-
guage spoken to the west of Yoruba] brings
nothing but dissension. (Half-knowledge is
a bad thing.)
2430. Àì-f/eacutedotbelow-àlejòó-ṣelàńwípé‘‘/Ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelow/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelow-/egravedotbelowmí
dé’’;káṣáàtiwípé,‘‘/Ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelow-/egravedotbelowmídé.’’
Reluctance-to-extend-hospitality makes one
say, ‘‘My friend’s friend has arrived’’; one
should simply say, ‘‘My friend has arrived.’’
(If one’s friend’s friend is one’s friend, one
should not stress that the friend is once
removed; one should avoid doubletalk.)
2431. Àìf/egravedotbelows/ogravedotbelowkéìbòsínikòṣéégbè.
It is an alarm that is raised without mod-
eration that ﬁnds no helpers. (If the person
who raises an alarm puts people oﬀ by his
4. Igbà,a thick rope made by braiding strips of
palm bark, is used by palm-wine tappers to help them
climb palm trees, much as lumberjacks use ropes.
or her methods, they will not come to his or
her aid.)
2432. Ajáníòunìbamádèéokoríòunìbásọ
pé/ogravedotbelowrunniw/oacutedotbelowntińkáláwá.
The dog says that if it had never been to
a farm, it would have thought that okra
came from heaven. (People are inclined to
hoodwink the innocent or the ignorant.)
2433. Ajátieréer/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowbádánilójúlàńdẹsí
ehoro.
It is a dog in whose speed one has faith that
one sics on a hare. (One entrusts important
tasks only to those one can trust. This is a
variant of 726 and 729.)
2434. Ajátíòlétíòṣééd/egravedotbelowgb/eacutedotbelow.
A dog without ears is no good for stalking
prey. (A person who cannot be instructed is
useless.)
2435. Àjàlá,tanínà/oacutedotbelow?Ìwọnáàk/oacutedotbelowun?
Àjàlá, who whipped you? It is none other
than you, isn’t it? (An evildoer is often also a
dissembler.)
2436. Àjànàkúkúroni‘‘Aríǹkanfìrí’’;bía
bárérinkáwí.
The elephant is more than something of
which one says, ‘‘I caught a ﬂeeting glimpse
of something’’; if one saw an elephant, one
should say so. (Don’t hedge when discussing
the obvious.)
2437. A-jí-má-jẹ-ǹkan,a-fàkàṣù-m/eacutedotbelowfà-
ṣoògùn-aràn.
He-who-wakes-in-the-morning-and-eats-
nothing; he-[who-]makes-a-wormer-of-
six-loaves. (The deceitful person deceives
himself.)
5
5. A person who says his condition forbids eating
but eats six loaves as a means of expelling worms is
inconsistent and deceives no one.
Onconsistency 239


--- PAGE 253 ---
2438. ÀjòàìwuniíyúnlàńdÍfásí.
It is about a journey one does not want to
make that one consults the oracle. (Where
there is no desire, excuses are easy to ﬁnd.)
2439. A-kápò-má-ṣọdẹ:/ogravedotbelowtáẹranko,/ogravedotbelowtáèèyàn.
He-who-carries-a-hunting-bag-but-does-
not-hunt: enemy alike of man and beast. (Be
not a dog in the manger.)
2440. Àkàs/ogravedotbelowfaratil/egravedotbelowfaratilé;bíẹnitíaf/egravedotbelowhìntì
óbàáyẹniawífúnni.
A ladder rests on the ground and leans on
the house; if the person one leans on must
remove his support, he should give warning.
(A person one trusts should be completely
trustworthy.)
2441. Akínińj/eacutedotbelowakíni;aﬁnihànńj/eacutedotbelowaﬁnihàn;
èwoni‘‘Ọkú,aráÌjàyè!’’lójúdeÒgúnm/oacutedotbelowlá?
A person who will greet one should greet
one, and a person who will betray one
should do so; what is the meaning of ‘‘Hello,
Ìjàyè person!’’ before Ògúnm/oacutedotbelowlá’s house?
6
(One should not do evil to others in the
guise of being good to them.)
2442. Akọasínkìígb/oacutedotbelowohùnọmọ-ọr/egravedotbelowkó
dúró;abiyamọkìígb/oacutedotbelowẹkúnọmọ-ọr/egravedotbelowkómá
taraṣàṣà.
A male asínrat does not hear the cry of its
young and remain still; a nursing mother
does not hear the cry of her baby without
responding anxiously. (One must take one’s
chief responsibilities seriously.)
2443. Alákata/mgravepòòmọirúẹran.
The user of a crossbow does not know what
sort of game he shoots at. (Some people
lack a sense of discrimination. See the next
entry.)
6. During the internecine Yoruba wars of the nine-
teenth century, Ògúnm/oacutedotbelowlá led Ibadan’s forces in their
war with Ìjàyè.
2444. Alápatàòmọirúẹran.
The butcher does not know what the animal
i s .( Ab u t c h e ri si n d i ﬀ e r e n tt ot h et y p eo f
animal he butchers. See the foregoing entry.)
2445. Am/ogravedotbelowrànbini/Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow,bíobágbéketelérí,
wọnaníokolòńlọtàbíodò.
People-who-know-the-answer-yet-ask-the-
question, natives of /Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow: if they see you
carrying a water pot, they ask whether you
are on your way to the farm or the stream.
(If the answer is plain to see, one does not
ask the question.)
2446. Apajájẹ-/eacutedotbelowní/egravedotbelowrùadìẹḿbaòun.
The-person-who-kills-and-eats-dogs claims
to be afraid of chickens. (A hardened crimi-
nal pretends to have scruples about mere
peccadilloes. Compare 2416.)
2447. Apanikìíj/eacutedotbelowkámúidàkọjánípàk/oacutedotbelow
òun.
A murderer never permits the passage of a
sword behind his skull. (The criminal is ever
suspicious of other people’s intentions.)
2448. Àpèjúwelalágb/egravedotbelowdẹńrọ.
The blacksmith manufactures from a de-
scription. (Unless a person speaks his or her
mind, others cannot know what the person
h a si ni t . )
2449. AráÌbàdànkìíságun ;àórìn s/eacutedotbelowhìnni
w/oacutedotbelownńwí.
Ibadan people do not run from war; what
they say is, ‘‘We will fall back a little.’’ (There
are ways of avoiding battle without seeming
to do so.)
2450. Arítẹnim/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowwí,óﬁàpáàdìràbàtàbotir/egravedotbelow
m/oacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelow.
He-who-eagerly-speaks-of-one’s-problems
covers his own with a huge potsherd.
(People will talk about others’ problems
while carefully hiding their own.)
240 the good person


--- PAGE 254 ---
2451. Àrókanl/egravedotbelowlaṣọayaba;àwàkanl/egravedotbelowniti
yàrà.
Wrapping-from-waist-to-the-ﬂoor is the
style of the queen’s wrapper; digging-down-
to-the-deepest-bottom is the requirement
of yàrà,the dry moat. (Whatever one has to
do, one must be thorough and not satsiﬁed
with half measures.)
2452. Arúgbóoǹdágbèsè,ónímélòóniòunó
dùúrósanníb/egravedotbelow?
The old person who incurs debt says, how
much of it will he be around to repay? (A
person whose days are numbered can aﬀord
to take on long-term obligations.)
2453. Asárélówóḿbẹl/oacutedotbelownàogun;Ap/ogravedotbelowṣ/egravedotbelowṣ/egravedotbelowḿbẹ
l/oacutedotbelownàèrò;Bó-p/eacutedotbelow-títí-ng-ó-làḿbẹlábà,óńjẹ
/egravedotbelowsuniṣu.
He-who-hurries-after-riches is on his way
to battle; He-who-has-in-abundance is oﬀ
on his travels; By-and-by-‘‘I-will-be-rich’’
is back in his hut, eating roasted yams.
(Wealth comes to those who exert them-
selves, not to those who wait for it to ﬁnd
them.)
2454. Às/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowàìlàdílópaElempeìṣáájútóní
igbáwúwojuàwo.
Speaking-without-explaining killed the ﬁrst
Elempe who said that calabash was heavier
than china. (Excessive economy in speech
leads to obscurity.)
7
2455. Àṣáògbádìẹník/ogravedotbelowk/ogravedotbelow;gba-n-gbalàṣá
ńgbádìẹ.
The kite does not snatch chicks in secret; it
snatches them openly. (What one dares to
do, one does openly. Compare 1956.)
7. The reference is to a certain character who came
to grief by asserting the point without explaining that
he was comparing a full calabash with an empty china
plate.
2456. Aṣeburúkútẹs/egravedotbelowm/oacutedotbelownà.
The evildoer makes a brisk exit. (The evil-
doer would not wait for his nature to catch
up with him.)
2457. A-ṣ/ogravedotbelowtún-ṣòsì-má-ba-ibìkan-j/eacutedotbelow,ir/oacutedotbelowlaó
bàáníb/egravedotbelow.
One-who-is-tight-with-the-right-and-tight-
with-the-left-without-alienating-either:
what one will ﬁnd in that characterization is
a lie. (There is no way to support both sides
of a quarrel without betraying one side.)
2458. Àwárílobìnrinńwánǹkanọb/egravedotbelow.
Seeking-until-ﬁnding is how a woman looks
for ingredients for stew. (The dutiful person
does not permit diﬃculties to keep her from
accomplishing her duty.)
2459. Àwíyéníḿmú/ogravedotbelowrànyéni;/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowdúnrún
okùnlaﬁńsinẹgb/egravedotbelowta;bíaòbálàá,kìíyéni.
Explicitness makes matters clear; it takes 300
strings to string 600; unless one explains it,
no one understands. (Too much economy in
speech leads to confusion.)
8
2460. ÀwíyénIf/egravedotbelowńf/ogravedotbelow;gba-n-gbalOròńpẹran.
Explicitly is the way If/egravedotbelow speaks; it is openly
that Orò kills animals.
9 (Whatever one has
to say, one should say without mincing
words.)
2461. Àyèkìíháadìẹkómádèéìdíàba-ar/egravedotbelow.
The space is never so tight that a chicken
will not be able to reach its incubating nest.
(No obstacle should keep one from one’s
duty.)
8. The message is that it takes a string costing 300
cowries in the old currency to string 600 cowries.
9. The references are to the oracle at If/egravedotbelow and to a
religious mystery of the people that is audacious in
claiming its victims.
Onconsistency 241


--- PAGE 255 ---
B
2462. Bíabákáokóm/oacutedotbelowobìnrinnídìíání
kùkúni.
If one catches a penis in a woman’s vagina,
she will argue that it is only a corncob.
(Trust a woman to deny even the obvious.)
2463. Bíabáńy/oacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelowdà,ohunab/eacutedotbelownúamáa
y/oacutedotbelowniṣe.
If one engages secretly in treachery, secret
disasters come. (Crimes committed in secret
do not go unrequited.)
2464. Bíab/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowbíab/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowlèèyànńṣèké;ọj/oacutedotbelowtóbá
tóbitóọk/oacutedotbelowtíaﬁńrokoníńpani.
Like a needle, like a needle, one compiles
falsehood; the day it is as big as the hoe one
uses on a farm, that is the day it kills one.
(Small falsehoods eventually grow into a
habit powerful enough to kill.)
2465. Bíẹnúbájẹ,ojúátì.
If the mouth has eaten, the eyes shut down.
( I fo n eh a sr e c e i v e ds o m ef a v o rf r o map e r -
son, one’s eyes will be closed to the person’s
faults.)
2466. Bíìgbínńfà,ìkaraunat/egravedotbelowlée.
When the snail crawls, its shell follows. (The
dependent person always sticks close to his
or her support.)
2467. Bíìkà-ábáńroj/oacutedotbelow,ìkàk/oacutedotbelowniyóda.
If the wicked person states a case, it is not
the wicked person who will judge it. (The
wicked will not prevail in the face of impar-
tial judges.)
2468. Bíoﬁnúṣìkàtíofòdeṣòót/oacutedotbelow,ọbaséríkí
árínọrínọ.
If you hide wickedness inside you while
displaying a kindly disposition, God above
will laugh hard at you. (No secret act of
wickedness is concealed from God.)
2469. Bíoní/ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowoògùn,tíoníèké,kònííj/eacutedotbelow;
oríẹníj/eacutedotbelowójuewélọ;ìpínjàójuoògùnlọ.
If you have a great deal of medicine and
you are false, it will not work; one’s head
works better than any herb; one’s destiny is
far more eﬀective than any medicine. (Evil
intentions make one’s medicine ineﬀective;
the best hope lies in one’s head and one’s
destiny.)
10
2470. Bíoríi,wàpéoòrí;ọk/oacutedotbelowfúnọlówó,
àlégbàáná.
If you saw it, you would say you did not;
your husband gave you money and your
lover spends it. (An unfaithful woman de-
serves no trust.)
2471. Bíótiwùkóp/eacutedotbelowtó,olóòót/oacutedotbelowòníísùn
sípòìkà.
However long it takes, a truthful person
will not wind up in the bed made for the
wicked. (Whatever happens in the short
run, in the long run the truthful person will
be vindicated.)
2472. Bíobìnrínbámáadánèkéwò,adaaṣọ
dúdúbora.
When a woman wishes to engage in mis-
chief, she wears dark clothing. (A woman’s
furtiveness portends mischief.)
2473. Bíojúbáséojú;kíohùnmáyẹohùn.
If eyes no longer see eyes, let the voice not
miss the voice. (Though separated by dis-
tances, people should keep agreements they
made.)
2474. Bíolókùnrùnyóbàákú,kómápur/oacutedotbelow
m/oacutedotbelowàlapà;omitoorokìíkorò.
If an invalid is approaching death, he should
not lie about the melon-seed loaf; stew is
never bitter. (If one must make excuses for
10. For the Yoruba,orí(literally, ‘‘head’’) is the
guardian of one’s destiny.
242 the good person


--- PAGE 256 ---
one’s ﬂaws, one should make them plau-
sible.)
2475. Bíòrubíòruníńṣealáṣọdúdú.
Longing for nighttime, longing for night-
time is the tendency of the person in dark
clothing. (A person engaged in secret busi-
ness is always secretive.)
2476. Bíọgb/oacutedotbelownbátánnínú,atúnòmíràndá.
When an elder has exhausted all his wisdom,
he turns to another’s wisdom. (An elder is
never at a loss for what to do.)
2477. Bíọmọdébámọigbá-di-ogóje,kòlèmọ
èrò-kò-wájà.
If a youth knows two-hundred-becomes-
one-hundred-forty, he cannot know traders-
refuse-to-come-to-the-market. (A person
who knows how to cheat those who deal
with him will not know how to win them
back when they refuse to deal with him.)
2478. Bíọmọdébárioyin,ajuàkàrànù.
When a child sees honey, he throws away
bean fritters. (The inconstant person’s con-
cern is limited to the latest attraction.)
D
2479. Dúkìatíaﬁèrúkójọkòmúkádolówó.
The treasure one gathers by foul means
will not make one rich. (Wealth garnered
unfairly does not last.)
E
2480. ‘‘Ebíńpamí’’òṣééfìféwí.
‘‘I am hungry’’ is not a message that whis-
tling can convey. (A person in need of help
must not be coy or cryptic in asking for it.)
2481. Eeguntíabásom/oacutedotbelowajál/oacutedotbelowrùn,kìí
ṣánan.
A dog does not eat a bone tied to its neck.
(One may not take advantage of a person or
thing entrusted to one’s care.)
2482. ÈkéÌbídùn,tíńkíeégún‘‘Kúàtij/oacutedotbelow.’’
[It is a] lying Ìbídùn who greets a masquer-
ader with ‘‘It’s been quite a while!’’ (The
subject of the comment [here named Ìbídùn]
is prone to telling blatant lies.
11 Compare
3380.)
2483. Èkélojúótìbód/ogravedotbelowla.
The devious will reap shame in the future.
(Wickedness will receive its just deserts in
due time.)
2484. Èkémọilé-er/egravedotbelowówó;/ogravedotbelowdàl/eacutedotbelowmọtir/egravedotbelowóbì
dànù.
The devious person builds a house, and it
collapses; the treacherous person builds one,
and it tumbles in ruins. (Evil people will not
proﬁt from their enterprises.)
2485. Elékèélèkéńyé;ounabáṣeníńyéni.
O n l yad e v i o u sp e r s o nk n o w sw h a th eo rs h e
is about; each person alone is privy to what
he or she has done. (One can never be sure
about a devious person. See also 4516.)
2486. Eléwe-éníiyènú;àìnímọìwà-áhù.
A person who has children must be re-
sponsible; one who does not must know
how to behave. (One should live up to one’s
responsibilities.)
2487. Èlùb/oacutedotbelowlowáárà;ọmọẹránṣedénú
igbá?
You came to buy yam ﬂour; how did a kid
ﬁnd its way into your calabash? (The alibi
11. Ìbídùn is a woman’s name, and women are for-
bidden to confront masqueraders. Moreover, no one,
male or female, is supposed to know the identity of the
carrier of the masquerade except for the initiates of the
eégún(egúngún) cult, usually men.
Onconsistency 243


--- PAGE 257 ---
oﬀered by a culprit [subject of the proverb]
is full of holes.)
2488. Èròòkíbaál/egravedotbelow,baálélóńkí.
The guest does not pay homage to the chief,
only to the host. (One’s ﬁrst obligation is to
one’s immediate benefactor, not to a remote
authority, however great.)
2489. EṣinṣínńjẹJagùnnàÀróògb/oacutedotbelow,/Ogravedotbelowd/ogravedotbelowﬁn
òm/ogravedotbelow;ṣùgb/oacutedotbelownnígbàtíJàgùnnàńjẹeṣinṣinÀró
gb/oacutedotbelow,/Ogravedotbelowd/ogravedotbelowﬁn-ínm/ogravedotbelow.
When ﬂies were eating [biting] theJagùnnà,
Àróheard nothing of it, and the /Ogravedotbelowd/ogravedotbelowﬁn
knew nothing of it; but when theJagùnnà
b e g a nt oe a tﬂ i e s ,Àróheard, and the /Ogravedotbelowd/ogravedotbelowﬁn
knew.
12 (People pay no attention to a vic-
tim’s complaints but are quick to fault one
who takes revenge.)
2490. Etí,gb/oacutedotbelowèkejìkíotódáj/oacutedotbelow.
Ear, hear the other side before passing judg-
ment. (One should not form an opinion
after hearing only one side of an argument.)
2491. Etítógb/oacutedotbelowàlọniyógb/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowàb/ogravedotbelow.
The same ears that heard about the depar-
ture will hear about the return. (Whoever is
privy to the genesis of an aﬀair will [must]
be privy to its conclusion.)
2492. Ewúr/eacutedotbelowníòunòmọléodì;ẹniòúnbáṣ/egravedotbelow
kóbiòun.
The goat says it does not set aside any house
as an enemy’s; whoever it has oﬀended
should ask it why. (One wants no enemies; if
one has oﬀended anyone, that person should
ask why.)
12. Jagùnnà,Àró, and /Ogravedotbelowd/ogravedotbelowﬁnare all chieftaincy
titles.
Ẹ
2493. /Egravedotbelow/egravedotbelowmejìletíọl/oacutedotbelowjàńgb/oacutedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow.
The ears of the king hear everything twice.
(Whoever will judge a case must hear it
twice from both sides of the dispute.)
2494. Ẹg/eacutedotbelowòṣákìí;ẹníbáb/oacutedotbelowsáb/eacutedotbelow-ẹr/egravedotbelow,apaá
kúpátá-pátá.
The ẹg/eacutedotbelowt r a pn e v e rm i s s e s ;w h a t e v e rp a s s e s
beneath it, it strikes dead.
13 (A certain per-
son, or thing, can be relied upon to do what
i se x p e c t e do fh i m ,h e r ,o ri t . )
2495. Ẹgb/egravedotbelowtàlá:bíaòbálàá,kìíyéni.
Ẹgb/egravedotbelowtàlá:if one does not explain it, no one
understands what it means. (Ambiguous
statements result in confusion.)
14
2496. Ẹ-kòì-f/eacutedotbelow-mi-kù,tótaajá-ar/egravedotbelowlókòó.
You-have-not-seen-the-last-of-me, who sold
h i sd o gf o r2 0c o w r i e s .( Ap e r s o nd u p e d
without his or her knowledge will be back
for redress once the fact dawns on him or
her.)
2497. /Egravedotbelowlàl/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow;bíaòbálàárírúní ńrú.
Statements must be clariﬁed; if they are
not, they become muddy. (Compare the
following entry.)
2498. /Egravedotbelowlàl/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow;bóbìnrínbájókòóalaṣọbòbò.
Statements must always be clariﬁed; when
a woman sits, she covers her genitals with
her wrapper.
15 (One must always be clear in
13. Ẹg/eacutedotbelowis a trap made of sharp spikes, designed to
impale from above whatever trips it.
14. The word ẹgb/egravedotbelowtàlácould be a contraction of
either igbam/eacutedotbelowtàlá(2,600) or ẹgbàám/eacutedotbelowtàlá(26,000).
15. The second part about a woman’s genitals is
gratuitous ﬂippancy; it takes advantage of the syllable
là(in /Egravedotbelowlà), which means ‘‘clarify’’ and also denotes the
action of passing one’s loincloth between one’s thighs
so as to cover the genitalia.
244 the good person


--- PAGE 258 ---
one’s speeches or intentions. This is a variant
of the preceding entry.)
2499. Ẹl/eacutedotbelowrìíníńyanjúẹj/oacutedotbelow;ẹl/eacutedotbelowrìíkìíṣeelégbè.
It is a witness that clears up a case; a wit-
ness is not a partisan. (People called to bear
witness in a case should be impartial.)
2500. Ẹniakòf/eacutedotbelownilé-er/egravedotbelowńjìnnalójúẹni.
It is a person one does not love whose house
is distant in one’s estimation. (One can
always ﬁnd an excuse for not doing what
one does not wish to do.)
2501. Ẹníbásùnlàńjí,akìíjíapirọrọ.
One wakes only those that sleep, not those
pretending to sleep. (Deal with people who
are in earnest, not with gamesters.)
2502. Ẹnígbéàrùnpam/oacutedotbelowkọjáoreoníṣègùn.
Whoever conceals a disease is beyond help
from a doctor. (People in need of help
should not conceal the fact.)
2503. Ẹnitíanàníkù/mgravem/ogravedotbelowm/eacutedotbelowfà,tóní/ogravedotbelowkan
ṣoṣolóbaòun,níbonìyókùúsọnùsí?
[ I f ]ap e r s o ni sh i ts i xt i m e sw i t hac l u ba n d
says only one blow landed, where did the
other blows disappear? (A person who tries
to minimize obvious misfortune deceives no
one.)
2504. Ẹnitíóbámáaj/eacutedotbelow/Ogravedotbelowṣákáláaj/eacutedotbelow/Ogravedotbelowṣákálá;
ẹnitóbámáaj/eacutedotbelowÒṣokoloaj/eacutedotbelowÒṣokolo;èwoni
/Ogravedotbelowṣákálá-ṣokolo?
Whoever wants to be known as /Ogravedotbelowṣákálá
should be known as /Ogravedotbelowṣákálá; whoever wants
to be known as Òṣokolo should be known
as Òṣokolo; what is the meaning of /Ogravedotbelowṣákálá-
ṣokolo? (One should make up one’s mind
to be one way or the other and not keep
straddling fences.)
2505. Ẹnitíóbámọìṣeòkùnkùn,kómádàá
òṣùpálóró;ohunaṣeníńmúni-írìndeòru;
òkùnkùnòyẹọmọèèyàn.
Whoever knows what darkness can do must
not antagonize the moon, [since] one’s
actions [sometimes] send one abroad at
night; roaming around in the dark is not
a becoming habit. (It is best to cultivate
those forces that might serve one well in the
future.)
2506. Ẹnitíóf/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowkúure,kóhùwàrere.
Whoever wishes to die a decent death, let
h i mo rh e rl i v ed e c e n t l y .( A so n el i v e s ,s o
one dies, and so one is remembered.)
2507. Ẹnitíógbépolájàòjalèbíẹnitógbàá
síl/egravedotbelowfúnun.
The person who removes oil from the rafter
is less a thief than the person who helps him
s e ti to nt h eﬂ o o r .( T h ea b e t t o ri sm o r ea
culprit than the perpetrator.)
2508. Ẹnitíógb/oacutedotbelowntóńpur/oacutedotbelow;ẹnitóm/ogravedotbelowràntó
ńṣèké;ẹnitóm/ogravedotbelowpénǹkanòsítóńtọrọ;èwo
lósànnínúàwọnm/eacutedotbelowt/egravedotbelow/egravedotbelowta?
The person who is wise and yet lies, the per-
son who knows the truth and yet dissembles,
the person who knows one has nothing and
yet asks for something: which is any good
among the three? (The liar, the dissembler,
and the one who would embarrass you are
all equally evil.)
2509. Ẹnitíósálàńlé.
P e o p l ec h a s eo n l yt h o s ew h oﬂ e e .( T h o s e
who act as though they are guilty are pre-
sumed to be guilty.)
2510. Ẹnitíósùntóníòúnkú,tóbájí,tani
yówìífún?
The person who is asleep but spreads the
word that he or she is dead, when he or she
awakens, whom will he or she tell? (If one
Onconsistency 245


--- PAGE 259 ---
paints oneself into a corner, one is truly
stuck.)
2511. Ẹnitíóṣeojúkòdabíẹnitóṣe/egravedotbelowhìn.
The person who honors one in one’s pres-
ence is nothing like the person who honors
one in one’s absence. (It is what people say
of you or do on your behalf in your absence
that matters.)
2512. Ẹnìkankìíy/ogravedotbelowkíil/egravedotbelowós/eacutedotbelow.
When a person slips, the earth may not deny
responsibility or knowledge. (For whatever
one does, one should be willing to accept
responsibility.)
2513. Ẹnuòpùr/oacutedotbelowkìíṣ/egravedotbelowj/egravedotbelow.
The liar’s mouth does not bleed. (Lies have
no telltale labels attached.)
2514. Ẹnu-ur/egravedotbelowníńdáigba,tíńdá/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowdúnrún.
His or her mouth is the same one that pro-
poses two hundred and proposes three
hundred. (An unreliable person’s mouth is
ever running, and what comes out of it is
not to be trusted.)
2515. Ẹrantíakìíjẹ,akìíﬁehínpínin.
Meat that one does not eat, one does not
bite into with one’s teeth. (One should be
unequivocal in one’s commitments or avoid-
ances.)
2516. /Egravedotbelowtànkìíṣeọgb/oacutedotbelown.
Deceit is no wisdom. (Deceit is not a reliable
strategy to count on.)
2517. /Egravedotbelowwàyíkòdùn,/egravedotbelowwàyíkòdùn,àáṣó
ìpàk/oacutedotbelowḿmìtìtì.
These beans are not delicious, these beans
are not delicious, yet the coiﬀure at the
occiput is shaking vigorously. (A person’s
actions toward a person or thing belie his or
her detracting comments; if one claims to
dislike something or someone, one’s actions
should not say the opposite. Compare 2590.)
2518. Ẹyẹléníòunòlèbáolúwaòunjẹ,kí
òunbáamu,kíódiọj/oacutedotbelowikú-ur/egravedotbelowkíòunyẹrí.
The pigeon says it cannot share its owner’s
food and drink, and then, when the day
of his death arrives, ducks its head. (If one
shares the good times with a person, one
should be prepared to share the bad times
also.)
F
2519. Fiinúṣìkà,ﬁòdeṣòót/oacutedotbelow;ẹnitíḿbinikò
nííṣàìbini.
Hide wickedness in you and aﬀect a be-
nevolent comportment; the one who calls
people to account will not forget. (God sees
all hidden acts of wickedness and metes out
punishment to their perpetrators.)
Gb
2520. Gba-n-gbalàńṣegbàǹgbà;b/eacutedotbelowṣínbákú,
ìtagbangbalàńsinísí.
One performs one’s great feats in the open;
if a horse dies, one buries it in a wide-open
space. (One should not attempt to keep
weighty matters under wraps.)
2521. Gba-n-gbalàṣáńta.
The hawk always spreads its wings to the
fullest. (Whatever one has in mind, one
should lay it out fully in the open.)
2522. Gba-n-gbalÒgèdè/mgravegbéńṣawo.
Ògèdè/mgravegbé always performs his rituals in
the open. (A great person need not hesi-
tate to do whatever he or she has a mind
to do.)
16
16. Ògèdè/mgravegbé was a late-nineteenth-century Ìjèṣà
warrior during the internecine Yoruba wars of the
period.
246 the good person


--- PAGE 260 ---
2523. Gbogbowalafòkétésanọg/oacutedotbelowfà;ìgbàtí
òkétéóﬁdiogóje,ojú-u gbogbowaniyóṣe.
We all agreed on 120 cowries as the value of
the bush rat; when the value changes to 140,
we must all know about it. (No subgroup
has the right to alter in secret the decisions
the whole group has arrived at.)
17
I
2524. Ìbáàtínrín,okùnòtít/oacutedotbelowkìíjá;bíir/oacutedotbelowtó
ìrókò,wíwóníńwó.
Even if it is ﬂimsy, the thread of truth never
snaps; even though a lie might have the girth
of an ìrókòtree, it inevitably crashes. (Truth
will inevitably triumph over lies.)
2525. Ibitíatinaọmọọbalàḿbèrè,akìí
bèrèibitíọmọọbátip/oacutedotbelownl/eacutedotbelowgb/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelow.
What one should ask is where the prince
was attacked and ﬂogged; one does not ask
where the prince got the welts on his side.
(When matters require urgent attention, one
should not speak in riddles or prevaricate.)
2526. Igbókannáàlọdẹńdẹ.
It is in the same forest that a hunter hunts
[or all hunters hunt]. (One should stick to
that which one knows. Or, the manners and
behaviors of members of a fraternity should
be consistent and uniform.)
2527. Ìjòkólàḿbáeèbà.
The oil pot is ever found in a sitting posi-
tion. (The constancy of the pot is worth
emulating.)
2528. Ìkòkòkìíṣeléìgbín;ṣelódèìgbínm/oacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelow.
The pot is no shelter for the snail; all it does
17. The amounts stated here were considerable be-
fore the English colonizers imposed their own currency
and also a conversion rate that drastically devalued
people’s wealth.
is trap the snail. (One should not try to
pass oﬀ as a favor an injury one is causing a
person.)
2529. Iléahunògbaahun;/ogravedotbelowd/egravedotbelowd/egravedotbelowahunò
gbàlejò;ahúnk/oacutedotbelowlé/egravedotbelowtánóyọ/ogravedotbelowd/egravedotbelowd/egravedotbelowníbàdí.
The tortoise’s house is not large enough for
it; the tortoise’s porch is not large enough
to receive visitors; the tortoise built its
house and adds a porch at the rear. (The
miser never has enough to share with
others.)
18
2530. Ìlútíabárèlàḿbápé.
The citizens one goes abroad with are those
in whose ranks one remains. (One should
not desert one’s colleagues midway through
an enterprise.)
2531. Ìmàlégbààw/egravedotbelowólóunògbét/oacutedotbelowmì;taní
ńṣeẹl/eacutedotbelowrìífúnun?
The Muslim fasts and swears he did not
swallow his saliva; who is to corroborate his
story? (There is no point is paying attention
to a claim that cannot be veriﬁed.)
2532. Ìmàlés/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowòjókù,óníỌl/oacutedotbelowrun-únj/eacutedotbelowrìí
òun.
The Muslim says something and thunder
rumbles; he says the Almighty is corrobo-
rating his statement. (Said of someone who
claims a neutral occurrence as evidence
support for his or her position.)
2533. Ìmùl/egravedotbelowògbọd/ogravedotbelowtanarawọnjẹ;ìm/ogravedotbelow
ẹnìkanòyàn.
Those who enter into a covenant must not
betray one another; one person’s counsel is
not enough by itself. (One must not break
covenants.)
18. Ahun,the tortoise, is a designation also applied
to miserly people. The ‘‘porch’’ is the overhang of the
shell above the tortoise’s tail.
Onconsistency 247


--- PAGE 261 ---
2534. Ìp/eacutedotbelowp/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowìgòméje;bíkòbápéméjearakì
ígbàá.
Seven triﬂing bottles; fewer than seven and
one cannot endure the thought. (If a matter
is really of no importance, one should not
dwell on it.)
2535. Ir/oacutedotbelowni‘‘Máj/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelownìkanógb/oacutedotbelow’’;òót/oacutedotbelowni‘‘Ẹni
oríobi. ’’
‘‘Breathe not a word of it to anyone’’ denotes
a lie; ‘‘Ask anyone you please’’ indicates
the truth. (It is a only a lie that one wants
no witness to; one will gladly proclaim the
truth.)
2536. Ìrókòtóbágbàb/ogravedotbelowdè,bíb/eacutedotbelowni.
Whichever ìrókòtree becomes involved in
treachery gets felled. (Whoever engages in
treachery will be destroyed, no matter his or
her status.)
J
2537. ‘‘J/eacutedotbelowkínfìdíh/eacutedotbelowẹ.’’-/eacutedotbelowgbàjòkó;àfòm/oacutedotbelowdi
onílé.
‘‘Permit me to perch by you’’ takes the whole
seat; the parasite becomes the host. (Said of
people who take over by wiles what belongs
to others.)
K
2538. Kíabaàlèp/eacutedotbelowníb/egravedotbelow,abukéníbíòúnbá
kú,kíw/oacutedotbelownti/egravedotbelowhìntúìfunòun.
Just to delay people deliberately, the hump-
back says when he dies his intestines should
be removed from the back. (Said of people
resorting to transparent delaying tactics.)
2539. Kíágà,kíágò,èdèniòyédè.
Sitting and refusing to budge from one’s
position results from lack of communica-
tion. (It is when people fail to compromise
that problems defy solution.)
2540. Kíáríkárà,káràkámásan:à-rà-àì-
sanèkejìolè.
To see and buy, to buy and not pay: buy-
ing without paying [is] the twin of stealing.
(One should pay for whatever one buys.
Compare the following entry.)
2541. Kíolówówá,kíaláwìnwá;à-rà-àì-san
niòsunw/ogravedotbelown.
Let the purchaser with cash come, and let
the purchaser on credit come; only buying
without [eventually] paying is bad. (What
is important is not so much when but that
one fulﬁll one’s obligation. Compare the
preceding entry.)
2542. ‘‘Kòdùnmí,kòdùnmí’’;àgbàlagbà
ḿbúọpal/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowmẹfànítoríiyánàná.
‘‘I am not upset, I am not upset!’’ Yet a
grown man swears angrily six times because
of last night’s pounded yam. (A person’s
protestation of indiﬀerence is belied by
agitated behavior.)
2543. Kòjọagbekòjọolètíńsúfèéyàgbàdo;
bíkòbábámiadiolè;bóbábámiadionílé.
It-is-not-begging-and-it-is-not-stealing who
whistles as he harvests corn ears: if he does
not come upon me, it becomes stealing; if
he comes upon me, it becomes [the action
of] a member of the household. (Said of
a person who secretively takes something
from a relative instead of asking openly
for it.)
19
19. The idea is that the person goes secretively to a
relative’s farm to harvest some corn and whistles while
doing so in order to give the impression that he or she
is carefree because not doing anything wrong. If the
owner of the farm does not come upon the person, then
the action goes down as stealing; if the farmer does
come, the person will claim the rights of a relative.
248 the good person


--- PAGE 262 ---
2544. Kòsíohuntíaòlèﬁòruṣe;/egravedotbelowrù/ogravedotbelowsánlà
ḿbà.
There is nothing one cannot do in the dead
of night; the light of day alone is what one
fears. (The cover of darkness is a perfect
protection for any sort of enterprise.)
2545. Kòṣekukòṣẹyẹòj/eacutedotbelowkíàjàòsanwóòde.
Being neither a rat nor a bird keepsàjàò(a
b i r d l i k ea n i m a l )f r o mh a v i n gt op a yp o l l
tax. (It is impossible to be really sure of a
person who will not commit to any side in a
dispute.)
M
2546. Más/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowkí/ogravedotbelowrànmáp/ogravedotbelow.
Do not deny your responsibility; that way
the problem will be minimized. (Refusing to
accept one’s responsibility only aggravates
one’s diﬃculties.)
2547. ‘‘Mokòó’’kìíṣeàìníàpèjúwe.
‘‘I met him’’ is an incomplete statement
without further elaboration. (One should say
enough to make one’s message understood.)
N
2548. Nìpalaba,níwonko,/egravedotbelowr/egravedotbelowk/eacutedotbelowáṣèkan.
Either sunken or swollen, the cheeks will be
one or the other. (If one is not one way, one
must be the other way; one cannot be no
way at all.)
2549. Nígbàtíọw/oacutedotbelowòtẹìjàdùlàńníkòsíohun
tíàńjẹtíkìítán.
It is when one has come up empty in a
scramble for food that one says there is
nothing one eats that is not ﬁnished sooner
or later. (An aﬀectation of indiﬀerence is
often disguised disappointment.)
O
2550. ‘‘Ófòsókèóp/eacutedotbelowtítí,’’ir/oacutedotbelowlóńpa.
‘‘He jumped up and stayed aloft almost for-
ever’’: that is a lie. (One should control the
urge to exaggerate.)
2551. Ójọgàtè,kòjọgàtè,ófẹs/egravedotbelowméjèèjìtiro
rìn.
It may seem like staggering, and it may not
seem like staggering, but he is tipping for-
ward on tiptoes. (A euphemism does not
make an action anything other than what
it is.)
2552. Okòp/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelow,b/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelownioògbéemì.
You do not spit it out, and yet you do
not swallow it. (Said of a person who will
neither accept nor reject a proposition.)
2553. ‘‘Óm/oacutedotbelowmil/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow’’níńdiolè.
‘‘It is an exact ﬁt for my hand’’ leads to
thievery. (One should not grow too attached
to other people’s possessions.)
2554. Omúooril/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow/ogravedotbelowtún,omúkùùm/ogravedotbelowl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow
òsì,oníkíOrímáf/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowwágbaoúnjẹ.
You hold corn loaf in your right hand and
hold a cudgel in your left hand, and you call
to Orímáf/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelow to come take the food from
you. (If one wishes to entice a person, one
should not adopt a threatening posture.)
20
2555. Óńṣeapákúlú-kúlúbíẹnikágbéejó,ó
sìńṣẹnuhàmù-hàmùbíèyítíyógbèénimì.
It wiggles its arms as though it would have
one dance with it, and yet it is working its
mouth as though it would swallow one.
( S a i do fap e r s o nw h om i x e sf r i e n d l yg e s -
tures with threatening ones.)
2556. Óp/eacutedotbelowtítíni‘‘A-bẹnu-bí-ẹnu-/ogravedotbelowbọ’’;káṣá
sọpé,‘‘ÌwọLámọnrín,/ogravedotbelowbọni/oacutedotbelow.’’
20. Orímáf/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowmeans ‘‘Let not the skull crack.’’
Onconsistency 249


--- PAGE 263 ---
It is mere circumlocution to say, ‘‘A per-
son has a mouth like a fool’s’’; one should
rather say, ‘‘You, so-and-so, you are a fool.’’
(Be conﬁdent enough to speak without
hedging.)
2557. Ótaọfàsókè,óṣíodóborí.
He shot an arrow toward the sky and
covered his head with a mortar. (Said of a
person who causes problems and goes into
hiding, leaving others to suﬀer the conse-
quences.)
2558. Obì-íb/oacutedotbelowl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowalákẹdunóníòúnfún
aráil/egravedotbelow;bíkòfúnaráil/egravedotbelow,yós/ogravedotbelowkal/egravedotbelowwámúu?
Kola nut drops from the grip of a mon-
key, which says it makes a gift of the nut to
ground dwellers; if it does not make a gift of
it to ground dwellers, would it come down
to fetch it? (One can tell when necessity is
being disguised as virtue.)
2559. Obìnrinabàlèm/eacutedotbelowfà:àlèm/eacutedotbelowfàòmọara
wọn.
A woman who has six lovers: the six lovers
never know about one another. (Women are
past mistresses of deceit.)
2560. Obìnrínbímọfúnnikòpékómápani;
obìnrinòbímọfúnnikòpékómápani.
That a woman has had your child does not
mean she cannot kill you; that a woman
has not had your child does not mean she
may not kill you. (Intimacy is no protection
against a woman.)
2561. Obìnrínp/eacutedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowjàófìgbójúwọlé.
A woman who tarried too long at the mar-
ket returns home with a brazen face. (An
oﬀender will try to ward oﬀ criticism by ﬁrst
going on the oﬀensive.)
2562. Obìnrínreiléàlè,óﬁiléìyá/egravedotbelowtanọkọ
jẹ.
A woman goes to her lover’s house and uses
her mother’s home to deceive her husband.
(Legitimate pursuits ofen serve as cover for
illegitimate ones.)
2563. Odídẹr/eacutedotbelowẹyẹòkun,àlùkòẹyẹ/ogravedotbelowsà;bíabá
jẹungbé,kámáj/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowùngbé.
The parrot is a bird of the sea, and the king-
ﬁsher a bird of the lagoon; even though we
may forget that we once partook of the food,
let us never forget what we covenanted.
(However far we may roam, and however
long, we should never forget promises
made.)
2564. Òfìífìílàńrí ,aòríòkodoro;òkodoro
ḿb/ogravedotbelow,babagba-n-gba.
All we see is shadows, not clarity; but clarity
will come, father of all openness. (The truth
may be long hidden, but in the end it will
emerge into the open.)
2565. Ògèdè/mgravegbéir/oacutedotbelowkìídánisíy/egravedotbelowwù;gba-n-
gbaníńdánisí.
An audacious lie does not trip one in one’s
closet; it exposes one in a public place.
(One’s transgressions are likely to catch up
with one in the most embarrassing circum-
stances.)
2566. Ohuntíaòf/eacutedotbelowkéèyànóm/ogravedotbelowlàńṣeláb/eacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelow.
It is what one wishes to keep a secret that
one does in private. (One who has nothing
to hide should not do things in secret.)
2567. Ojodí/egravedotbelow,akindí/egravedotbelow;ìyàníńkójẹni.
A little cowardice [or] a little bravery: all
it brings one is trouble. (One should de-
cide whether one will be bold or cowardly;
inconsistency in such matters results in
suﬀering.)
2568. Òjò/ogravedotbelowgànj/oacutedotbelowòpaẹnirere;bíkòpajalè-
jalèapayíde-yíde.
A midnight rain does not beat a decent per-
son; if the person it beats is not a habitual
250 the good person


--- PAGE 264 ---
thief, he or she will be a habitual [night]
wanderer. (Honest people are seldom caught
in compromising positions.)
2569. Ojúgba-n-gbalàńtaawọgbà-ǹ-gbà.
It is out in the open that one spreads a huge
skin. (A matter that is of great consequence
to all should be discussed in the presence of
all.)
2570. Ojúkìíf/eacutedotbelownikùkóhuibi.
The eyes do not, because they do not see
one, engage in evil against one. (Never take
advantage of people’s absence to do them
ill.)
2571. Ojúlobìnrínm/ogravedotbelow.
Women know only the face. (The only
time one can rely on women is when one is
present.)
2572. Ojúl/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowwà.
Discourse is in the eyes. (Look the person
with whom one is holding a dialogue in the
eyes.)
2573. Ojúolóbìlatińjèrèobì.
It is in the presence and with the knowledge
of the kola-nut seller that one receives a gra-
tuitous addition to one’s purchase.
21 (If one
has a right to something, one should not
take it surreptitiously.)
2574. Ojútótimọniríkìíwípéòunòmọni
m/oacutedotbelow.
The eyes that used to recognize us cannot
say they no longer recognize us. (Whatever
happens, one should not refuse to acknowl-
edge one’s friends.)
2575. Òkété,báyìínìwàẹ:obáFámul/egravedotbelowo
daFá.
21. Sellers often gave purchasers some extra as a
sweetener, or gratuity.
So, giant bush rat, such is your character:
you made a pact with Ifá and you betrayed
Ifá. (An address to a person whom you
trusted but who has betrayed you.)
22
2576. Òkéténíọj/oacutedotbelowgbogbolòúnm/ogravedotbelow,òunòmọ
ọj/oacutedotbelowmìíràn.
The large bush rat says it knows every day
but not some other day. (If one makes a
promise, it should be ﬁrm and deﬁnite, not
vague.)
2577. Òkóbókìíbímọsítòsí.
The eunuch never has children close by.
(The person who has something to hide will
always oﬀer outlandish explanations.)
23
2578. Olófòófóògb/eacutedotbelowgbàá;ibiọp/eacutedotbelowníḿmọ.
The tattler does not earn six pence; thanks
are all he gets. (Tattling is not a proﬁtable or
appreciated habit.)
2579. Olóòót/oacutedotbelowìlúnìkàìlú.
T h eh o n e s tp e r s o ni nat o w ni st h eo g r e
of the town. (Honesty seldom makes one
popular.)
2580. Olóòót/oacutedotbelowkìísùnsípòìkà.
The honest person will not sleep in the place
prepared for the wicked person. (The honest
person will in the end be vindicated.)
2581. Òǹroròl/egravedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelownòfófó.
Lack of compassion is the elder of back-
biting. (A person who lacks compassion will
think nothing of spreading false news about
others.)
22. Giant bush rats love palm kernels, and these are
also used in Ifá divination; the rat is apparently raiding
Ifá’s preserve when it gathers them.
23. In a bid to conceal his calamity the eunuch will
always claim that he has fathered several children but
that they live far, far away.
Onconsistency 251


--- PAGE 265 ---
2582. ‘‘Oríj/eacutedotbelowkímpéméjì’’obìnrinòdénú.
‘ ‘ M a ym yh e a dg r a n tt h a tIh a v eap a r t n e r ’ ’
as a woman’s prayer is not sincere. (People
often pay lip service to concepts they do not
believe in.)
24
2583. Òtít/oacutedotbelowd/oacutedotbelowjàókùtà;owól/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowlàńraèké.
Truth arrives at the market but ﬁnds no
buyer; it is with ready cash, though, that
people buy falsehood. (People appreciate
falsehood more than truthfulness.)
2584. Òtít/oacutedotbelowkìíkúkáﬁir/oacutedotbelowjọba.
The truth does not die to be replaced as king
by the lie. (The lie cannot match the truth in
esteem.)
2585. Òtít/oacutedotbelowkìíṣìnà;ir/oacutedotbelowníńforígbọgb/eacutedotbelow.
Truth never goes awry; it is falsehood
that earns a gash on the head. (Truth will
not bring misfortune; falsehood leads to
trouble.)
2586. Òtít/oacutedotbelowkorò;bíomitooronir/oacutedotbelowrí.
Truth is bitter; falsehood is like meat stew.
(It is more diﬃcult to be truthful than to
lie.)
2587. Òtít/oacutedotbelowlolóríìwà.
Truthfulness is the chief of attributes. (There
is no better attribute than truthfulness.)
2588. Òtít/oacutedotbelowníńtúẹrùìkàpal/egravedotbelow.
It is truth that unpacks the load of the
wicked for all to see. (Truth will triumph
over the wicked.)
2589. Owólobìnrínm/ogravedotbelow.
Women care only about money. (Whatever
women do, they do only for money.)
24. The reference is to a woman’s co-wife.
Ọ
2590. Ọb/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowdùn,ọb/egravedotbelowòdùn,iyántánnígbá.
The stew is delicious, the stew is not deli-
cious; the pounded-yam meal is completely
gone from the dish. (Said of people who
complain about something yet will not let
go of it. Compare 2517.)
2591. /Ogravedotbelowkánkánlàńṣeìbí;ìk/ogravedotbelowk/ogravedotbelowlàńṣeìmùl/egravedotbelow;
bíat/oacutedotbelowjúìmùl/egravedotbelowtán,kát/oacutedotbelowjúìbíp/egravedotbelowlú;bíabá
kúaráẹniníńsinni.
One conducts aﬀairs with one’s kin with
forthrightness; one enters into covenants
[with nonrelatives] in secret; as one attends
to one’s secret compacts, one should also
attend to aﬀairs with one’s kin; on the day
one dies, it is one’s kin who attend to the
funeral. (Never neglect your relatives in
favor of others.)
2592. /Ogravedotbelowm/ogravedotbelowránbèèrè/ogravedotbelowrànwò;Àjàpání,‘‘Ẹni
tíw/oacutedotbelownpalánàá,kààkútán?’’
The sage asks for information; Àjàpá the
trickster asks, ‘‘About the person who was
killed yesterday, is he already dead?’’ (If you
know the answer to a question already, don’t
ask it.)
2593. /Ogravedotbelownàir/oacutedotbelowkìíp/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowpin.
The path of deceit soon ends. (Deceit is soon
exposed.)
2594. ‘‘/Ogravedotbelowrànyíòdùnmí’’:/egravedotbelow/egravedotbelowkanṣoṣolàńwíi.
‘‘This matter does not hurt me’’: stating it
only once suﬃces. (If one is indiﬀerent to
something, it should not dominate one’s
conversations.)
2595. /Ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowìk/ogravedotbelowk/ogravedotbelow,nígba-n-gbaníḿb/ogravedotbelow.
Secret matters have open exposure as their
ultimate destination. (Whatever is done in
secret will eventually be brought to light.)
2596. /Ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowòpariwo.
The matter in question does not make a
252 the good person


--- PAGE 266 ---
noise. (The matter under discussion poses
little problem.)
2597. /Ogravedotbelowtáẹnikìípòdù/ogravedotbelowyà.
One’s enemy never kills a huge cane rat.
(One is always tempted to minimize the
accomplishments of one’s enemies.)
P
2598. Pàkìtíṣebíòkúw/ogravedotbelowlú;labalábáṣebíẹyẹ
jáko.
The coarse mat enters the town like a
corpse; the butterﬂy enters the bush like
ab i r d .
25 (Said of people who appear to be
what they are not.)
2599. Pátá-pátálàńf/oacutedotbelowjú,kù/mgraveb/ogravedotbelow-kumbọlà
ńd/eacutedotbelowt/egravedotbelow;ojúà-f/oacutedotbelow-ì-f/oacutedotbelow-tánìjàníńdásíl/egravedotbelow.
One’s blindness should be absolute, and
one’s leprosy should pervade the whole
body; half-blindness only brings dissension.
(One’s condition should be deﬁnite, not am-
biguous or undetermined. See also the next
entry.)
2600. Pátá-pátáleégúnńfaṣọborí.
It is completely that the masquerader covers
his head with his shroud. (One must be
thoroughgoing in whatever one does. Com-
pare the preceding entry.)
2601. P/egravedotbelowhìndàkíoríṣeèké,farapam/oacutedotbelowkíorí
bíaṣenítińsọ.
Turn your back, and you will discover how
the deceitful person behaves; hide, and you
will ﬁnd out what the detractor is saying. (If
one could surprise them, one would discover
the true nature of one’s enemies.)
25. Corpses are carried on the head when being
brought home from the farm or some other place; mats
are also usually wrapped up and carried on the head.
2602. Pípọnniyìidẹ;/egravedotbelowj/eacutedotbelowniyìoògun.
Redness is the glory of brass; eﬃcaciousness
is the glory of medicine. (Truth to one’s na-
ture and fulﬁllment of one’s obligations are
the determinants of one’s worth.)
2603. P/ogravedotbelowǹgbà-pọngbalàḿbáodi.
Firmly planted and unshakable is the way
one ﬁnds the city fortiﬁcation. (An injunc-
tion to be ﬁrm and unshakable.)
2604. Purọkóoníyì;bíabájánitán,/egravedotbelowt/eacutedotbelowní
ńdà.
Lie and become renowned; once you have
been found out, the result is disgrace. (The
glory that results from deceit does not last.)
R
2605. Rìkíṣípaw/oacutedotbelownp/ogravedotbeloww/oacutedotbelownd/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelow;kòl/oacutedotbelowj/oacutedotbelowkò
lóṣù/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowbàj/eacutedotbelow.
Intrigue brought them together and they
became friends; it did not take days, let
alone months, before the friendship ended.
(People united in friendship by intrigue
soon become enemies.)
2606. Rìkíṣípin,alábòsílọ.
When the intrigue is terminated, the devious
person takes his leave. (When the intrigue is
exposed, the career of the devious person is
over.)
S
2607. Sàráàbabaẹbọ.
Alms are the ultimate sacriﬁce. (It is blessed
to give alms.)
Ṣ
2608. Ṣìgìdìòl/eacutedotbelownufọhùn;ir/oacutedotbelowńpur/oacutedotbelowfúnr/oacutedotbelow.
The earthen idol has no mouth to speak; lies
Onconsistency 253


--- PAGE 267 ---
are lying to lies.26 (One should not be fooled
by people who, for example, oﬀer to reveal
one’s future.)
2609. Ṣìgìdìtíòs/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow,aòmẹnitíńgbè.
[Since] the earthen idol does not speak,
no one knows whose side it is on. (No one
can ascribe any position to a person who is
cagey.)
T
2610. Talàbáríbáwíbíẹnífọmọf/oacutedotbelowkọlóru,tí
òj/eacutedotbelowkíl/egravedotbelowm/oacutedotbelow?
Whom should one blame, if not the person
who delivered a child to a husband in the
middle of the night without waiting until
daylight? (The person to blame in the event
of a preventable problem is the one whose
thoughtless action causes it.)
2611. Taladomisílára?Talòrìṣàńgùn?
W h oi st h eo n eo nw h o mw a t e rw a sp o u r e d ?
Who is the one being mounted by the god?
(The person receiving all the attention can-
not pretend not to be the one in need of
attention.)
2612. Taleṣinṣinìbágbèbíkòṣeelégbò?
Who else will the ﬂies ﬂock after if not the
person with open sores? (Opportunistic
people can be expected to stick with those
who oﬀer them the most beneﬁts.)
2613. Talódè/oacutedotbelowtíòńkakọ?
Who has tied you down and thus forced
you to confess your guilt? (Said to stop the
mouths of people who protest too much as a
result of a guilty conscience.)
26. The proverb refers to the use of earthen idols as
divination mediums.
2614. Taníńṣoògùnlódòtílábẹ-lábẹògb/oacutedotbelow?
Who is concocting a medicine by the river
about which the lábẹlábẹplant is ignorant?
(Trying to keep someone in the dark about a
matter is futile.)
27
W
2615. ‘‘Wájẹun.’’‘‘Ngòjẹ.’’Ófọg/oacutedotbelowrùn-ún
òkèlèt/oacutedotbelowọb/egravedotbelowwò.
‘‘Come join me at my meal.’’ ‘‘Thank you,
but no.’’ Still he eats a hundred mouthfuls,
just to taste the stew. (If you intend to de-
cline an invitation, match your action to
your words.)
2616. W/oacutedotbelownní,‘‘Àwòko,obúọba.’’Óní
ìgbàwolòúnráàyebúọba,kóuntókọigba
lówùúr/ogravedotbelow,igbal/oacutedotbelowsàn-án,igbalál/eacutedotbelow,kóuntóﬁ
àyìndà-yindàlùú?
They said, ‘‘Mockingbird, you are accused
of insulting the king.’’ It asked, when would
it have time to insult the king, seeing that it
must sing two hundred songs in the morn-
ing, two hundred in the afternoon, and two
hundred at night, mixing it all up with some
frolicsome notes? (The person in trouble
will resort to ludicrous alibis to escape pun-
ishment. Compare 2396.)
2617. W/oacutedotbelownníkárúgbógbaọmọp/ogravedotbelown,óníṣe
bíw/oacutedotbelownm/ogravedotbelowpéòunòléhín;w/oacutedotbelownníkópaọmọ
jẹni?
The old woman is asked to carry a child
on her back, and she says but they know
s h eh a sn ot e e t h ;w a ss h ea s k e dt oe a tt h e
child? (Said of people whose comment on a
proposition is wildly irrelevant.)
27. The plant is presumably an ingredient in the
medicine anyway.
254 the good person


--- PAGE 268 ---
On consideration, kindness,
and thoughtfulness
A
2618. Akìídùbúl/egravedotbelowṣubú.
One does not fall from a prone position.
(Hunger cannot make one faint and fall if
one goes to sleep.)
2619. Akìíﬁàì m/ogravedotbelownàdápàdé-/mgrave-pàdé.
One does not play the rendezvous game
without knowing one’s way. (One should
not enter into competition handicapped by
ignorance.)
2620. Abúniòtóab/egravedotbelowrín;b/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowniab/egravedotbelowrínòmọ
/egravedotbelowhìn/ogravedotbelowla.
The person who insults one is not as bad as
the person who derides one; yet the person
who derides one does not know what the
future may bring. (Fortunes and circum-
stances may be reversed in time.)
2621. Adì/eacutedotbelowy/egravedotbelowg/egravedotbelow;aṣebíóṣubú.
The chicken lists to one side; we think it has
fallen. (Never be too quick to celebrate the
demise of a nemesis.)
2622. Àf/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowríkanòjukáríigbóńláb/oacutedotbelowsílọ;
ẹbọkanòju/ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowèèyànlọ;‘‘Òrìṣágbémilé
àtète’’kanòjuoríẹṣinlọ.
There is no disappearing trick better than
the availability of a dense forest to disappear
into; there is no sacriﬁce more eﬃcacious
than having many people on one’s side;
there is no ‘‘The gods have elevated me’’ that
is higher than the back of a horse. (Practical
and realistic moves are more reliable than
mysterious expectations.)
2623. A-ﬁ-tir/egravedotbelow-síl/egravedotbelow-gb/oacutedotbelow-tẹniẹl/eacutedotbelowni:Ọl/oacutedotbelowrunní
ḿbagb/oacutedotbelowtir/egravedotbelow.
He-who-neglects-his-aﬀairs-to-care-for-
others’-aﬀairs: it is God that takes care of his
aﬀairs. (God takes care of the benevolent.)
2624. Àgbàṣooremáwob/egravedotbelow.
Elder, do a favor and remove your eyes from
it. (Do not advertise your acts of kindness or
pointedly await acknowledgment of them.)
2625. Àgbòòṣéémú;/ogravedotbelowdáòṣéémú;ohun
gbogboníńtóbilójúahun.
A ram is too much to give; a gelded animal
i st o om u c ht og i v e ;e v e r y t h i n gi se x c e s s i v e
i nt h es i g h to fam i s e r .( E x p e c tn of a v o r
from a miser.)
2626. Àì-ﬁ-ǹ-kan-pe-ǹ-kanníḿbaǹ-kanj/eacutedotbelow.
It is failure-to-count-anything-as-signiﬁcant
that ruins things. (Minimizing problems
results in disaster.)
2627. Àìmète,àìmèrò,lọmọìyám/eacutedotbelowfà-áﬁńkú
sókoẹgbàafà.
Lack of resourcefulness and lack of thought-
fulness cause six siblings to die as pawns for
only 12,000 cowries. (Pooling resources and
wisdom ensures better results than going it
alone.)
1
1. If the children had known how to plan and pool
their resources, they could have redeemed themselves;
the amount in question is insubstantial. It was usual in
traditional Yoruba society for a person to pawn himself


--- PAGE 269 ---
2628. Àj/eacutedotbelowgbànitik/ogravedotbelowǹk/ogravedotbelow.
Croaking-in-relays is the mark of frogs. (It is
in the nature of sheep to follow and to lack
initiative.)
2629. Ak/eacutedotbelowyinjẹòm/ogravedotbelowpéìdíńroadìẹ.
The person who gathers eggs to eat does not
know that the chicken’s oriﬁce hurts. (One
should never be so preoccupied with one’s
own pleasures that one does not care what
they cost others.)
2630. A-lágbára-má-mèrò,baba/ogravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelow.
He-who-has-strength-but-lacks-diecretion
[is the] father of laziness. (A powerful but
thoughtless person is worse than the laziest
person.)
2631. A-láì-mète-mèròọkọtóﬁadìẹìyàwóbọ
oríìyálé;bíbaálébáj/eacutedotbelowìkà,èwonitòrìṣà?
The shiftless, thoughtless husband makes
the junior wife’s chicken a sacriﬁce to the
senior wife’s head; if the husband is wicked,
what about the god? (God will not accept
oﬀerings or prayers tainted with wicked-
ness.)
2632. Aláràjẹòmọọdún;a-biṣu-úta-bí-igi.
He who purchases the food he eats cares not
w h a tt h es e a s o ni s ;h i sy a m sa l w a y sﬂ o u r i s h
like trees. (The consumer does not know
what the producer goes through.)
2633. Arúgbóṣogerí;àkísà-álògbàrí.
The old person was once a dandy; the rag
w a so n c ei nf a s h i o n .( T h o s ew h oa r ef a v o r e d
should remember that times and circum-
stances do change.)
2634. Àṣẹ/Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelowkìíró‘‘Gbà,’’àﬁ‘‘Múwá.’’
The order from /Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow never soundsGbà
[meaning ‘‘Take!’’], onlyMúwá[meaning
or a willing relative for a certain amount; as soon as the
amount was repaid, the pawn was redeemed.
‘‘Bring’’]. (It is good to give as well as to
receive.)2
2635. Àṣírí-ináwó-náwókìítúlójúahun.
The big spender is never disgraced in the
presence of the miser. (The free spender will
always be honored in the community.)
2636. Aṣiwèrèlóbíìyá/ogravedotbelowbọ.
It was an imbecile that gave birth to the
mother of the monkey. (The fool belongs in
the same lineage as the imbecile.)
2637. A-ti-ara-ẹni-roni,ajáọdẹ.
A-creature-that-applies-another’s-
circumstances-to-itself: a hunter’s dog. (The
hunter’s dog would do well to place itself in
the shoes of the animals it hunts.)
2638. Ayídóborítafàsókè:ojúOlúwaátówọn.
Those who cover their heads with mortars
and shoot arrows into the sky: God’s eyes
encompass them all. (God sees all acts of
selﬁshness and wickedness toward others.)
B
2639. Bámijókòólàbíkúńj/eacutedotbelow;ẹnitíòbímọríò
gbọd/ogravedotbelowsọỌm/oacutedotbelowláriwo.
Bámijókòó [Sit-with-me] is the name one
gives an àbíkú;a person who has never had
a child does not name a child Ọm/oacutedotbelowláriwo.
(A reference to the crying that accompanies
the death of anàbíkú.)
3
2640. Bíabágéiginígbó,káﬁ/ogravedotbelowrànroara
ẹniwò.
2. This is obviously the sentiment of /Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow’s vassal
towns, which have to send tributes periodically.
3. Àbíkú(‘‘One born to die’’) is the name given to
children believed to plague certain women by entering
into them to be born, only to die prematurely, and then
repeating the process several times.
256 the good person


--- PAGE 270 ---
When one fells a tree in the forest, one
should apply the matter to oneself. (When-
ever one does something to another, one
should put oneself in that person’s shoes.)
2641. Bíabáríòkúìkàníl/egravedotbelow,tíaﬁẹs/egravedotbelowtaá;
ìkà-ádiméji.
If one sees the corpse of a wicked person on
the ground and one kicks it, there are then
two wicked people. (If one returns evil for
evil, one joins the ranks of the evil.)
2642. Bíoṣerereyóyọsíọlára;bíokòṣerere
yóyọsíl/egravedotbelow.
If your deeds are good, the beneﬁts return to
you; if your deeds are not good, they will be
apparent to all. (Neither good nor evil goes
for nought.)
2643. Bíótińdunọmọẹyẹ,b/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowlóńdunọmọ
èèyàn.
As the young of birds know pain, so do the
young of humans. (Others feel hurt, just as
we do.)
E
2644. ‘‘Èròtètèjí;’’‘‘Èròj/eacutedotbelowil/egravedotbelowóm/oacutedotbelow’’:tèròlà
ńrò.
‘‘Traveler, get up early’’; ‘‘Traveler, wait until
light’’: it’s all out of solicitousness for the
traveler’s welfare. (Good intention does not
guarantee good reception; the person of
whose welfare one is being solicitous may
resent one’s attention.)
Ẹ
2645. Ẹníkámátafà;kíniaóﬁléogun?
Kànnà-kànnàlaﬁléBoko.
You forbid us to shoot arrows, so with what
shall we repell invaders? In the past the Boko
were repelled with catapults. (It is unhelpful
to deprive people of the tools they need for
w h a tt h e ym u s td o . )
2646. Ẹnífowólògbàlókáyéjá.
It is the person who uses his or her money
to enjoy life who lives well. (Money is to be
used to enjoy life.)
2647. Ẹnílówókóṣebíọba;àràwolahúnf/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelow
ﬁowódá?
Whoever has riches should act like a king;
what kind of feat can a miser perform with
money? (The best thing to do with wealth is
use it to live well.)
2648. Ẹnímọowó-ólòlowóḿbágbé.
It is the person who knows how to use
wealth that wealth attaches to. (Wealth
follows only those who know how to use
it.)
2649. Ẹnitíaṣelóoretíkòdúp/eacutedotbelow,bíọl/oacutedotbelowṣà-á
kónil/eacutedotbelowrùni.
A person for whom one does a favor but
who shows no gratitude is like a robber
who has stolen one’s goods. (Ingratitude
is comparable to robbery.)
2650. Ẹnitíóbámáabímọáy/ogravedotbelowf/oacutedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowmọ.
Whoever would have children of her own
must rejoice with those who already have.
(Those who seek good fortune must not
begrudge those who are already fortunate.)
2651. Ẹnitíóbèèrè/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowlóf/eacutedotbelowìdí-ir/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelow.
Whoever asks about a matter genuinely
wishes to know its causes. (If a person asks
for help with a problem, one should appre-
ciate the gesture and comply.)
2652. Ẹnitíógòkè,kófa/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelow-ẹr/egravedotbelowl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow;ẹnitó
ríjẹ,kófún/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelow-ẹr/egravedotbelowjẹ.
Whoever has reached the top, let him or her
pull a friend by the hand; whoever has food
to eat, let him or her share it with a friend.
Onconsideration 257


--- PAGE 271 ---
( I fo n eh a ss u c c e e d e d ,o n es h o u l dg i v ea i dt o
those still struggling.)
2653. Ẹnitíósoìl/egravedotbelowk/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowparí/ogravedotbelowṣ/oacutedotbelow;ẹnitófúnni
l/oacutedotbelowmọ-/oacutedotbelowparíoore.
The person who adorns herself with beads
has done the ultimate in self-beautifying; the
person who gives one a child [in marriage]
has done the ultimate in favor. (There are
certain gestures that cannot be surpassed.
Compare 4955.)
2654. Ẹnitíóṣeìbàj/eacutedotbelowèèyàn-ánṣeìbàj/eacutedotbelowara-a
r/egravedotbelow.
Whoever defames others defames himself or
herself. (The evil one does to others reﬂects
on oneself. Compare 2656.)
2655. Ẹyẹléﬁ/egravedotbelowsín-inr/egravedotbelowpam/oacutedotbelow,óńṣe/egravedotbelowsín
adìẹ.
The pigeon hides its own disgrace and goes
ridiculing the chicken. (A person full of
ﬂaws insists on ﬁnding fault with others.)
I
2656. Ìbàj/eacutedotbelowiṣunìbàj/eacutedotbelow/ogravedotbelowbẹ;ẹnitóṣeìbàj/eacutedotbelow
èèyàn-ánṣeìbàj/eacutedotbelowara/egravedotbelow.
The blemish of the yam is the blemish of the
knife; whoever besmirches other people’s
names besmirches his or her own. (How one
treats others reﬂects more on oneself than
on the others. Compare 2654.)
4
2657. Igbáolóorekìíf/oacutedotbelow;àwoolóorekìífàya;
towótọmọníńyailéolóore.
The calabash of a kindhearted person never
breaks; the china plate of a kindhearted per-
son never cracks; both riches and children
ever converge in the home of a kindhearted
4 .T h ei d e ai st h a ti fo n ep e e l say a mw i t hak n i f e
and streaks show on the yam, the ﬂaw is the knife’s, not
the yam’s.
person. (Good always attends those who
are good. The following entry is a variant.
C o m p a r ea l s o2 6 5 9 . )
2658. Igbáoníp/egravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowkìíf/oacutedotbelow;àwooníp/egravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowkìí
fàya.
The calabash belonging to a patient per-
son never breaks; the china plate belonging
to a patient person never cracks. (Patient
people never come to grief. This is a vari-
ant of the preceding entry, and compare the
next entry.)
2659. Iléolóorekìíwótán;tìkàkìíwókù.
The home of a kindhearted person never
collapses completely; the home of a wicked
person always collapses, leaving nothing
standing. (Good will attract good, and evil
will attract evil. Compare the two preceding
entries.)
2660. Ilé/ogravedotbelowṣọnúàyàyó;taníj/eacutedotbelowyaléahun-
káhun?
To visit the home of a generous person is
to be plied with food aplenty; who would
think of visiting a miser? (One’s generosity
or miserliness makes one friends or loses
one friends.)
2661. Inúbúburú,oògùnòṣì.
Ill will [is the] medicine that ensures misfor-
tune. (Misfortune will surely attend a person
who harbors ill will toward others.)
2662. Inúurekìípani,wàhálàníńkóbáni.
Good will toward others does not kill; it
only gets one into trouble. (One should be
wary of kindness to others. But compare the
previous entry.)
2663. ‘‘Iyándára,ọb/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowdùn’’lópaAkíndélé
lókoÌgbájọ;‘‘Òrìṣà,nkòfúnọníèdìjẹ’’lópa
abọrìṣàÌkirè.
‘‘The pounded yam is good and the stew
is delicious’’ killed Akíndélé on his farm
258 the good person


--- PAGE 272 ---
at Ìgbájọ; ‘‘God, I will not give you some
food to eat’’ is what killed the priest at Ìkiré.
(Closed-ﬁstedness and stinginess bring
people nothing but misfortune.)
5
2664. Ìyàwójẹọkàjẹigbá.
The wife ate the yam-ﬂour meal and ate the
calabash with it. (One should show con-
sideration and exercise care in using others’
property.)
K
2665. Kíáṣáaṣáa,kíágb/ogravedotbelown/oacutedotbelowngb/ogravedotbelown/oacutedotbelown;ká
ﬁokoeéransíl/egravedotbelowlódáeéranlára.
One may slash at it and slash at it, and one
may shake the sand from its roots forever,
but nothing aﬀects theeérangrass like being
abandoned. (The best treatment for a recal-
c i t r a n tp e r s o ni st os h u nh i mo rh e r . )
2666. ‘‘Kiníyìíòp/ogravedotbelow;ngòlèfúnọníb/egravedotbelow’’:
olúwar/egravedotbelowahunni.
‘‘This thing is not plentiful; I cannot give
you any of it’’: the person is a miser. (How-
ever little one has, one should be willing to
spare some for others. Compare the follow-
ing entry.)
2667. ‘‘Kiníyìítíofúnmiòp/ogravedotbelow’’:ahunníńj/eacutedotbelow
b/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelow.
‘‘This thing that you have given me is not
plentiful’’: that statement indicates a greedy
person. (One should not be too demanding
of one’s benefactors. Compare the previous
entry.)
2668. Kòmútiọw/oacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowwáògbatọw/oacutedotbelowẹni.
He-will-not-bring-what-he-has will not
5. Presumably, Akíndélé would not share the
pounded yam and stew because they were delicious,
and the priest kept for himself all the things meant for
sacriﬁce to the god.
have what one has. (A person who will not
share what he or she has will not have a
share of others’ possessions either.)
2669. Kòsíkòsí;b/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowniọmọwọnńyó.
‘‘We have nothing, we have nothing!’’ Yet
their children always have full stomachs.
(Said of people who are too tightﬁsted to
help others.)
2670. Kòtóǹkanníńsọnidahun.
‘‘There is not much of it’’ is what turns one
into a miser. (Only a miser does not have
enough to share with others.)
M
2671. ‘‘Mábàámijẹìdùn,’’ẹranníńlélọ.
‘‘Do not share in my delicious meal’’ chases
away the animal. (The selﬁsh person would
rather ward oﬀ good fortune than allow
others to share it.)
6
2672. ‘‘Máf/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowọw/oacutedotbelow-/ogravedotbelowmikù’’tíńyangúgúrú
fúneégún;eégúnnáàání‘‘Máf/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowọw/oacutedotbelow-/ogravedotbelowmi
kù’’;ófúnunníọmọláńgidi.
‘‘Just so you won’t ﬁnd my hand empty’’
roasted popcorn for the masquerader; the
masquerader responded, ‘‘Just so you won’t
ﬁnd my hands empty’’ and gave him a
wooden doll. (Stinginess will not win gener-
osity in return.)
7
2673. M`bá-lówó-/mgravebá-se-/ogravedotbelowl/egravedotbelowl/egravedotbelow-fún-Ag/oacutedotbelown:
ìjímèrèkìíjẹoko/egravedotbelowkós/ogravedotbelow.
6. The reference is to a hunter who would rather
scare away game he cannot kill than give another
hunter the opportunity of killing it.
7. Masqueraders, who are supposed to be the em-
bodiment of ancestors, are credited with the power to
grant boons—including children—to supplicants. A
person who makes lame excuses while oﬀering inade-
quate gifts tothe masquerader will hear lame excuses
and receive worthless boonsfromthe masquerader.
Onconsideration 259


--- PAGE 273 ---
Had I money, I would cook bean meal for
the Ag/oacutedotbelown masquerader; the brown monkey’s
raiding of his farm never elicits a complaint
from him. (One should acknowledge and
reciprocate favors done one by others.)
8
2674. ‘‘Múwá,múwá’’lapáẹyẹléńké.
‘‘Bring! Bring!’’ is the sound of the pigeon’s
wings. (Some people know only how to take,
never how to give.)
9
N
2675. Náwó-náwókìíṣàpà.
The big spender is not a prodigal. (There is
nothing wrong with spending one’s money.)
O
2676. Ojẹbẹ,omubẹ,obabẹj/eacutedotbelow.
There you ate, there you drank, and there
you fouled. (Don’t besmirch a place that has
been good to you.)
2677. ‘‘Okúiṣ/eacutedotbelow’’òlèbíaráyénínú.
‘‘Greetings to you at work’’ cannot invite
people’s anger. (A courteous act does not
expose one to trouble.)
2678. ‘‘Ókúnmilójú,’’/egravedotbelowkọArogun;/ogravedotbelowkanṣoṣo
nimorà,igbaènìlóﬁsíi.
‘‘Its impression on me is tremendous’’: such
is Arogun’s corn meal; I bought only one,
but she gave me two hundred as makeweight
[or extra measure]. (Said of people who have
gone well beyond the call of duty.)
8. The egúngún(masqueraders) are believed to
favor /ogravedotbelowl/egravedotbelowl/egravedotbelow,seasoned and steamed ground beans. Ag/oacutedotbelown
is the masquerader charged with executing witches.
9. The bird’s wings in ﬂight are supposed to make a
sound like Múwá,múwá! (‘‘Bring, Bring’’).
2679. Obìkékerékọjáòkútańlá.
A small kola nut is superior to a large stone.
(A small gift is better than none at all.)
2680. Obìnrintóbímọtóbíolómitútù,
wàhálàọkọ/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowdínkù;kòníjáewém/oacutedotbelow,b/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowni
kòníwaegbò.
A woman who bears a child that requires
only cold water for all cures has saved her
husband much worry; he will never again go
searching for medicinal leaves, nor will he
go digging roots. (A considerate woman is
the joy of her husband.)
2681. Obínrin-ínbímofú nọoníoòrínú/egravedotbelow;o
f/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowkóonífunni?
A woman has a child by you, and you still
say you do not see her inside [know her
mind]; would you have her expose her intes-
tines? (People’s actions are enough, without
accompanying words, to prove the extent of
their commitment.)
2682. Ògúnòrọike;àgb/egravedotbelowdẹòrọbàtà;okoò
ṣòro-óro,àgb/egravedotbelowdẹòpaọk/oacutedotbelowtà.
Ògún [god of metals] does not fashion
ivory; the blacksmith does not make shoes;
were farming not a diﬃcult pursuit, the
blacksmith would not manufacture hoes for
sale. (One should appreciate people for their
eﬀorts and not belittle their accomplish-
ments.)
2683. Ohuntíḿbáahunnáwó/egravedotbelowḿbẹlápò-o
/egravedotbelow.
What will help a miser spend his money is
r i g h tt h e r ei nh i so rh e rp o c k e t .( T h ep e r -
son who does not willingly share what he or
she has will somehow ﬁnd himself or herself
being deprived of it.)
2684. Òjòpaewé-ekòkò;bólèyakóya.
The rain beats the coco-yam leaf; if it will
tear, let it tear. (When one has no invest-
260 the good person


--- PAGE 274 ---
ment in a property, one is likely to be care-
less in using it. Also, one will do what one
pleases, and damn the consequences.)
2685. Ojúlarílàńkọrinòkú,òkúòforinsáyé
kótólọ.
It is out of regard for onlookers that one
sings in praise of the dead; the dead did not
prescribe a song before departing this life.
(One does certain things out of a sense of
propriety, not because one must.)
2686. Ojúníńrójúṣàánú.
Eyes are what look on eyes and ﬁll with
kindness. (When the eyes actually see suﬀer-
ing, they cannot avoid compassion.)
2687. Ojúọbaayélóf/oacutedotbelow;t/ogravedotbelowrúnlàkedere,ó
ńwoaṣebi.
Only the king of this earth is blind; that of
heaven is wide-eyed, watching evildoers.
(God sees all acts of wickedness that may be
hidden from earthly authorities.)
2688. Òkulúnítaniòunórotòunfún?Taní
wároti/egravedotbelowfunÒkulu?
Òkulu asks with whom should he lodge his
complaint? Did anybody lodge his complaint
with Òkulu? (If one has been unhelpful to
others, one should not expect any help from
them.)
2689. Oníg/egravedotbelowg/egravedotbelowìṣájúbatìkẹhìnj/eacutedotbelow.
The goitered person going in front ruins the
fortunes of the one coming behind. (A per-
son’s misdeeds compromise those coming
after him.)
2690. Oorekìígbé;ìkàkìídànù;à-ṣoore-
jindònímmúnipàdánùoore.
A good deed does not go for nought; a
wicked deed is never lost; drowning while
doing a favor is what makes the good person
lose out on the rewards for his goodness.
(Every kindness, like every wickedness, is
rewarded; one should be prudent, though,
in doing favors.)
2691. Ooretíaṣefádìẹògbé;bóp/eacutedotbelowtítíaṣomi
toorosínil/eacutedotbelownu.
The favor that one does a chicken is not
for nought; in due course it will make stew
to delight one’s mouth. (There will always
be a return for whatever favor one does for
others.)
2692. Òr/eacutedotbelowhìnníńṣeọmọòkúp/egravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelow;taníj/eacutedotbelowṣe
ọmọÈgùnlóore?
Only a person who thinks of the future com-
miserates with an orphan; otherwise, who
would show kindness to an Ègùn person?
(Only the knowledge that one never knows
the future makes one show kindness to
people who do not appreciate goodness.)
10
2693. Òṣónúòbíèjìr/eacutedotbelow;onínúureníḿbíẹdun.
An ill-natured woman will not give birth to
twins; only good-natured people give birth
to twins. (Only good people are fortunate
enough to have twins.)
11
2694. Owólóńpeìnáowó.
Money is what calls for spending money.
(The availability of money creates the need
to spend it.)
Ọ
2695. /OgravedotbelowgáÌwátà,eṣúòmọolóòót/oacutedotbelow;eṣúdé,
eṣújẹokoolóore.
Big shot of Ìwátà town; the locusts do not
know who is honest; the locusts arrive and
10. Another example of the Ègùn, a branch of the
Yoruba, suﬀering a good deal of detraction.
11. Ẹdunis the colobus monkey, but the Yoruba,
who greatly favor twins, associate them with the animal.
Onconsideration 261


--- PAGE 275 ---
the locusts eat up the good person’s farm.
(Vandals care not which property belongs to
good people and which to bad people.)
12
2696. /Ogravedotbelowmùtíkìíṣàpà;owó/egravedotbelowlóńná.
The drunkard is not a prodigal; it is his
money that he is spending. (One can spend
one’s money as one wishes.)
2697. /Ogravedotbelowràn-an-yànòsínínúuiyánrán.
There is no compulsion in voluntary work.
(Volunteering is not an obligation.)
2698. Ọtígbéléahunókan.
Wine stays in the home of the miser until
it goes sour. (The miser would rather see
things go bad than share them.)
2699. /Ogravedotbelowt/ogravedotbelowniṣ/eacutedotbelowolókùnrùn.
The assignment for an invalid must be dif-
ferent from everybody else’s. (People should
be employed only according to their capa-
bilities.)
2700. Ọw/oacutedotbelowhíháàhájùníńdínàirem/oacutedotbelowni.
Excessive stinginess is what slams the door
of fortune in one’s face. (Miserliness will
divert good fortune away from the miser.)
P
2701. P/egravedotbelowgàn-p/egravedotbelowgàn-ánb/oacutedotbelowsódekòníláárí;ẹni
tíòrówóṣefújàníńp/egravedotbelowgànẹni.
He who derides others steps outside and
does not amount to much; it is he who has
no basis for bragging that derides others.
(People who belittle others are themselves
worthless.)
12. Ìwátà (ìwà-átà) means ‘‘Character pays’’: some
irony there.
Ṣ
2702. Ṣesíl/egravedotbelow:ẹrù-ur/egravedotbelowkìíp/eacutedotbelowníbodè.
He who extends kindness beforehand: his
goods will not stay long at the frontier. (The
generous person will always ﬁnd helpers to
ease his passage.)
13
2703. Ṣ/egravedotbelowgàn-ṣ/egravedotbelowgànòláṣọméjì;pé-ń-pélaṣọ
abúniḿmọ.
The detractor of others does not possess a
change of clothing; the garment of the in-
sulter of people is always skimpy. (People
who make a habit of cutting others down
never prosper either.)
2704. Ṣìkà-ṣìkà-áﬁdí/egravedotbelowṣeara/egravedotbelow.
The wicked person does a little wickedness
to himself or herself. (Wickedness has some
adverse eﬀect on the perpetrator.)
2705. Ṣìkà-ṣìkà-ágbàgbéàjọbí,adánilóró
gbàgbé/ogravedotbelowla.
The wicked forget kinship; the person who
hurts others forgets tomorrow. (People
who inﬂict injury on others forget that the
gods of kinship will inﬂict punishment on
them and that they themselves may be at the
receiving end in the future.)
2706. Ṣìkà-ṣìkàòj/eacutedotbelowpeara/egravedotbelowníkà.
The wicked person will never describe him-
self as wicked. (The wicked always strive to
appear as decent, kind people.)
T
2707. Tewétegbòníńṣàánúàfòm/oacutedotbelow.
Both the leaf and the root take pity on the
climbing parasite. (A plea for consideration
13. The reference is to traveling traders and tariﬀ
collectors.
262 the good person


--- PAGE 276 ---
from all and sundry. Compare the following
two entries.)
2708. Tigit/ogravedotbelowp/egravedotbelowníńṣàánúàfòm/oacutedotbelow.
Both trees and palms take pity on the climb-
ing plant. (A plea for mercy from all and
sundry. Compare the preceding and follow-
ing entries.)
2709. Tigit/ogravedotbelowp/egravedotbelowníńsàánúìyèrélóko.
Both trees and palms extend kindness to the
African black pepper plant. (A plea for kind-
ness from others. Compare the preceding
two entries.)
2710. Tìkàtoore,/ogravedotbelowkankìígbé.
Wickedness or kindness, neither goes for
nought. (Wickedness and kindness will be
rewarded unfailingly.)
2711. Tútùníńtẹnuẹjawá.
Only coolness come out of the ﬁsh’s mouth.
(Permit your mouth to say only soothing
things.)
Onconsideration 263


--- PAGE 277 ---



--- PAGE 278 ---
The Fortunate Person
(or The Good Life)
two


--- PAGE 279 ---



--- PAGE 280 ---
On good name (good repute)
A
2712. Àì-lóbìnrinkòṣé-édák/eacutedotbelowlásán;ótóká
pegbogboayékóbánigb/oacutedotbelow/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelownáà.
Not-having-a-woman is not a problem to
keep secret; it merits appealing to the whole
world to intervene in the matter. (A man
without a woman needs drastic measures to
resolve his problem.)
2713. Àk/eacutedotbelowbàj/eacutedotbelow,ọmọàgan-án-dáríjọ-bí.
Spoiled rotten, child-collectively-mothered-
by-barren-women. (Infertile women make
poor mothers.)
2714. Àk/eacutedotbelowjùtíḿbaọmọolówój/eacutedotbelow.
Excessive pampering ruins the child of a
wealthy person. (Children of wealthy par-
ents are likely to be spoiled with too much
pampering.)
2715. Aṣèbàj/eacutedotbelowńwáẹnirerekúnra.
The evildoer seeks good people to associate
with. (Evil people always seek the company
of good people to burnish their image.)
2716. Àwòdìòkèòm/ogravedotbelowpéaráil/egravedotbelowńwoòun.
The hawk in the sky does not know that
ground dwellers are watching it. (One may
be unaware, but one’s machinations are not
hidden.)
B
2717. Bíeégúnbájóore,oríayáat/oacutedotbelowkùn-unr/egravedotbelow.
If a masquerader dances well, his attendant
is ﬁlled with pride. (The accomplishments
of one’s relatives make one proud. This is a
variant of the following entry.)
2718. Bíeégúnẹníbájóore,oríayáni.
If one’s masquerader dances well, one is
proud. (The accomplishments of one’s rela-
tives give one cause for pride. Compare the
preceding entry.)
2719. Bíbíireòṣé-éfowórà.
A good pedigree is not something one can
buy with money. (Money cannot improve
the circumstances of one’s birth.)
D
2720. Dídùndídùnniléolóyin;kíkorònilé
agb/oacutedotbelown.
Sweetness is the constant characteristic
o ft h eh o n e ys e l l e r ’ sh o m e ;b i t t e r n e s si s
the permanent characteristic of the wasp’s
home. (The good person will always be at-
tended by goodness, the wicked person by
wickedness.)
E
2721. Èèyàn-ándáraókuìwà;ilédáraóku
ìgbé.
A person may be attractive, but character
still matters; a home may be gorgeous, but
what matters is its livability. (Looks are not
everything.)


--- PAGE 281 ---
2722. Èèyàn-ánrìn,òjìjít/egravedotbelowlée;kòṣé-émú,
kòṣé-éjùsápò.
A person walks along, and his or her shadow
follows; it cannot be grabbed, and it cannot
be slipped into the pocket. (No one can hide
his or her character.)
2723. Ehínfunfunl/egravedotbelowṣ/oacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowrín;ìwàrerel/egravedotbelowṣ/oacutedotbelow
èèyàn.
The adornment of a smile is white teeth; the
adornment of a person is good character.
(Good character is more valuable than good
looks. Compare 4991.)
2724. Ehín/ogravedotbelowkánkánobìnrínkán;olóríẹwà-á
lọ.
A woman’s front teeth break; the main-
stay of [her] beauty is demolished. (When
o n e ’ sm a i na s s e ti sg o n e ,o n ei sa sg o o da s
ﬁnished.)
2725. ÈjìOgbènibabaIfá.
Èjì Ogbè is the father ﬁgure in Ifá. (The
subject of this comment is thought to be
without peer in its category.)
1
2726. Èkékú,agb/eacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelowókanòkúta.
The devious person dies, and while digging
his or her grave one strikes a rock. (Even the
earth bears witness against the wicked.)
2727. Èkéṣíṣeòníkámálòówó;ìkàṣíṣeòní
kámádàgbà;ṣùgb/oacutedotbelownọj/oacutedotbelowàtisùnlẹbọ.
Being devious does not prevent one from
prospering; being evil does not prevent one
from living long; but it is one’s dying day
that one needs to worry about. (The devious
and the evil may prosper and live long, but
their end will be terrible.)
2728. Epokìít/eacutedotbelow;iy/ogravedotbelowkìít/eacutedotbelow.
Palm oil never goes stale; salt never goes
1. In Ifá, the elaborate Yoruba system of divination,
Èjì Ogbè is the ﬁrst and most important of the sixteen
main chapters.
stale. (Certain things never go out of season
or favor. Also, this is a prayer that a person
may never be disgraced.)
2729. Èṣùòníwà,ak/oacutedotbelowlé-er/egravedotbelowsíta.
Èṣù lacks good character; therefore, his
house is built outdoors.
2 (Whoever lacks
social graces deserves to be ostracized.)
Ẹ
2730. Ẹgbàá/ogravedotbelowbùnòtó/ogravedotbelowkanṣoṣo/ogravedotbelowgá.
Two hundred ﬁlthy persons are no match
for one person of good repute. (One decent
individual is worth more than two hundred
tasteless people.)
2731. /Egravedotbelowhìnòsunw/ogravedotbelown:ajámúawọẹkùnt/eacutedotbelowsùn.
The end is inauspicious: a dog sleeps on the
hide of a leopard. (The way one is remem-
bered after death is a good indication of
whether or not one lived and died well.)
2732. Ẹníbáṣ/egravedotbelowjalèl/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowkan,bóbáfàránogún
/ogravedotbelowk/eacutedotbelowbora,aṣọolèlów/ogravedotbelow.
Whoever stole once, if he or she later drapes
himself or herself in expensive velvet cloth,
is draped in stolen goods. (A reputation
once ruined is impossible to mend.)
2733. Ẹníbúẹṣinl/oacutedotbelowbùn-únjàreẹṣin:ẹṣinò
b/oacutedotbelowjúlál/eacutedotbelow;kòwẹs/egravedotbelowlówùúr/ogravedotbelow;p/egravedotbelowt/egravedotbelow-p/eacutedotbelowt/egravedotbelowèṣíḿbẹ
lát/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowlẹs/egravedotbelow-ẹẹṣin.
Whoever calls the horse ﬁlthy is justiﬁed:
the horse does not rinse its face at night;
the horse does not wash its feet at night;
there is year-old caked mud on the hooves
of the horse. (If one does not look well to
one’s behavior, one deserves the contempt of
others.)
2734. Ẹníﬁẹnuraiyì,/egravedotbelowt/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowḿb/ogravedotbelow.
The disgrace of the person who bought
2. The reference is to the practice of erecting
outdoors the images of Èṣù, the rascally Yoruba god.
268 the fortunate person


--- PAGE 282 ---
glory with his or her mouth is near at hand.
(Undeserved glory is soon exposed.)
2735. Ẹnímọẹniòdàbíẹniam/ogravedotbelow.
A person who knows one is not like a per-
son one knows. (One can vouch for the
character of a person one knows, not of a
person who knows one.)
2736. Ẹnirerekìíkúsípòìkà.
A good person does not die the death of an
evil person. (Each person will be recom-
pensed according to his or her character.)
2737. Ẹnitíabíníléọgb/oacutedotbelown,tíawònílé
ìm/ogravedotbelowràn,ọgb/oacutedotbelownnikòníígb/oacutedotbelownni,tàbíìm/ogravedotbelowràn
nikòníím/ogravedotbelow?
Ap e r s o nw h oi sb o r ni nt h eh o u s eo fw i s -
dom and reared in the house of discern-
ment, will he or she lack wisdom or be
without discernment? (A person carries the
marks of his or her pedigree and upbring-
ing. See 3476.)
2738. Ẹnitóbáìwàbúburúwásáyé,tòun
tokùnàjàràníńlọs/oacutedotbelowrun.
Whoever comes into this world accompa-
nied by bad character goes back to heaven
by means of a vine. (Bad character will be
the undoing of its owner.)
3
2739. Ẹnitólóríreretíkòníwà,ìwà-ar/egravedotbelowniyó
baorí-ir/egravedotbelowj/eacutedotbelow.
A person who is blessed with good fortune
but lacks good character: his character will
ruin his or her good fortune. (Evil character
ruins good destiny.)
2740. Ẹnitólówótíkòníwà,owóolówólóní.
The person who has riches but lacks good
character has other people’s riches. (A rich
person without good character soon loses
his or her riches to others.)
3. The idea of the vine is that the bad person may
well be liable to hang.
2741. Ẹnitóp/eacutedotbelowlóko/ogravedotbelowpẹlóníkádáàbá-
kábàá.
The person who stayed too long on the
palm-wine farm is the one who encouraged
all sorts of speculation about what he was up
to. (If one’s behavior is devious, people are
justiﬁed in wondering about one’s charac-
ter.)
2742. Ẹs/egravedotbelowigúnnugúntíḿbaọb/egravedotbelowj/eacutedotbelow.
The legs of vultures, which ruin the stew.
(An abomination [is] like the legs of a vul-
t u r ei nas t e w . )
2743. Ẹs/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowhìn-inkòrikò.
There is a multitude of feet in the wake of
the wolf. (An illustrious person attracts a
great following.)
I
2744. Ikúyáju/egravedotbelowsín.
Death is preferable to disgrace. (One should
die rather than besmirch one’s name.)
2745. Ilédáraókuẹk/eacutedotbelow;èèyàn-ándáraóku
ìwà.
The house is beautiful but for its pillars; a
person is handsome, but what of character?
(Bad character nulliﬁes any charm a person
might have.)
2746. Ilékan-ánwàl/Oacutedotbelowy/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelownígbààtij/oacutedotbelowtíàńpè
níÀk/iacuteigravej/eacutedotbelow;òyìnbókúníb/egravedotbelow.
There was a house in /Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow in ancient times
called One-that-does-not-acknowledge-
greetings; a white man died there. (Com-
ment on ill-mannered people who do not
respond to greetings.)
4
2747. ‘‘Ìṣe/egravedotbelowni’’òj/eacutedotbelowkámọikúàbíkú.
‘‘That is his or her habit’’ keeps one from
4. The proverb associates this bad habit with Euro-
peans and suggests that those who do not greet others
are like dead people.
Ongoodname 269


--- PAGE 283 ---
knowing when an àbíkúis really dying. (One
who cries ‘‘wolf ’’ too many times will attract
no one in times of real trouble. See note 6 at
3488 and compare 3627.)
2748. Ìwàkìíﬁoníwàsíl/egravedotbelow.
Character will not forsake its owner. (One
cannot shed one’s character.)
2749. Ìwàl/egravedotbelowsìn.
Character is worship. (One’s worship and
prayers are only as eﬃcacious as one’s char-
a c t e ri sg o o d . )
2750. Ìwàlẹwà.
Character is beauty. (A person is as beautiful
a sh i so rh e rc h a r a c t e ri sg o o d . )
2751. Ìwàlòrìṣà;bíatihùúsíníńgbenisí.
C h a r a c t e ri sag o d ;j u s ta so n el i v e si t ,s o
it succors one. (One’s fortune depends on
one’s character.)
2752. Ìwàrerel/egravedotbelowṣ/oacutedotbelowèèyàn;ehínfunfunl/egravedotbelowṣ/oacutedotbelow
/egravedotbelowrín.
Good character is a person’s [best] adorn-
ment; white teeth are the adornment of a
smile. (A person’s most desirable trait is
good character, just as a smile’s best aspect
is white teeth.)
2753. Ìwàniyì,alágb/egravedotbelowdẹIf/ogravedotbelowk/ogravedotbelow;w/oacutedotbelownfúnun
nírin,ólájágbéejẹ;ajáamáajẹirinbí?
Ìwàniyì [Good character brings good re-
gard], blacksmith of If/ogravedotbelowk/ogravedotbelow quarters [in
Ibadan], was given an iron rod, and he
claimed a dog ate it up; do dogs eat iron?
(If you wish others to think well of you,
you must be reliable and trustworthy.)
K
2754. Káròhìnẹniòtókábáẹnib/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelow.
To have people say good things about one
is nothing like being found to vindicate
the report. (One’s real character is more
important than what others say.)
2755. ‘‘Kítìjúpamí’’:ààrẹèpèni.
‘‘May I die of shame’’: that is the chief of all
curses. (No fate is worse than disgrace.)
2756. KòsíọmọnínúọmọLébé;òkúníńgbé
òkúp/ogravedotbelown.
There is no child worthy of the name among
the children of Lébé [the acrobatic mas-
querader], only dead people carrying dead
people on their backs. (Said as a dismis-
sive statement about worthless, ill-behaved
children.)
5
M
2757. Màá-ṣe-é-màá-lọobìnrin,ojú-upópó
lòrìṣà-ar/egravedotbelowńgbé.
I-will-do-as-I-wish-and-go-my-way woman:
the memorial shrine to her goddess belongs
by the roadside. (A wife who cares not about
her character is not worth keeping.)
2758. Méjìlàńwéèèyàn;bíòṣeyíyìnaṣe
bíbú.
There are two ways of speaking about
people; if it is not in praise, it will be in cas-
tigation. (One has either a good reputation
or bad, never neutral.)
2759. ‘‘Mobí,mobí’’kìíṣeọmọrere.
‘ ‘ Ih a v ej u s th a dab a b y ;Ih a v ej u s th a da
baby!’’ does not make for good breeding.
(Frequent births are less desirable than
painstaking child rearing.)
5. The masqueraders, supposed to be the incarnated
spirits of the dead, actually have only props made to
look like children on their backs.
270 the fortunate person


--- PAGE 284 ---
O
2760. Ódioríẹnióbàj/eacutedotbelow,àì-m/ogravedotbelowwà-á-hùni.
[If] all was ruined during one’s watch, that
spells a defect in character. (A person of
good character will not be responsible for
social disasters.)
2761. Obìnrintíkòníwà,ìyá/egravedotbelowníḿbá
ṣorogún.
A woman without good character will have
only her mother as co-wife. (A woman
without good character is unlikely to ﬁnd a
husband.)
2762. Obínrintóbímọtíògb/oacutedotbelownfab/eacutedotbelowjóná.
A woman who gives birth to a child that
lacks wisdom only singed her genitals. (A
child who grows up lacking wisdom is the
bane of his or her mother.)
2763. Òbúkọ-/oacutedotbelowdé,òórùn-úndé.
The he-goat has arrived; stink has arrived.
(When evil people arrive at a gathering,
dissension ensues.)
2764. Odògbẹmágb/eacutedotbeloworúkọ.
Rivers dry up but not their names. (One’s
deeds will survive one.)
2765. Ojúìkàlatińﬁọmọolóorejọba.
It is in the presence of the wicked person
that the son of the good person is crowned
king. (The wicked will live long enough to
see the good prosper.)
2766. Olèkìígb/oacutedotbeloworúkọ/egravedotbelowkódúró.
A thief does not hear his name and stand in
place. (A person who has something to hide
is always worried about being exposed.)
2767. Oníwàp/egravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelow:a-báni-gbé-tuni-lára.
A mild-mannered person [is] one with
whom cohabitation envelops one in ease. (A
mild-mannered person is a joy to live with.)
2768. Òrìṣànìwà;bíatihùúlóṣeńgbeni.
Character is a god; it aids one according to
how one uses it. (One’s character determines
one’s fortune.)
2769. Orúkọẹniníńj/eacutedotbelowrìíẹnilókèèrè.
One’s name is one’s most eﬀective advocate
abroad. (Your reputation determines what
people who do not know you go by.)
2770. Orúkọl/egravedotbelowgbọnoyè.
A name is the elder of a chieftaincy title.
(A good name is better than an important
position.)
2771. Orúkọńroni;àpèjàńroni.
One’s name aﬀects one’s character; one’s war
name determines how one behaves. (People
are inﬂuenced by their names.
6 Compare the
following entry.)
2772. Orúkọtíasọọmọníḿm/oacutedotbelowmọlára.
It is the name a child is given that sticks to
the child. (People behave later in life the
way they were brought up. Compare the
foregoing proverb.)
2773. Òyìnbóńlọóṣusága.
The white man takes his leave; he shits on
the chair. (Said of persons who leave a mess
of problems behind when they depart a
place.)
Ọ
2774. Ọm/oacutedotbelowtánláraọmọtíńjẹeérú.
There is no longer anything worth calling
a child in a child that eats ashes. (A youth
whose habits are ﬁlthy and bestial is worth-
less.)
6. This is a Yoruba belief.
Ongoodname 271


--- PAGE 285 ---
P
2775. Pála-pàlaniléìgbín,igbórereniléahun.
The home of the snail is ever disorganized,
but the home of the tortoise is a tidy bush.
(One can always expect to ﬁnd certain
people in an orderly state.)
S
2776. Sán/ogravedotbelowbẹsùn,ﬁapórọrí;ìwàọmọní
ḿmúọmọjẹòkígb/eacutedotbelow.
Tie a knife on you before you sleep; use a
quiver as your pillow: your character forces
you to resort to charms for rendering cut-
lasses harmless against your ﬂesh. (People
whose characters are evil have good reason
to fear attack from others.)
T
2777. T/Egravedotbelowgbát/EgravedotbelowsàlómọLáfìlágẹmọ;gbogbo
ayélómọTẹl/egravedotbelowmúlólè.
Both the /Egravedotbelowgbá and the /Egravedotbelowsà people know
that Láfì is like the chameleon; the whole
world knows Tẹl/egravedotbelowmú as a thief. (Said of a
person whose bad character is common
knowledge.)
7
2778. Tìwàtìwàlàńràjò.
It is in the company of one’s character that
one goes on a journey. (No one leaves his
or her character at home when venturing
abroad.)
Y
2779. Yíyẹníńyẹẹyẹlé;díd/egravedotbelowníńdẹàdàbà
l/oacutedotbelowrùn.
The fate of the pigeon is always to enjoy
good report; the fate of the dove is always to
be at peace. (A way of wishing people peace
and good regard.)
7. /Egravedotbelowgbá and /Egravedotbelowsà people are from two locations in
Yorubaland; Láﬁ and Tẹl/egravedotbelowmú are persons from those
places whose poor reputations are widely known.
272 the fortunate person


--- PAGE 286 ---
On health
A
2780. Akíríbotokìílójúaw/eacutedotbelow;/egravedotbelowlàìl/egravedotbelowk/egravedotbelowkìílójú
àtokùnb/ogravedotbelow.
One-piece kola nut has no cleavage lines; a
split bead has no string hole. (A defective
thing or person is not as well oﬀ as a whole
thing or person.)
2781. Àlàáfíàbaba/egravedotbelowṣ/oacutedotbelow;ojúríríbabaaralíle.
Well-being, father of commanding pres-
ence; peace of mind, father of well-being.
(Without well-being there is no good im-
pression; without peace of mind there is no
well-being.)
2782. Àlàáfíàbaba/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelow.
Well-being, father of friendship. (Nothing
conduces to friendship like well-being.)
2783. Anìkànrìnejòlàńfàdápa.
It is a snake that travels alone that one kills
with a machete. (The lone traveler is vul-
nerable to opportunistic attacks. Compare
2802.)
2784. Aralíleloògùnọr/ogravedotbelow.
A healthy body is the medicine for wealth.
(Health is wealth.)
2785. AràrákìíyinỌl/oacutedotbelowrun,àﬁbóbárárọtí
ńrákò.
A dwarf does not show gratitude to God
until he sees a crawling cripple. (Until see-
ing people who are worse oﬀ, one does not
appreciate one’s own good fortune.)
2786. Aṣunúòm/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowláy/ogravedotbelow;ódìgbàtóbáríẹni
tíkòlèṣu.
The person who has diarrhea does not know
his or her good fortune until seeing some-
one who cannot relieve himself or herself.
(Until seeing others who are worse oﬀ, one
makes too much of one’s misfortune.)
B
2787. Bírílolongońyí;akìíbáòkùnrùnẹyẹ
lóríìt/eacutedotbelow.
The orange waxbill is always sprightly; one
never ﬁnds an invalid bird in a nest. (The
person addressed is ever healthy or will ever
be healthy.)
L
2788. Lékèé-lékèéẹyẹìmàle;bóbáṣílórí
/ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowt/oacutedotbelowabàsóríòro/mgravebó,amáaﬁgbogboara
kóewúeléwúkiri.
Cattle egret, Muslim of a bird; if it ﬂies
oﬀ the ﬁg tree, it alights on the orange
tree, carrying on its whole body gray hair
gathered from sundry sources. (Said of
irrepressible and sprightly older people.)
1
1. The egret is described here as a Muslim bird
because it is all white, just as Muslims favor all-white
garments. The whiteness also suggests graying hair.


--- PAGE 287 ---
O
2789. Ohunàńjẹk/oacutedotbelowlàńtà.
What one eats is not what one sells. (One
should satisfy one’s needs before thinking
about disposing of the excess.)
2790. Olókùnrùn/egravedotbelowṣ/oacutedotbelowkìíruẹkù;kíaláratún
aramú.
A sickly warrior does not carry rope snares;
everyone should prepare properly for the
task at hand. (People who have important
d u t i e st op e r f o r ms h o u l dg i r du pt h e i rl o i n s
accordingly.)
274 the fortunate person


--- PAGE 288 ---
On happiness and success
A
2791. Akìíl/eacutedotbelowniníMọsànkámuìgán.
One does not have people at Mọsàn and yet
eat deformed sour oranges. (There should
be some beneﬁt to having connections.)
1
2792. Akìínìkangbéagánk/eacutedotbelows/egravedotbelow-ẹr/egravedotbelowmá
w/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelow.
One does not carry a masquerader’s shroud
by oneself and succeed in keeping its train
oﬀ the ground. (One can succeed in certain
ventures only with the aid of others.)
2793. Akìínìkanjayé.
One does not enjoy life alone. (A person
without other people is nothing.)
2794. Ab/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowkìínùtòuntòwúnídìí.
A needle is never lost with a thread in its
eye. (As the thread will reveal where the
needle is, a person with relatives will always
have people interested in his or her fate.)
2795. Abímitánòdanǹkan;aralaﬁńré.
‘‘I am well born’’ guarantees nothing; all it
permits is ﬂaunting. (It is personal qualities,
not birth, that determine one’s fortune.)
2796. Abiyamọ,a-b/egravedotbelowhìn-jíjà.
Nursing mother with a ﬁghting back. (The
child she carries ﬁghts, and ﬁghts for her.
1. The place-name Mọsàn literally means ‘‘Eat
oranges’’ (muọsàn), an indication that the place is the
home of orange groves.
People who have family thereby have de-
fenders.)
2
2797. Àgbàòlówóaníkògb/oacutedotbelown;olówóńṣebí
ọbalóko.
An elderly man has no money, and we say
he lacks wisdom; the rich man is like a king
on his farm. (Money is everything.)
2798. Àgbàtíńf/ogravedotbelowníkáàláìlówól/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow,akọajá
níńgbó.
An elder sounding oﬀ in the back yard with-
out money in his possession is like a barking
male dog. (Money makes the person.)
2799. Àgbájọọw/oacutedotbelowlaﬁńsọàyá.
It is with bunched ﬁngers that one strikes
one’s chest. (One assembles all one’s re-
sources in preparation for a struggle.)
3
2800. Àgbàt/oacutedotbelowòjọobí;ọmọ-ọl/oacutedotbelowmọòjọtẹni.
A foster child is not like a child one gave
birth to; other people’s children are not the
same as one’s own. (There is no substitute
for one’s own possession. Compare 704.)
2. There is a double entendre in the proverb. Be-
cause mothers customarily carry their babies on their
backs, the saying could refer to the restlessness of a
child thus carried, which would trouble the mother. On
the other hand, because children presumably survive
their parents, the saying would indicate that a mother
has someone who will look out for her and survive her.
3. The proverb refers to the practice of striking
one’s chest with a ﬁst in making a vow.


--- PAGE 289 ---
2801. Agb/ogravedotbelowràndùnbíìyáòsí;ẹnitóníbaba
lótóara-áré.
There is no commiserator like one’s mother;
only those who have fathers dare to be im-
pudent. (With the backing of a powerful
patron, one can attempt anything.)
2802. Àìk/oacutedotbeloww/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowrìnejòl/oacutedotbelowm/oacutedotbelowaráyéﬁńfàdápa
w/oacutedotbelown.
The failure-to-travel-in-groups habit of
snakes makes it easy for humans to kill them
with machetes. (Those who hang together
will not hang separately. Compare 2783.)
2803. Àìl/eacutedotbelowbíyéyelàìníaáw/ogravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowrùn.
Not-having-numerous-relatives explains not
having quarrels to attend to. (Many relatives
make many quarrels.)
2804. Àìlówól/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowòsí;bíabálówól/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow,tajá
tẹranníḿbánitan.
Lack of money is lack of friends; if you have
money at your disposal, every dog and every
goat will claim to be related to you. (Money
makes the person, socially.)
2805. Àìlówól/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowkìíṣàìsàn;àìníṣ/eacutedotbelowl/ogravedotbelowràn.
Lack of money is no disease; it is lack of
w o r kt h a ti sad i s a s t e r .( A sl o n ga so n eh a sa
job, one has hope.)
2806. Àìmọèèyànlọjàòtà.
It is not-knowing-people that makes one
unable to sell one’s wares. (To know people
is to be a successful trader.)
2807. Àìsíẹnìkẹtaniẹniméjì-íﬁńjaàjàkú.
It is the absence of a third person that makes
it possible for two people to ﬁght to the
death. (Communal living minimizes the
eﬀects of personal conﬂicts.)
2808. Ajákìíkọ‘‘Wágbà;wágbà. ’’ A dog
does not turn a deaf ear to ‘‘Come take;
come take.’’ (One should never reject gener-
osity.)
2809. Ajától/eacutedotbelownil/eacutedotbelowhìnáp/ogravedotbelowbọ;èèyàntól/eacutedotbelowni
l/eacutedotbelowhìnájàreẹj/oacutedotbelow.
A dog that has people behind it will kill a
monkey; a person with people behind him
will win lawsuits. (With people behind one,
one can accomplish the impossible.)
2810. Ajániláyàbíàì-lówó-l/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow,àìlówóbaba
ìjayà,owóníńtúniṣe.
Frightful-thing-like-lack-of-ready-money,
lack-of-money [is] father of frights; it is
money that repairs a person’s fortunes.
(Lack of money is a frightful condition.)
2811. Ajénìyáògo.
Wealth is the mother of glory. (Money
makes all things possible.)
2812. Ajétúnọmọbí.
Wealth brings rebirth. (However one was
born, wealth makes one over.)
2813. Àjòjìòr/eacutedotbelownij/eacutedotbelowrìí-ir/egravedotbelow.
The stranger has no one to bear witness for
him or her. (A stranger cannot hope for
vindication against an indigene.)
2814. Àjọrìnníńyẹèrò.
Traveling in company best suits the wayfarer.
(There is glory in numbers.)
2815. Àk/oacutedotbelowbíẹniníńrọni.
It is one’s ﬁrstborn that is one’s support.
(One’s heir is also one’s security in old age.)
2816. A-kọrin-láì-lélégbè,bíẹníluagogo
lásán.
He-who-sings-and-lacks-a-supporting-
chorus [is] the same as one who merely
beats a gong. (A chorus enhances a solo
performance.)
2817. Alááyanníńjẹunogun.
It is the industrious person who enjoys the
booty of war. (To the valiant belong the
spoils.)
276 the fortunate person


--- PAGE 290 ---
2818. Alágẹmọòr/eacutedotbelowniwáwòranòun;ẹníbá
gb/oacutedotbelowṣ/eacutedotbelowṣ/eacutedotbelow,èèyànnínsáré.
The chameleon has no audience to watch it;
if one hears footsteps, it is people that are
running. (People should know the limits of
their capability and act accordingly.)
2819. Aráiléẹniòṣeun;èèyànẹniòsunw/ogravedotbelown;
aòlèﬁwéàlejòlásán.
The members of one’s household have not
done well by one; one’s relatives are not
good-natured; yet one cannot liken them
to mere strangers. (Whatever one may have
against one’s own people, they are still pref-
erable to strangers.)
2820. Àtà/mgravepàkònioníkìmíìka;babaọmọ-/oacutedotbelow
kúọmọ-/oacutedotbelowdẹyọ.
The thumb is the pillar among ﬁngers; a
father dies and the children are disunited.
( A st h u m bt oﬁ n g e r s ,s oi saf a t h e rt oh i s
children: remove the one and the others
are dispersed. This is a variant of the next
entry.)
2821. Àtà/mgravepàkòòsíìkád/egravedotbelowtú;babaọm/oacutedotbelowkú
ọm/oacutedotbelowdẹyọ.
The thumb is missing and the ﬁngers be-
come unbunched; the father dies and the
children become individuals. (Without the
thumb, the ﬁngers cannot be bunched; with-
out a father the children are dispersed. See
also the preceding entry.)
2822. Àtàríniòj/eacutedotbelowkóòrùnópaàgb/ogravedotbelownìsàl/egravedotbelow.
It is the skull that keeps the sun oﬀ the chin
below. (As the chin is beholden to the skull,
one is beholden to one’s benefactor.)
2823. Àt/eacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowlará;ìgb/ogravedotbelownw/oacutedotbelowniyèkan.
One’s palms are one’s relatives; one’s el-
bows are one’s siblings of the same mother.
(The most reliable things are one’s own
resources.)
B
2824. Bíabámúinákúròlóko,àﬁàgb/egravedotbelowtí
yój/ogravedotbelowg/egravedotbelowd/egravedotbelow;bíabámútiÌbíkúnléOlókèkúrò,
BalógunÒgbóríẹf/ogravedotbelown,àdiagíraṣe.
If one removed ﬁre from the farm, only
farmers satisﬁed with a diet of bananas
would be unconcerned; but for Ìbíkúnlé
Olókè, General Ògbórí Ẹf/ogravedotbelown, we could
achieve nothing. (Deprived of their founts of
power, people are ineﬀective.)
4
2825. Bíabáníogúnẹrú,tíaníìw/ogravedotbelowfàọgb/ogravedotbelown;
ọmọlèrèẹni.
If one owns twenty slaves and thirty pawns,
children are still one’s proﬁt. (Children are
p r e f e r a b l et os l a v e so rp a w n s . )
5
2826. Bíakòbáníohunàgbà,bíèwelàńrí.
If one does not have the accouterments of
elders, one seems a mere youth. (An elder is
not an elder without the means to be one.)
2827. Bíakòbár/eacutedotbelownif/egravedotbelowhìntìbí/ogravedotbelowlẹlàńrí;bía
kòbár/eacutedotbelownigbójúlé,àtẹram/oacutedotbelowṣ/eacutedotbelowẹni.
With no one to lean on, one seems a lazy
p e r s o n ;w i t hn oo n et or e l yo n ,o n ef a c e s
one’s duties with devotion. (The person with
powerful support seems better than his or
her peers; lacking such support, one should
redouble one’s eﬀorts.)
2828. Bíakòlówó,àléèyàn;bíakòléèyànà
lóhùnrerel/eacutedotbelownu.
If one lacks money, one should have people;
if one lacks people, one should be pleasant
in one’s speech. (If you lack a social as-
set, make up for it in other ways. Compare
2961.)
4. The person named was a famous and illustrious
Ibadan war chieftain of the nineteenth century.
5. The construction reﬂects the conception of the
world as a market from which people eventually return
to the home whence they came.
Onhappiness 277


--- PAGE 291 ---
2829. Bíebíbákúrònínúìṣ/eacutedotbelow,ìṣ/eacutedotbelowbùṣe.
If hunger is removed from poverty, poverty
comes to an end. (Whoever has food to eat
is not poor.)
2830. BíeégúnòbámọÒdèré,tíkòm/oacutedotbelow
Àṣàk/eacutedotbelow,at/oacutedotbelowkùn-únr/egravedotbelowníńwi.
If a masquerader cannot recognize Òdèré
and cannot recognize Àṣàk/eacutedotbelow, his attendant
h a st ot e l lh i m .( O n e ’ sa i d e sa r et h e r et o
make up for one’s deﬁciencies.)
2831. Bíeégúnyólọ,adiìròjúfúnat/oacutedotbelowkùn.
When the time comes for the masquerader
to depart, the attendant begins to grieve.
(One is saddened at losing one’s benefactor
and patron.)
2832. Bíẹnińláòbátán,/ogravedotbelowrànńláòlèpani.
If there is no scarcity of great people, a great
problem cannot kill one. (As long as one has
powerful patrons, diﬃcult problems will not
defeat one.)
2833. Bíìbíòt/egravedotbelow,bíìbíòw/oacutedotbelow,ẹnitíabáníwájú
tóbaba-áṣefúnni.
If the pedigree is not bent, if the pedigree
is not crooked, the person ahead of one is
enough to play the role of father. (Unless
there is dissension in the family, the elders
in it exercise responsibility over the youth.)
2834. Bíìtìòwó,ọw/oacutedotbelowkìíbaìṣ/eacutedotbelowp/eacutedotbelow.
If the trunk does not fall, the twigs are not
endangered. (One is safe as long as one’s
protector is around.)
2835. Bíìyáòsí,taníj/eacutedotbelowṣeọmọọl/oacutedotbelowmọlóore?
If there is no mother, who would show kind-
ness to another person’s child? (A child can
look only to its mother for protection.)
2836. Bíìyàwó/ogravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowbádàgbà,olówóniyó
gbée.
When the woman betrothed to a lazy person
matures, the rich man marries her. (The idle
will be left empty-handed.)
2837. Bíkòbásíowó,babaẹnìkanòjubaba
ẹnìkanlọ.
In the absence of money, one person’s father
is no greater than another person’s father.
(Money determines status.)
2838. Bíkòsíigil/eacutedotbelowhìnọgbàọgbàáwó;bíkò
síakọnínú-ubàtábàtáònííle.
Without a post behind the fence, the fence
will collapse; without masculine forces in
bàtádrumming, the music is not gripping.
(Without his or her main support, a person
is nothing.)
2839. Bíkòsítọmútíḿbẹláyàobìnrin,tíkò
síìl/egravedotbelowk/egravedotbelowtíḿbẹnídìíàgbèrè,/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelow-/egravedotbelowmídáradí/egravedotbelow
juobìnrinlọ.
Except for the breasts on the chest of a
woman, and the beads around the waist of
the woman who sleeps around, my friend
is somewhat more attractive than a woman.
(But for feminine sexual organs, a male
friend is preferable to a female.)
6
2840. Bíkòsítowó,kílaófòwòṣe?
Were it not for the matter of money, what
would one want with trading? (The need for
money gets one into a trade.)
2841. BíkòsítỌya,ogunatikóIrá,bíkòsí
tOlúf/oacutedotbelown,ogunatikóIf/oacutedotbelownlọ.
But for the goddess Ọya, Irá would have
been sacked in a war; but for the god
Olúf/oacutedotbelown, If/oacutedotbelown would have been destroyed.
(Thanks to one’s protector, one survives.)
2842. Bíókuòníku/ogravedotbelowlakíòùngbẹpaaw/oacutedotbelown-
rínw/oacutedotbelown,òjòyór/ogravedotbelow.
If it is only a matter of days before the
iguana dies of thirst, rain will fall. (For
6. This is one proverb that only men would use.
278 the fortunate person


--- PAGE 292 ---
those the gods favor, rescue will come before
disaster. See the next entry also.)
2843. Bíókuòníku/ogravedotbelowlákíọmọolódò-ókú
fúnòùngbẹ,/ogravedotbelowṣ/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowòjòár/ogravedotbelow.
If it is only a matter of days before the child
of the river goddess dies of thirst, a torren-
tial rain will fall. (The favored of the gods
will always be rescued before disaster falls.
See the previous entry.)
2844. Bíojúkòbáti/EgravedotbelowhìnÌgb/egravedotbelowtì,ojúònííti
Èkó.
If /Egravedotbelowhìn Ìgb/egravedotbelowtì is not disgraced, Lagos will
not be disgraced. (As long as one’s defenses
hold, one will be secure.)
7
2845. Bíòkétébádàgbà,ọmúọmọ-ọr/egravedotbelowní
ḿmu.
When the giant rat becomes old, it sucks
from its child’s breast. (In one’s old age, one
depends on one’s children.)
2846. Bíolówós/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow,tóṣèké,ajéaníkòpur/oacutedotbelow.
If a rich person speaks and lies, money will
say he or she has not lied. (A rich person
can get away with any lie.)
2847. Bíòtútùńpaìw/ogravedotbelowfàwọnaníókóìṣe-e
r/egravedotbelowdé;bíóńpaolówówọnaníkór/oacutedotbelowjúkóata
s/eacutedotbelownu.
W h e nt h ep a w nh a saf e v e r ,p e o p l es a yh e
is up to his usual tricks; when the owner
is thus aﬄicted, they urge him to make an
eﬀort to eat. (The poor cannot expect the
consideration the rich enjoy.)
2848. Bíowóbásìnínú/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow,asúnipa.
If money is removed from a matter, it bores
o n et od e a t h .( M o n e yg i v e sw e i g h tt om a t -
ters.)
7. /Egravedotbelowhìn Ìgb/egravedotbelowtì was important as a defensive buﬀer
for Lagos.
2849. Bí/oacutedotbelow-bí/oacutedotbelowtíapóńdá,ọránlógbójúlé.
The quiver’s boasting is due to its conﬁdence
in the backing of the bow. (A person who is
sure of his backers can boast as much as he
likes.)
2850. B/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowkìnníjuọl/oacutedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowlọ.
The popular rich man is superior to the
merely wealthy. (To be well regarded is
better than to be rich.)
I
2851. Ìbí-ìrẹ-/eacutedotbelows/egravedotbelownùòńy/ogravedotbelow;oòm/ogravedotbelowpéirúẹló
ńrá.
Your pregnancy aborts and you rejoice;
you are not aware that it is your kind that
is perishing. (What in the short run is a
boon might turn out in the long run to be a
disaster.)
2852. Irekìídékámágb/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowohùn-ungudu-
gudu.
Good fortune does not arrive without being
trailed by the sound of thegudugududrum.
(Good fortune must be greeted with re-
joicing.)
O
2853. Òwúsúwusù-úmúojú/ogravedotbelowrunbàj/eacutedotbelow;gùd/egravedotbelow-
gùd/egravedotbelowòj/eacutedotbelowkóòrùnóràn.
The fog besmirches the face of the sky;
the clouds keep the sun from shining. (An
unfortunate matter keeps happiness or
cheerfulness at bay.)
T
2854. TítùlàḿbáOlúwẹri.
Ever cool is how one ﬁnds Olúwẹri. (May
Onhappiness 279


--- PAGE 293 ---
calmness and peace ever attend a certain
person’s aﬀairs.)8
W
2855. W/egravedotbelowníw/ogravedotbelown;ajéníńwẹni.
Limit how often you take a bath; it is wealth
that grooms a person. (Wealth beautiﬁes
more eﬃciently than a lot of grooming.)
8. This is a prayer, an incantation. Olúwẹri is
presumably a river or spring that is always cool.
280 the fortunate person


--- PAGE 294 ---
On children and elders
A
2856. Akìídéléayòkámábàáọmọ.
One never arrives at the home of theayò
game without ﬁnding children. (A prayer for
a blessing of children in abundance.)
2857. ÀgbàlótóOrò-ól/ogravedotbelow;ọbalótóehín
erin-ínfun.
Only a [male] elder is qualiﬁed to invoke
Orò; only a king is qualiﬁed to blow a horn
carved out of elephant tusk. (Certain tasks
are for august people only.)
2858. Àgbàm/eacutedotbelowtakìíṣièkùlùpè;bíọkánbáni
‘‘ekulu,’’èkejìaní‘‘ekùlù,’’/egravedotbelowkẹtaaní‘‘èkùlù.’’
Three elders will not mispronounceèkùlù;
if the ﬁrst says, ‘‘ekulu,’’the second will
say, ‘‘ekùlù,’’but the third will say,‘‘èkùlù.’’
1
(Three heads are better than one.)
2859. Àgbàm/eacutedotbelowtaníḿmọìdíẹ/eacutedotbelowta.
It takes three elders to know the mystery
behind three. (It takes the pooled wisdom of
many elders to resolve deep matters.)
2860. Àgbàníńgbà.
It is an elder that accepts. (Certain privi-
leges, and obligations, attach to age.)
2
1. E˜kùlùis another name forẹtu,a kind of duiker.
2. The proverb is based on a play on the syllable
gbà.By itself it means ‘‘accept’’ (a proposition) or
‘‘take’’ (‘‘receive’’). Since Yoruba forms nouns from
verbs by attaching certain initial vowels to them, in this
case the vowelà,the word àgbà(à-gbà), which means
‘‘elder,’’ is construed to mean ‘‘someone who takes or
accepts’’ (a-gbà).
2861. Àgbàníńjẹoríàdán;ọmọdéníńjẹorí
ẹyẹk/eacutedotbelowyẹ.
It is an elder who eats bats’ heads; youths eat
the heads of ordinary birds. (Only elders can
confront extraordinary eventualities.)
3
2862. Àgbàníńjẹọkàn;ọmọdéníńjẹara
ẹran.
Only elders eat the heart; the youth eat
the ﬂesh. (Each station has its particular
obligations.)
4
2863. Àgbàníńk/oacutedotbelowàpòàgbà.
Only an elder may hang the satchel of an
elder [on his shoulder]. (Certain privileges
are restricted to elders.)
2864. Àgbàòsíìlúbàj/eacutedotbelow;baáléilékúilé
dahoro.
Without elders a town is ruined; the patri-
arch of the compound dies, and the house-
hold becomes an empty shell. (Elders hold a
community together.)
B
2865. Bíakòkú,aójẹẹrantótóerin.
If one does not die, one will eat as much as
3. Birds’ heads are not usually eaten. Bats are never
used as food, let alone their heads. Bats’ heads would be
eaten only as part of a mystery or cult.
4. The heart of an animal is supposed to be more
desirable food than the ﬂesh.


--- PAGE 295 ---
an elephant’s meat. (Whoever has life has
things to accomplish.)
2866. Bíakòkú,ìṣeòtán.
If one does not die, one’s accomplishments
are not over. (As long as one has life, one has
f e a t st oa c c o m p l i s h . )
2867. Bíoríp/eacutedotbelowníl/egravedotbelow,ádiire.
If a head remains long on earth, it becomes
fortunate. (If one lives long enough, one will
prosper.)
2868. Bíọmọdéòkú,àgbàníńdà.
If a youth does not die, he becomes an elder.
(In time even a youth assumes the mantle of
an elder.)
I
2869. Inákúfeérúbojú;/ogravedotbelowg/egravedotbelowd/egravedotbelowkúfọmọ/egravedotbelow
r/oacutedotbelowpò;olóyè-ékúfoyèsíl/egravedotbelowlọ.
T h eﬁ r ed i e sa n dc o v e r si t sf a c ew i t ha s h e s ;
the banana tree dies and replaces itself with
an oﬀshoot; a chief dies and leaves his title
behind. (When a person dies, survivors
inherit his or her place and property.)
2870. Ìyàwódùn-úngbé;ọm/oacutedotbelowdùn-únkó
jáde.
Marriage is a pleasurable activity, and so is
christening a child. (Marrying and christen-
ing are pleasures.)
K
2871. Kíniàbáfowóràtólèkọjáọmọ?
What can one use one’s money to buy that
would be more precious than children?
(Nothing is more precious than children.)
L
2872. Lílélọmọayòńlé.
I n c r e a s i n gi st h ew a yo ft h eayògame’s coun-
ters. (An incantatory prayer that a person’s
f o r t u n e sw i l la l w a y si n c r e a s e . )
5
O
2873. ObìnrintójíníkùtùkùtùtóníỌl/oacutedotbelowrun
niyómọoyeọmọòun,ógbégbáìrégbè.
A woman who at the dawn of her life vows
that only God will know how many children
s h ew i l lb e a rh a sp l a c e dal o a do ft r o u b l eo n
her own head. (Children are not an unmixed
blessing for women.)
Ọ
2874. Ọj/oacutedotbelowtíabákú,ọw/oacutedotbelowògbaokòó;ọmọẹni
níńjogúnẹni.
The day one dies one’s hand cannot hold
a coin; one’s children inherit one’s prop-
erty. (One cannot take earthly possessions
into the grave but must leave them to one’s
survivors.)
2875. Ọl/oacutedotbelowm/oacutedotbelowkúròní‘‘Kílobí?’’
Ap e r s o nw h oh a sac h i l di sn o tap e r s o n
who can be asked, ‘‘What did you sire?’’ (A
child is a child; whoever has one cannot be
taunted with childlessness.)
2876. Ọl/oacutedotbelowm/oacutedotbelowlà.
The person who has children has pros-
pered. (Having children is the best kind of
prosperity.)
2877. Ọmọbẹẹrẹ,òṣìbẹẹrẹ.
A multitude of children, a multitude of
5. The proverb refers to the fact that when anayò
player takes his turn, he adds counters to the ones
already in each of several holes.
282 the fortunate person


--- PAGE 296 ---
misery. (Children are desirable, but not in
excess.)
2878. Ọmọẹnikìídiméjìkínukanni.
One’s mind does not become sour because
one has had a second child. (People always
rejoice at having children.)
2879. Ọmọẹnilàḿbí;ẹrúẹnilàńràl/oacutedotbelowjà.
One gives birth to one’s children; one buys
one’s slave in the market. (No one can buy
children in the market.)
2880. Ọmọkìínùbíẹranko.
A child does not become lost like an ani-
mal. (One must place great value on one’s
children. Compare 2884.)
2881. Ọm/oacutedotbelowmọìyá/egravedotbelow;talágbàt/oacutedotbelownìyà.
A child knows its mother; the foster moth-
e r ’ sl o ti sm i s e r y .( Ac h i l dw i l ln e v e rt r e a -
sure a foster mother as much as a natural
mother.)
2882. Ọmọòláy/ogravedotbelowlé;ẹniọm/oacutedotbelowsinlóbímọ.
Children are not to be rejoiced over; only
those whose children bury them really have
children. (The most valuable service one
may expect from one’s children is that they
attend to one’s funeral.)
2883. Ọmọọl/oacutedotbelowmọ-/oacutedotbelowṣòro-ópèránníṣ/eacutedotbelow.
Another person’s child is not easy to send
on an errand. (There is nothing like having
one’s own children.)
2884. ‘‘Ọmọ-/ogravedotbelowmíkú’’yáju‘‘Ọmọ/ogravedotbelowmínù’’lọ.
‘‘My child is dead’’ is far better than ‘‘My
child is lost.’’ (One may lose a child to death,
but it is unspeakable parental irresponsi-
bility simply to lose a child. Compare 2880.)
2885. /Ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowtíaboyúnbásọ,ẹniméjìlósọ/oacutedotbelow.
Whatever a pregnant woman says is said
by two people. (A pregnant woman’s words
should not be taken lightly.)
T
2886. Tọmọtómáakú,tọmọtómáayè,káy/ogravedotbelow
f/oacutedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowmọ.
Whether the child will survive or not, let
us rejoice with a person who has a baby.
(Childbirth is always an occasion for joy.)
Onchildren 283


--- PAGE 297 ---
On material wealth
A
2887. Akìíﬁekukanrẹọmọméji.
One does not placate two children with one
rat. (An otherwise suﬃcient commodity
divided too many ways satisﬁes no one.)
2888. Akìíﬁ/egravedotbelowj/egravedotbelowdúdúsínútut/oacutedotbelowfunfunjáde.
One does not leave red blood inside and spit
out white saliva. (Never let people think you
love them when in fact you wish them ill.)
2889. Akìíláhunníyì.
One cannot be both stingy and respected.
(Only generosity earns respect.)
2890. Àìsíowólàńpa/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowdúnrúnm/oacutedotbelow;kíni
irínwóbabaìgbiwótó-óṣe?
It is lack of money that makes one hoard 300
cowries; what can 400 cowries, the father of
200 cowries, accomplish? (Those who have
little make too much of little things. See also
the following entry.)
2891. Àìsíowólàńtìl/egravedotbelowkùnm/oacutedotbelow/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowdúnrún;kíni
irínwóbabaìgbiwótó-óṣe?
It is lack of money that makes one keep 300
cowries under lock; what can 400 cowries,
father of 200 cowries, accomplish? (The im-
port is the same as that of the preceding
entry. See also 119.)
2892. Àìsíowóni,‘‘J/eacutedotbelowkíl/egravedotbelowóm/oacutedotbelow’’;ajékìí
gbowókáníód/ogravedotbelowla.
It is lack of money that makes one say, ‘‘Wait
until morning’’; if the terms are agreeable,
one does not wait until morning. (Lack of
money makes one temporize even when the
market is in one’s favor.)
2893. Àj/eacutedotbelowkùlàńmayo.
Leaving remnants is the indicator of satia-
tion. (How one lives will show how well oﬀ
one is.)
2894. Ajé-ṣàlúgà!Óﬁẹniiwájúsíl/egravedotbelowṣeẹni
/egravedotbelowhìnníp/egravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelow.
Almighty wealth! It skips over the person
in front to oﬀer salutations to the person
behind. (Wealth is no respecter of age.)
2895. Ajíjìfàníńnítìtììpàk/oacutedotbelow.
It is a person who wakes to free booty that
develops an overhanging nape. (Those who
labor for their food are not plagued with
obesity.)
2896. Àk/egravedotbelowhìnsíọláòsunw/ogravedotbelown.
The reverse side of greatness is unattractive.
(A fall from greatness, or turning one’s back
on greatness, is unfortunate.)
2897. Àkísà-ábaẹnirerej/eacutedotbelow.
Rags demean illustrious people. (A ragged
attire overrides innate qualities.)
2898. Akọebitíńdiòjòjò.
Masculine hunger, one that becomes an ill-
ness.
1 (When hunger is extreme, it becomes
an illness.)
2899. A-kó-èésú-má-dàá,ẹrùngbàolè.
He-who-collects-the-pool-in-turn-but-
1. In Yoruba usage, describing something as mas-
culine is stating that it is the most formidable of its
kind.


--- PAGE 298 ---
does-not-make-a-contribution: same as a
thief. (Reaping without sowing is akin to
stealing.)2
2900. A-pèèpò-l/eacutedotbelowhìn-àgbà,àgbàḿb/ogravedotbelowwá.
You-who-clear-the-weeds-behind-an-elder,
your old age approaches. (Those who do fa-
vors for old people should be reminded that
they too will some day grow old.)
2901. Àrùntíńj/eacutedotbelownárunòsí;ebiníńmú
ara-áyi.
There is no sickness called nettle rash; it
is hunger that makes one develop welts.
(Hunger is a disease not to be belittled.)
2902. Àṣírí/egravedotbelowkọkìítúlójúewé.
The secrets of corn meal’s being will not
be exposed in the presence of leaves. (As
long as one has champions, one will not be
disgraced.)
2903. Àtètèdáyéòkantàgbà;oríẹniní
ńgbéniga.
Primogeniture has nothing to do with elder-
liness; it is the head that elevates one. (Age is
no guarantee of status. Compare the follow-
ing entry.)
2904. Àtètèdáyéòkantọr/ogravedotbelow;Ọl/oacutedotbelowrunníńṣeorí
owó.
Primogeniture has nothing to do with
wealth; God assigns wealth to heads.
3 (Age is
no guarantee of wealth.)
B
2905. Bíabálówól/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowtótótiṣ/egravedotbelowk/egravedotbelowr/egravedotbelow,ìwà
rereninǹkan.
Even if one has as much money as the
2. Èésú(èsúsú) is a mutual organization whose
members regularly contribute money to a pool from
which each member in turn withdraws the total sum.
3. Again, orí(head) here refers to destiny.
beaded gourd, it is good character that mat-
ters.4 (Character is more important than
wealth.)
2906. Bímolọl/eacutedotbelowhìnkùléOlúgb/oacutedotbelown,Olúgb/oacutedotbelowná
m/ogravedotbelowpémolọl/eacutedotbelowhìnkùléòun;bímolọl/eacutedotbelowhìnkùlé
Arẹsà,Arẹsàám/ogravedotbelowpémolọl/eacutedotbelowhìnkùléòun;bí
mol/oacutedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowhìnkùléOníkòyíMàgbó,yóm/ogravedotbelowpémo
lọl/eacutedotbelowhìnkùléòun.
If I pass behind the house of theOlúgb/oacutedotbelown,
the Olúgb/oacutedotbelownw i l lk n o wt h a tIh a v ep a s s e d
behind his house; if I pass behind the house
of the Arẹsà,the Arẹsàwill know that I have
passed behind his house; if I pass behind
the house of the OníkòyíMàgbó, he will
know that I have passed behind his house.
5
(My fame is such that my presence is loudly
proclaimed.)
2907. Bíòtútùńpa/ogravedotbelowlẹàj/eacutedotbelowkókú;kíkútàìkú
/ogravedotbelowlẹòṣenǹkanfúnni.
If a lazy person has a fever, one lets him
die; neither a live nor a dead lazy person
does anything for one. (A lazy person is not
worth troubling over.)
2908. Bóom/oacutedotbelowyọláàrinbàbà.
Red corn shows amid guinea corn. (A good
person sticks out among bad people.)
E
2909. Èkóòdùnlójúẹnitíòlówól/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow.
The city of Lagos oﬀers no pleasures in the
view of a penniless person. (Without money,
one is shut out of many pleasures.)
4. Ṣ/egravedotbelowk/egravedotbelowr/egravedotbelowis a gourd that has beads or cowrie shells,
the currency before colonization, strung around it and
that is used as a musical instrument.
5. The three titles are those of renowned Yoruba
chiefs.
Onmaterialwealth 285


--- PAGE 299 ---
Ẹ
2910. Ẹniajéyailé-er/egravedotbelowlógb/oacutedotbelown.
It is the person whose home riches have
found that is wise. (Whoever has prospered
may boast that he or she is wise.)
2911. ẸniỌlórun-úndáòṣé-éfarawé.
T h ep e r s o nf a s h i o n e db yG o di sn o to n et o
emulate. (It is unwise to emulate people who
have means that do you not have.)
6
I
2912. Ìṣ/eacutedotbelowaagokìíṣ/eacutedotbelowòyìnbó.
The dearth of watches does not aﬄict the
white man. (One never lacks a thing for
which one is the source.
7 See also the follow-
ing three entries.)
2913. Ìṣ/eacutedotbelowagbádákìíṣ/eacutedotbelowìmàle.
The dearth of agbadá[the traditional Yor-
uba garment] never aﬄicts the Muslim.8
(A person is never short of something that
characterizes him. Compare the preceding
entry and the following two.)
2914. Ìṣ/eacutedotbelow-ẹbàtàkìíṣ/eacutedotbelowòyìnbó.
The dearth of shoes never aﬄicts the white
man. (This is a variant of 2912. Compare
also the preceding and following entries.)
2915. Ìṣ/eacutedotbelowowókìíṣ/eacutedotbelowDàda,Dàdaolówóẹyọ.
The dearth of money never aﬄicts Dàda,
Dàda who is blessed with coins.
9 (One will
6. ẸniỌl/oacutedotbelowrun-úndá,translated literally as ‘‘a person
fashioned by God,’’ actually means a person who is
under God’s constant protection.
7. This proverb and its variant are based on the fact
that the white man introduced the watch to Yorubaland
and is never seen without shoes.
8. The agbádáis the characteristic attire of the
Muslim.
9. Dàda is the name automatically given to a child
never lack whatever is part of one’s essence.
Compare the preceding three entries.)
2916. Ìṣ/eacutedotbelowòmúọkọláyàkómáranọmọ;
akúṣ/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowkìíníará.
Destitution does not aﬄict the husband
and spare his children; the poverty-ridden
person does not have relatives. (The desti-
tution of the head of the household aﬀects
all members of the household; on the other
hand, the poor person does not have many
friends.)
N
2917. Náwó-náwóònás/egravedotbelowgi;òtòṣìònáerèé
dàgbà;Ìràtàtíńṣ/eacutedotbelowgitànínúìgb/eacutedotbelow:owóni
gbogbow/oacutedotbelownjọńná.
The big spender does not use beads for
money; the poor person did not grow up
spending peas; the person who gathers ﬁre-
wood from the forest for sale: all of them
spend money. (Rich or poor, no one can do
without money.)
O
2918. Òdeòsúaláṣọ-/oacutedotbelowlọ.
Public functions do not faze a person with
many clothes. (No eventuality can over-
whelm a person with abundant resources.)
2919. Òkútóbáláṣọ,If/egravedotbelowníńsinín.
A dead person who owns a wealth of clothes
is buried by If/egravedotbelow itself. (The community itself
sees to the funeral of an illustrious person;
the problems of a popular person arouse the
concern of everyone.)
born with an abundance of curly hair; the curls, being
likened to the traditional currency of cowrie shells,
are sometimes referred to asowó(money), and people
customarily oﬀer coins to such children.
286 the fortunate person


--- PAGE 300 ---
2920. Olówólarám/ogravedotbelow;aráòmọìṣ/eacutedotbelow;èròtíò
lówó,aráfaìwé/egravedotbelowya.
Kin acknowledges only the rich; no kin
claims a poverty-ridden person; the way-
f a r e rw h oh a sn om o n e yf o rk i nr i p su ph i s
papers.
10 (Everybody associates with a rich
person, but nobody knows a poor person.)
2921. Olówólayém/ogravedotbelow.
Humankind knows only the rich. (The poor
do not count in this world.)
2922. OlówólọbalÉkòó.
The rich man is king in Lagos. (Lagos is an
ideal playground for the rich.)
2923. Olówósòkèdil/egravedotbelow.
T h er i c hp e r s o nt u r n sah i l li n t oap l a i n .
(Nothing is beyond a rich person, not even
drastically altering the face of Nature.)
2924. Òrìṣàbíajéòsí;ajéníńgbéniga.
There is no god like money; it is money that
makes people great. (Money can accomplish
anything.)
2925. Òṣìníńj/eacutedotbelow‘‘Taním/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowrí?’’Owóníńj/eacutedotbelow
‘‘Mobáọtan. ’’
P o v e r t yi sw h a te x p l a i n s‘ ‘ W h ok n o w sy o u ? ’ ’
Wealth explains, ‘‘I am related to you.’’ (No
one knows a poor person, but everybody
c l a i m sk i n s h i pt oar i c hp e r s o n . )
2926. Owóiléyọ,gbèsèḿbínú.
The household money makes its appearance,
and debt becomes angry. (One’s enemies are
never happy to see one escape misfortune.)
2927. Owó-là-ńró:tòbíÀlàbá.
Money-is-what-we-are wearing: Àlàbá’s
knickers. (Said of a person who is so wealthy
10. The expression ‘‘to rip up one’s papers’’ means
to ruin one’s fortunes.
that even his clothing is virtually all
money.)
11
2928. Owól/egravedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelown;ọmọlàbúrò.
Money is the elder sibling; a child is the
younger sibling. (Having wealth makes
having children easier.)
2929. Owólów/oacutedotbelown,ìyàwóòw/oacutedotbelown.
O n l ym o n e yi sh a r dt oc o m eb y ;aw i f ei sn o t
hard to come by. (If one has money, ﬁnding
aw i f ei sas i m p l em a t t e r . )
2930. Owólorí/ogravedotbelowràn;bówóbádénú/ogravedotbelowràn,yíyọ
níńyọ.
Money is the head of any problem; when
money is introduced into a problem, its
solution results. (Money solves all prob-
lems.)
12
2931. Owólọjà.
Money is trade. (There is no trading in the
absence of money:)
2932. Owónínígbàtíòunòsínílé,taní
ńdám/ogravedotbelowrànl/eacutedotbelowhìnòun?
Money asked, when it was not at home,
who dared to make plans in its absence?
(Without money, all plans are useless.)
2933. Owóòsí,èèyànòsunw/ogravedotbelown.
[If] money is lacking, a person is unattrac-
tive. (Wealth is beauty.)
2934. Owóòtòṣìníńgbéòkèẹrù;tolówóa
máagbéìsàl/egravedotbelowigbá.
It is a poor man’s money that stays at the top
11. The concept is that the knickers (or male skirt)
of the obviously real person named in the proverb,
Àlàbá, is made of money or material as valuable as
money.
12. The proverb is based on the Yoruba phraseyọ
orí,literally meaning ‘‘pull the head out,’’ an idiom for
‘‘solve.’’
Onmaterialwealth 287


--- PAGE 301 ---
of the load; the rich person’s money rests
at the bottom of the calabash. (A poor man
wants to be able easily to see and reach his
money, but the rich person can aﬀord to be
more carefree.)
2935. Owóyẹilé,Ògúnyẹodò.
Money ﬁts a home quite well; Ògún is at
home by the river. (Money is a desirable
thing in a home.)
Ọ
2936. Ọb/egravedotbelowlàw/ogravedotbelow.
Stew is complexion. (What one eats deter-
mines one’s well-being.)
2937. Ọb/egravedotbelowlọmúàgbà.
Stew is the breast milk of adults. (Adults
have their own nourishment, even if it dif-
fers from children’s.)
2938. Ọjàtíòtà,owólóńwá.
Goods that will not sell are only in need of
money. (All things are possible if there is
money.)
2939. Ọmọẹwàkanòsí;ọmọaṣọníḿbẹ.
T h e r ei sn os u c ht h i n ga sac h i l dt h a ti sa
creation of beauty, but there is something
like a child that is a creation of clothing.
(Clothing, rather than facial beauty, deter-
mines the impression one makes on others.)
2940. /Ogravedotbelownàọláp/ogravedotbelow.
The approaches to wealth are plentiful; also,
the responsibilities of aﬄuence are plenti-
ful. (There are many diﬀerent approaches
to wealth. And the more one has, the more
responsibilities one must shoulder.)
13
13. Most often used as a comment on people who
have too much on their minds to pay attention to
routine expectations.
2941. /Ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowirúkìíbaọb/egravedotbelowj/eacutedotbelow.
A surfeit of locust-bean seasoning does not
ruin a stew. (One cannot have too much of a
good thing.)
2942. /Ogravedotbelowràngbogbo,lórí-iṣílèníńdásí.
All matters resolve themselves around a
shilling.
14 (Money solves all problems.)
2943. /Ogravedotbelowràntíẹgbà-áw/ogravedotbelow,ókúròláwàdà.
A problem complicated by as much money
as 2,000 cowries is no longer a joking
matter. (Matters that involve signiﬁcant
amounts of money are not to be triﬂed
with.)
T
2944. Talagbégẹṣintíkòṣèpàk/oacutedotbelowlùkẹ?
Who would be placed on the horse and
not cock his head haughtily? (One should
forgive the arrogance of fortunate people.)
2945. Tíalágbádáóﬁkú,yíyanniyómáa
yan.
Until the time the owner of elaborate gar-
ments dies, he will keep strutting. (One
should not be bashful about displaying one’s
wealth.)
W
2946. W/oacutedotbelownṣebíòtòṣìògb/oacutedotbelownbíọl/oacutedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow;w/oacutedotbelownní
ìbágb/oacutedotbelownìbálówól/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow.
People think the poor person lacks the wis-
dom the wealthy person has; they say if one
had wisdom, one would be rich. (It is folly
to equate wealth with wisdom.)
14. This proverb came into being when Nigeria still
used British currency.
288 the fortunate person


--- PAGE 302 ---
On longevity
A
2947. Agẹmọkìíkúníkékeré.
The chameleon does not die young.
(A prayer for longevity.)1
Ẹ
2948. /Egravedotbelowmígígùnlèrèayé.
Longevity is the reward of living. (Longevity
is most to be desired by all. This is a variant
of 2953.)
2949. /Egravedotbelowmígígùnníńsànyà.
It is longevity that makes up for suﬀering.
(Longevity makes all suﬀering worthwhile.)
K
2950. Kíèèm/ogravedotbelowómọníÌbèṣè,kómáṣedé
Ìjánà.
May the disaster stop at Ìbèṣè and not get
1. The chameleon’s slow, deliberate gait suggests
advanced age.
to Ìjánà. (May trouble stop before it reaches
our frontier.)
2
Ọ
2951. /Ogravedotbelowd/oacutedotbelowmọdékìímọoríkììp/ogravedotbelownrí/egravedotbelow.
A child never knows the praise name of
his guardian spirit.
3 (Only age brings deep
knowledge of how the world goes.)
2952. Ọj/oacutedotbelowal/eacutedotbelowlàńtọrọ.
It is nighttime [i.e., old age] that one should
pray for. (Old age is everybody’s desire.)
P
2953. Píp/eacutedotbelowláyélèrèayé.
Longevity is the proﬁt of living. (Longevity
is the reward for having lived a good life.
This is a variant of 2948.)
2. Ìbèṣè and Ìjánnà, neighboring Yoruba towns,
were destroyed during the Yoruba wars of the nine-
teenth century.
3. Oríkìis a panegyric, either a short ‘‘praise name’’
for an individual or a long ‘‘praise poem,’’ often recited
(performed) in honor of important persons or, on state
occasions, of kings.


--- PAGE 303 ---
On wealth in people (popularity)
A
2954. Àfòm/oacutedotbelowòlégbò;igigbogboníḿbátan.
The climbing plant has no roots; it claims
relationship with every tree. (A feckless
person is ever in search of benefactors.)
B
2955. Bíilékanilé,tí/ogravedotbelowd/egravedotbelowd/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowkan/ogravedotbelowd/egravedotbelowd/egravedotbelow,bía
kòf/eacutedotbelowniníb/egravedotbelow,aòtóab/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelow.
If houses adjoin and living rooms abut, if
one is not wanted there, one is not worth so
much as a needle. (Being neighbors amounts
to nothing if there is no mutual regard.)
E
2956. Elègbè[or elégbè]níḿmúorindùn.
It takes a chorus to make a song melodious.
(It is good to have backers.)
2957. Eṣinṣintíḿbáọdẹrìnámu/egravedotbelowj/egravedotbelowyó.
Aﬂ yt h a tk e e p sah u n t e rc o m p a n yw i l ld r i n k
blood to its ﬁll. (The fortunes and misfor-
tunes of one’s associates will surely rub oﬀ
on one.)
2958. Etí-ibabanílé,etí-ibabalóko,èèyànní
ńj/eacutedotbelowb/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelow.
‘‘Father’s ears encompass the house, father’s
ears reach to the farm’’ spells ‘‘people.’’ (A
p e r s o nw h oi sp r i v yt ow h a tg o e so ne v e r y -
where has people everywhere. Compare
2960.)
Ẹ
2959. /Egravedotbelowmíàbàtàníḿmúodòṣàn;ọlá-ababa
níḿmúọmọyan.
It is due to the life in the marshes that the
r i v e rﬂ o w s ;i ti so w i n gt ot h eg r e a t n e s so ft h e
father that the son struts about. (The suc-
cessful person has some backing that must
be acknowledged.)
2960. Ẹnitíabúl/eacutedotbelowhìntógb/oacutedotbelow,a-betí-í-lu-
lára-bí-ajere.
A person who is insulted in absentia but
hears about the insult anyway: his or her en-
tire body is all ears, as a sieve is all holes. (If
one cannot be everywhere, one should make
sure one has people everywhere. Compare
2958.)
2961. Ẹnitíkòlówóaléèyàn;ẹnitíkòléèyàn
aláápọn.
A person who lacks money should have
people; a person who lacks people should be
gregarious. (Good connections can make up
for lack of money; but if one also lacks good
connections, one had better be gregarious or
personable. See 2828.)
2962. Ẹnitíkòníadès/ogravedotbelowkìípàtẹ.
A person who has no one to watch a stall
should not display his or her wares there. (If
one lacks helpers, one should be judicious in
the extent of one’s undertakings.)
2963. Ẹnitíkòní‘‘Ẹbámipèé!’’kìídákú.
A person who does not have ‘‘Help me re-
vive him!’’ does not faint. (If one does not


--- PAGE 304 ---
have a champion, one should stay out of
trouble.)
2964. Ẹnitíkòníigiobìkìíléso.
Whoever does not have a kola-nut tree can-
not have its fruits. (Unless one owns the
means of production, one cannot claim the
product.)
1
2965. Ẹnitóﬁilésíl/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowsọàpòìyàk/oacutedotbelow;ẹnitíó
sọọk/oacutedotbelownù-úk/oacutedotbelowàpòebi.
Whoever moves away from home drapes the
satchel of suﬀering on his or her shoulder;
whoever loses a hoe drapes the satchel of
hunger. (To move from one’s home is to ex-
pose oneself to hardship; to lose the means
of making a living is to expose oneself to
hunger.)
F
2966. Fóró-fóróimúìyàwó,ósànjuyàráòfìfo
lọ.
A bride with a gaping nose is better than an
empty bedroom. (To have something blem-
ished is much better than to have nothing at
all.)
I
2967. Ìdíìyálàḿp/ogravedotbelownsí.
It is on the mother’s waist that a child rests.
(One should know where one’s succor lies.)
2
2968. Igbórúrúníwajúọl/oacutedotbelowdẹ,èèyànṣùṣù
l/eacutedotbelowhìnọl/ogravedotbelowt/egravedotbelow.
1. This proverb is usually employed to state that
a man not married to a woman may not claim her
children as his.
2. This is a reference to the Yoruba women’s practice
of carrying their children mounted on their backs, so
that the mother’s waist supports the child.
Dense forest behind the hunter; teeming
crowd in the wake of a schemer. (Just as
a hunter does not run out of forest and a
schemer never runs out of co-plotters, so
one will not run out of backers.)
2969. Ìhínilé,/ogravedotbelowhúnilé;òjòkìír/ogravedotbelowkópaọmọ
adìẹ.
Here a home, there a home; the rain does
not fall and drench a chick. (One should not
submit to suﬀering when relief is everywhere
around.)
2970. Ikútíkòníípaniníńgbéaláworere
koni.
It is the death that has no intention of kill-
ing one that brings an expert diviner man
one’s way. (One should be grateful if one
has people to warn one about impending
dangers.)
2971. Ìl/egravedotbelowkùntíkòníalùgbàgbà,kójókòó/egravedotbelow
j/eacutedotbelowj/eacutedotbelow;ẹnitíòníbabakìíjìjà/egravedotbelowbi.
A door without a knocker should keep its
peace; a fatherless child does not ﬁght an
unjust ﬁght. (People who have no strong
backing should not court trouble.)
2972. Ìràw/ogravedotbelowsánsánsán,a-l/oacutedotbelowmọ-l/eacutedotbelowhìn-bí-
òṣùpá.
Brilliantly twinkling star, with a multitude
of followers like the moon. (Comment on
an illustrious person who has a huge follow-
ing.)
2973. Ìyàwódùnl/oacutedotbelowsìngín.
Marriage is pleasant when it is new. (No
pleasure compares to that of a honeymoon.)
J
2974. J/ogravedotbelowj/ogravedotbelowàgbòníḿmúàgbòníyì;ọlá-ababa
níḿmúọmọyan.
It is the ram’s dewlap that lends it dignity;
Onwealthinpeople 291


--- PAGE 305 ---
it is the father’s greatness that gives the son
reason to strut. (One who has good grounds
for doing so may walk proudly.)
K
2975. Kájàkáre/Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow,kámọẹnitólọba.
Let us quarrel and go to /Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow, and we will see
on whose side the king is. (Boast that one
would have the powers-that-be on one’s side
in any quarrel.)
2976. Kárìnkáp/ogravedotbelow,yíyẹníńyẹni[bí-it/ogravedotbelownà
/ogravedotbelowrunk/oacutedotbelow].
T r a v e l i n gi nt h ec o m p a n yo fo t h e r ss h o w s
people in a good light [but not if the journey
is to heaven]. (People are best in association
with others, and not as loners.)
3
2977. Kárínilókèèrèkáṣàríyá,óyónióju
oúnjẹlọ.
To see one from afar and greet one cheer-
fully satisﬁes far better than food ever could.
(Fellowship is far better than material gifts.)
2978. Káṣínilétíòj/eacutedotbelowkágbàóṣìṣeláàrinilé.
Being quietly advised keeps an elder from
committing a blunder within his household.
(Even elders will do well to heed advice.)
2979. Kàkàkígbajúm/ogravedotbelowójẹ/ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelow,ẹnitíyópa
k/ogravedotbelowǹk/ogravedotbelowfunyójàáde.
Rather than the popular person ﬁnding
himself reduced to eating a toad, someone
will emerge to kill a frog for him. (The well-
regarded person will always have people to
c o m et oh i so rh e ra i di nt i m e so fn e e d . )
2980. Kìíburúburúkómákuẹnìkanm/oacutedotbelowni;
ẹnitíyókùlaòm/ogravedotbelow.
3. The tag about the journey to heaven was not
originally part of the proverb but is in fact a cynical
rejoinder to the original observation.
One’s fortune never turns so bad that one
is left with no one; whom one will be left
with is what one does not know. (One never
knows, until trouble comes, who among
one’s friends is faithful.)
2981. Kòsíohuntódàbí-ikáwániwálé.
There is nothing that compares with being
v i s i t e da th o m e .( I ti sag r e a th o n o rt ob e
visited in one’s home.)
L
2982. Láraèèyànlowówà.
Riches are inseparable from people. (Who-
ever has people around him is rich indeed.)
O
2983. Oríolókìkíòj/eacutedotbelowasán;w/oacutedotbelownńkígbe/egravedotbelownílé,
w/oacutedotbelownńkígbe/egravedotbelowlógun.
The lot of a valorous person is not simple;
he is called upon at home, and he is called
upon in battle. (A great person is subject to
demands from all sides.)
2984. Oṣùpágbókèm/Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow;ọbágbélémọará
oko.
The moon remains on the ﬁrmament and
knows all about /Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow; the king remains at
home but knows all about the farm dweller.
(An inﬂuential person does not have to be
present at a place to know what goes on
there. Compare 2958.)
2985. Owófífúnòtóèèyàn.
A gift of money is not equal in value to
a [gift of a] person. (Human presence or
company is worth more than money.)
2986. Owókanòróṣẹkẹ;èèyànm/eacutedotbelowtaòdúró
níméjìméjì.
A solitary coin does not clink; three people
292 the fortunate person


--- PAGE 306 ---
cannot stand in twos. (One cannot make
suﬃciency out of deﬁciency.)
Ọ
2987. Ọl/oacutedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowkú,/egravedotbelowhìn-inr/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowkún.
The wealthy person dies and his wake is
congested. (A wealthy person has many
mourners.)
T
2988. Talólèṣebíat/oacutedotbelowkùnfúneégún?
Who can play the role of the guide for a
masquerader? (No one can replace a devoted
benefactor.)
4
W
2989. Wèrèpè-égbaara/egravedotbelowgbaigioko.
The cow-itch protects itself and protects
other trees in the forest. (Closeness to a
powerful person is good protection.)
4. The at/oacutedotbelowkùnis the ever vigilant attendant who
ensures that the masquerader, with his vision limited
and movements often restricted by his costume, does
not get into diﬃculties.
Onwealthinpeople 293


--- PAGE 307 ---



--- PAGE 308 ---
Relationships
three


--- PAGE 309 ---



--- PAGE 310 ---
On relationships with the divine
and the supernatural
A
2990. AkìíbaỌl/oacutedotbelowrunṣòwòkápàdánù.
One does not trade with God and come up
a loser. (Any venture that takes God into
account will surely prosper.)
2991. Ak/oacutedotbelowlébíríkótó,aníkíòrìṣàgbàá;bíkò
bágbàá,kólọsígb/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowkólọṣáẹk/eacutedotbelow,kólọs/oacutedotbelowdàn
lọhọokùn,kómọbíagara-átińdáni.
We build a modest shrine and implore the
god to accept it; if he does not accept it, let
him go into the forest to cut stakes, let him
go into the grassland for vines, so that he
might appreciate the pains we have taken.
(A god must not be too demanding of his
worshipers, for if pushed too far they will
rebel.)
2992. Àkèréńgb/oacutedotbelowtọmọẹjalódò.
The frog pays attention to the doings of little
ﬁshes in the river. (One must be attentive to
those beholden to one.)
1
2993. ÀtidádéOlókunòṣ/egravedotbelowhìnòkun;àtidádé
Ọl/oacutedotbelowsàòṣ/egravedotbelowhìn/ogravedotbelowsà;àtidádéekìnnìúnòṣ/egravedotbelowhìn
Olúigbó.
The crowning of the Olókun, goddess of
the sea, will not be in the absence of the
sea; the crowning of the Ọl/oacutedotbelowsà, goddess of
the lagoon, will not be in the absence of the
1. Since the frog shares a habitat with the ﬁshes, it
cannot help being attentive to their doings. This saying
is often used by Christians as a justiﬁcation for paying
attention to the wishes of God.
lagoon; the crowning of the lion will not
be in the absence of the deity of the for-
ests. (Nothing can be accomplished without
God’s help.)
2994. Àtisùn/egravedotbelowdáòṣ/egravedotbelowhìnOlódùmarè.
A human being’s dying is not hidden from
the Creator. (Only God determines the time
of a person’s death.)
2995. Ayéòf/eacutedotbelowkárẹrùkás/ogravedotbelow;oríẹniníńsọni.
The world would not wish to see one set
down one’s heavy burden; only one’s head
relieves one of the burden. (One cannot
count on the good will of the world; one can
count only on one’s protective spirit.)
B
2996. Bíalàgbà-ábájúbàfÓlúwa,/ogravedotbelownàálà.
If the elder pays homage to God, the path
opens. (Nothing is possible without God,
and nothing is impossible with God.)
E
2997. Eégúnṣé-éjó;òòṣà-áṣé-éjó;ti
Olódùmarè-éyàt/ogravedotbelow.
A masquerader can be set alight; a god [or
idol] can be set alight; God, though, is a dif-
f e r e n tm a t t e r .( O n l yG o di sb e y o n dp e r i la t
the hands of humans.)


--- PAGE 311 ---
Ẹ
2998. Ẹnitóbáfojúànáwòkú,ẹbọraáb/oacutedotbelowọ
láṣọ.
Whoever looks at the dead with yesterday’s
eyes will be undone by the spirits. (Never
deal with newly powerful people as you did
before they became powerful.)
2
I
2999. Igbaẹk/eacutedotbelowníńfọw/oacutedotbelowtilé;igbaalámùní
ńfọw/oacutedotbelowtiògiri;Olú-fọw/oacutedotbelow-tìniṢàngó;gbogbo
ayéníńfọw/oacutedotbelowtiọba.
Two hundred poles hold up a house; two
hundred lizards support a wall with their
hands; Chief-lends-support is Ṣango’s name;
the whole world lends support to the king.
(Used in the context of prayer or incantation
to invoke the support of the powers that
control the universe.)
K
3000. Kàkàkíebípaọmọawokú,ìpèsèniyó
yòóo.
Rather than the child of the priest dying of
hunger, he or she will feed to satisfaction on
goods provided for sacriﬁce. (Providence
will not permit the referent to suﬀer want.)
3001. Kòsíòrìṣàtíkòníìgb/eacutedotbelow.
T h e r ei sn oòrìṣà[god] that does not have a
bush.
3 (Every god provides some beneﬁt for
its worshipers.)
2. Because the dead are believed to assume super-
natural powers in their new status as spirits, any human
who approaches them as he or she did when they were
alive courts disaster.
3. Ìgb/eacutedotbelow(bush) here refers to the medicinal herbs
that are associated with anòrìṣàand whose properties
are known to that god’s devotees.
3002. K/ogravedotbelowl/ogravedotbelowk/ogravedotbelowl/ogravedotbelowìbákú,adìẹòsunkún;
k/ogravedotbelowl/ogravedotbelowk/ogravedotbelowl/ogravedotbelowògbaadìẹsìn.
Were the fox to die, the chicken would not
shed a tear; the fox never fostered a chick.
(One does not mourn an enemy’s disas-
ter.)
M
3003. Màlúùtíònírù,Ọl/oacutedotbelowrunníḿbáa
léṣinṣin.
A cow that has no tail can count on God
to help it chase ﬂies away. (There is always
some help for even the most helpless per-
son.)
3004. Múni-múniòlèmúOlódùmarè.
The professional arrester cannot arrest the
Almighty. (God is beyond human punish-
ment.)
N
3005. ‘‘NgòníísinOlúwa,ngòníísin
Ànábì’’;ohuntíolúwar/egravedotbelowósìnòníítóèkùr/oacutedotbelow.
‘‘I will not worship God, and I will not wor-
ship Allah’’; what such a person will worship
will not be so large as a palm kernel. (A per-
s o nw h oi st o op i c k yw i l lw i n du ph a v i n gn o
pick at all.)
3006. NítoríỌl/oacutedotbelowrunnìmàléﬁńjẹm/oacutedotbelowsà.
It is in deference to God that the Muslim
eats fried corn cake. (Necessity obliges one
to do things one would not do otherwise.)
O
3007. Ohuntíbabáṣesíl/egravedotbelownìrègúnọmọ.
What the father provided is what the chil-
dren inherit. (Children beneﬁt from the
industry of their father.)
298 relationships


--- PAGE 312 ---
3008. Ojúil/egravedotbelowlaṣedáatíaṣerúu;bíẹb/oacutedotbelowbá
máaj/eacutedotbelowkíil/egravedotbelowój/eacutedotbelowrìí.
It is in the presence of Earth that one con-
sulted the oracle and oﬀered the prescribed
sacriﬁce; if the sacriﬁce will yield the prom-
ised result, let Earth bear witness. (The
Earth will monitor and enforce oaths sworn
in her presence.)
3009. Òkùtù/ogravedotbelowpẹkìíwoojúẹlòmírànbíkòṣe
ojúỌl/oacutedotbelowrun.
Young palm leaves do not raise their eyes to
anyone other than God. (All aﬀairs are best
left to God.)
3010. Oorewolòrìṣáṣefúnabukétósọọmọ/egravedotbelow
níÒrìṣá-gbè-mí?
What favor have the gods granted the hump-
back who names his child Òrìṣágbèmí [The
gods have come to my aid]? (There is no
point in oﬀering gratitude in a direction
from which no help has come.)
3011. Òrìṣà,bíoòlegbèmí,ṣemíbíoti
bámi.
God, if you will not save me, leave me as you
found me! (If the person one looks to for
help does not help, he or she at least should
not leave one worse oﬀ than before.)
3012. Òrìṣàníńpeniwájẹọkà;akìígb/oacutedotbelowọw/oacutedotbelow
orógùnl/eacutedotbelowhìnkùlé.
It is the gods that summon one to come
eat yam-ﬂour meal; one does not hear the
sound of the stirring stick from the back
yard. (If one chances on good fortune, one
should give thanks to the gods.)
3013. Òrìṣàtíak/eacutedotbelow,k/eacutedotbelow,k/eacutedotbelow,tíkògb/oacutedotbelow,tíag/egravedotbelow,g/egravedotbelow,
g/egravedotbelow,tíkògbà;ojú-upópóníńgbé.
The god that one praises, praises, and
praises but who does not listen, that one
worships, worships, and worships but who
refuses to heed, ends up in the streets. (If
a supposed savior consistently fails you,
discard it and ﬁnd yourself another.)
Ọ
3014. Ọl/oacutedotbelowrunlakìísú.
Only God never gets fed up with us. (Unlike
people, God is inﬁnitely patient.)
3015. Ọl/oacutedotbelowrunníńṣèdáj/oacutedotbelowa-fehín-pínran.
Only God can render justice to the person
who uses his teeth to share out meat. (God
alone sees, and can reward, what people do
in secret.)
T
3016. TanitàkútéOlúwaòleèmú?
Who is beyond being caught in God’s trap?
(No one is beyond God’s judgment.)
3017. Tinút/egravedotbelowhìnnilabalábáﬁńyinỌl/oacutedotbelowrun.
It is with both its belly and its back that
the butterﬂy praises the Lord. (One should
glorify God with all one has.)
Withthedivineandsupernatural 299


--- PAGE 313 ---
On relationships with the family
A
3018. Akìídúrónílùúkáfarahẹ.
One does not stay for long in a town and
remain uninvolved. (One must live as a part
of one’s community.)
3019. Akìímọalájákánàál/oacutedotbelowpa.
One does not know a dog’s owner and yet
rain blows on it with a rod. (One’s regard
for a person should extend to that per-
son’s interests. Compare the two following
entries.)
3020. Akìímọalájákápèénítítà.
One does not know the owner of a dog
and yet announce that it is for sale. (One
should safeguard the interests of those one
knows, even in their absence. Compare the
preceding and following entries.)
3021. Akìímọalájákápék/eacutedotbelowkùnópaájẹ.
One does not know the owner of a dog and
yet wish that a leopard would eat it. (One
should invoke no ill on things dear to people
one knows. Compare the preceding two
entries.)
3022. Akìísọpéódiọj/oacutedotbelowtíabábímọkátó
sọọmọníkòó.
One does not say it will not be until one
has fathered a child that one raps a child on
the head with one’s knuckles. (Every adult
shares the responsibility for disciplining all
children, not only his or her own.)
3023. Abánigúnwàníḿmọìjagunẹni.
It is he who shares one’s throne that knows
one’s strategy in battle. (Only soulmates
know each other’s minds. Compare the next
entry.)
3024. Abánigbéníḿmọìṣeẹni.
Whoever one lives with knows one’s habits.
(The public image is not reliable. Compare
the preceding entry and 3400.)
3025. A-bánigbé-má-m/ogravedotbelowwà-ẹni,/ogravedotbelowtáẹnini.
He-who-lives-with-one-without-knowing-
one’s-habits: he is one’s enemy. (A house-
mate who does not know one’s ways cannot
be trusted.)
3026. Abíniòtóat/oacutedotbelowni.
The parent is no match for the rearer.
(Raising a child is more important than
giving birth to a child.)
3027. Àdábọw/oacutedotbelowl/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelow;babaọmọníńﬁọmọ
f/oacutedotbelowkọ.
Af r i e n di sl i k eag l o v e ;i ti sac h i l d ’ sf a t h e r
that gives her away to a husband. (Only
the relationship sanctioned by the woman’s
father is legitimate.)
1
3028. A-dáko-má-gbin-ọkà-áníòúndáikún
lára;bíkúnòbáríjẹlóko-or/egravedotbelow,ááríjẹlóko
ẹlòmíràn.
1. /Ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowin this instance means a male friend with
whom a woman has relations before marriage: like a
glove, he can be discarded. The man that the father
recognizes as her husband is the person with whom she
may have a lasting relationship.


--- PAGE 314 ---
He-who-prepares-a-farm-and-does-not-
plant-corn says he is denying something to
the squirrel; if squirrel ﬁnds nothing to eat
on his farm, it will ﬁnd something on an-
other person’s farm. (Obsessive attempts to
injure others can and do backﬁre.)
3029. Adámúòlèwànílékámágbọd/ogravedotbelowṣe
han-han.
One does not stop sayinghan-hansimply
because there is a person with a nasal speech
defect in the home. (There is a limit to the
concessions one can make to those one lives
with.)
3030. Adáruguduadìẹníńyésíìb/ogravedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow.
It is a troublemongering chicken that lays
eggs in a glove. (A dependent’s recklessness
causes problems for his or her protector.)
2
3031. Àì-fojú-kan-ara-ẹniòj/eacutedotbelowkí/ogravedotbelowt/egravedotbelowótán.
Not-seeing-each-other-face-to-face perpetu-
ates a conspiracy. (Lack of personal contact
prevents the ending of a feud.)
3032. Ajátótińríniy/ogravedotbelowkìítúnrínigbó.
A dog that once rejoiced on seeing one does
not switch to barking on seeing one. (Radi-
cal changes in other people’s attitude to one
are developments not to be wished for.)
3033. Àjànàkúyáwótánkòsingbàm/oacutedotbelow;erin-
íngbówóolówówọgbólọ.
The elephant pawned itself for money but
did not serve as promised; the elephant took
others’ money and disappeared into the
bush. (The mighty person can get away with
anything.)
3034. Ajélómọbíòunótiṣeọl/oacutedotbelowjàOdògbo,tí
apa/egravedotbelowkìrìkáﬁwójò,tónìkankunúntà.
Only the demon of prosperity knows what it
2. The chicken will put its owner and the owner of
the glove at loggerheads.
will do with the chief of Odògbo; we killed
a wild goat as an oﬀering for rain, and he
cut it for sale for himself. (A powerful per-
son who betrays his trust must be left to the
gods to deal with.)
3035. Àjèjéọw/oacutedotbelowkanògbégbákarí.
A single hand does not lift a calabash to the
head [to be carried]. (It takes two hands to
lift a heavy load. Cooperation is best.)
3036. Aj/egravedotbelowbimágbàníńkógunw/ogravedotbelowlú.
It is he-who-is-guilty-but-refuses-to-accept-
the-guilt that brings warfare into a town.
(Refusal to accept one’s guilt ruins commu-
nal harmony.)
3037. Aládùúgbòẹniniọmọìyáẹni.
One’s neighbor is one’s same-mother rela-
tive. (A neighbor is as close as any sibling.)
3038. Aláìláyàòlègbéiléńlá;bíabáláyà
ihòròníńsinniílọ.
A fainthearted person cannot live in a large
house; if one has a lion heart, it leads one to
the grave. (Whatever the inconvenience, one
must learn to get along with people or else
l i v ea sah e r m i t . )
3039. Alájọbíòsím/oacutedotbelow,alájọgbélókù.
Kin is no longer to be found; only cohabitors
remain. (Kinship is no longer in fashion,
only neighborliness.)
3040. Ànìkànjẹayékìídùn;jíjọjẹníńdára.
Going through life by oneself is unpleasant;
living life in company is pleasant. (Having
riches is nothing like having people.)
3041. Àńtètè,ódáyànp/ogravedotbelown-yànp/ogravedotbelownsíl/egravedotbelow.
The cricket sows confusion among others.
(When people like the cricket depart a place,
they leave dissension and confusion in their
wake.)
Withthefamily 301


--- PAGE 315 ---
3042. Àpésankìítúìlú.
Contributing to a common purse does not
ruin a town. (A town that acts together stays
together.)
3043. Àp/oacutedotbelownyanìyàóníòúnyanìyá;talàbá
kóiṣuméjìfúntíkògúnyánkonkofúnni?
A bachelor chooses suﬀering but says he
chose his mother; to what person would one
give two yams but would not make pounded
yam? (Whatever a mother can do for a man,
a wife can do, and more.)
3044. Aráòdeòmọnil/eacutedotbelowrú;aráiléẹniní
ńnaw/oacutedotbelowẹrúsíni.
Outsiders do not know that one is a slave;
people of one’s household are the ones who
point one out as a slave. (If those of one’s
household do not dishonor one, outsiders
will not.)
3045. Aríjàmálàjà,/ogravedotbelowtáỌl/oacutedotbelowrun.
One-who-sees-a-ﬁght-and-does-not-try-to-
stop-it: an enemy of God. (To fail to stop a
ﬁght is to oﬀend God.)
3046. Àròm/eacutedotbelowtakìídaọb/egravedotbelownù.
A trident cooking hearth does not spill stew.
(Many hands ensure success.)
3047. Àrùntíńṣeogójìníńṣe/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowdúnrún;ohun
tíńṣeAb/oacutedotbelowyadégbogboọl/Oacutedotbelowyaníńṣe.
The same disease that aﬄicts the forty af-
ﬂicts the three hundred; whatever aﬄicts
Ab/oacutedotbelowyadé aﬄicts all devotees of Ọya.
3 (Every
member of a group shares in the collective
fate and reputation of the group.)
3048. Àsop/ogravedotbelowníńmúewúr/eacutedotbeloww/egravedotbelow.
It is being-tied-together that forces goats to
3. The name Ab/oacutedotbelowyadé means ‘‘One who arrived
with Ọya,’’ the Yoruba goddess of the river Niger. Born
during the sabbath (the period of worship) of the river,
the child is presumed to be a ward of the goddess.
take a bath. (If one must act in concert with
others, one loses some freedom to do what
one would rather do.)
3049. Àt/eacutedotbelowlẹw/oacutedotbelowﬁnúṣ/ogravedotbelowkan;àtà/mgravepàkóṣeti/egravedotbelow
l/oacutedotbelowt/ogravedotbelow.
The palms of the hand have only one in-
terior; the thumb separates itself from the
r e s t .( Ap e r s o nw h os ow i s h e sm a yr e -
frain from going with the group.
4 Compare
3189.)
3050. Àwáyófara/egravedotbelowgbodì.
We-are-full makes enemies for himself.
(A person who refuses favors on behalf of
others makes enemies of those others.)
3051. Awoníńgbeawonígb/ogravedotbelownw/oacutedotbelow;bíawoòbá
gbeawonígb/ogravedotbelownw/oacutedotbelowawoát/eacutedotbelow.
Initiates of mysteries must rally round other
initiates; if initiates do not rally round one
another, they suﬀer disgrace. (Coopera-
tion among group members protects their
collective image.)
B
3052. Bíabábuìgb/eacutedotbelowlábùká,aórìíẹran
inú-ur/egravedotbelowpa.
I fh u n t e r se n c i r c l et h eb u s h ,t h e yw i l ls u c -
ceed in killing the animals therein. (If all
available hands converge on a task, it will be
accomplished.)
3053. Bíabáfagbùùrù,gbùùrùafagbó.
If one pulls the vine, the vine pulls the bush.
(If one goes after an oﬀender, one becomes
entangled with his or her patron.)
3054. Bíabáḿbúẹtù,oríamáaf/oacutedotbelowawó.
If one insults the guinea fowl, the guinea
4. The palms of one’s hands are face to face when
brought together.
302 relationships


--- PAGE 316 ---
fowl gets a headache. (When one hears one’s
close relative insulted, one feels insulted.5
Compare 4555.)
3055. Bíàṣákòbáf/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowf/eacutedotbelowàṣáníràn,ojú-u
sánmà-átó-ófòf/eacutedotbelowyẹláìfaragbúnra.
If an eagle does not want to provoke an
eagle, the sky is wide enough for birds to
ﬂy without bumping one another. (If one is
spoiling for a ﬁght, any excuse will do.)
3056. Bíayábágb/oacutedotbelowtọkọ,wàhálàátán.
If a wife does the husband’s bidding, all
problems disappear. (Domestic bliss de-
pends on the wife’s complaisance.)
6
3057. Bíẹj/oacutedotbelowòsunw/ogravedotbelown,ẹl/eacutedotbelowj/oacutedotbelowlàńfúndá.
If a case is hopeless, one asks the owner
to judge it. (If guilt is obvious, the guilty
should be made to declare it.)
3058. Bíẹrúbájọara-awọn,àm/ogravedotbelowpéilé
kannáàniw/oacutedotbelowntiwá.
If slaves resemble one another, one surmises
that they came from the same household.
(People who share similar traits deserve to
be lumped together.)
3059. Bíìbágbéòbáw/ogravedotbelow,káyàgòfúnra.
If cohabitation does not work, let us give
each other some space. (If people cannot be
friends or husband and wife, they should
part amicably.)
3060. Bíilékòdùn,bíìgb/eacutedotbelownìlúńrí.
If the home is not pleasant, the town seems
like a jungle. (The tone of the town depends
on the condition of the homes in it.)
5. The proverb works in Yoruba, whereẹtùand awó
mean the same thing; the construction then permits
the suggestion that they are two diﬀerent (because of
diﬀerent names) but very similar entities.
6. The sexism is not accidental.
3061. Bíobìnrínbádiméjì,imúọkọadiodó,
aníwọnòtúnyíimúluòunm/oacutedotbelow.
When women number two, the husband’s
nose becomes a mortar; she [the ﬁrst wife]
says that he no longer rolls his nose in her
direction. (The erstwhile favorite never
takes kindly to being supplanted by a new
favorite.)
3062. Bíojúbákoojú,àlàyót/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelownídìíìgbá.
If eyes meet eyes, the boundary line will be
straight at the base of the locust tree. (When
all parties participate in dividing something
among them, no one is cheated.)
3063. Bíọmọòjọṣòkòtòajọkíjìpá.
If a child does not resemble the trousers,
he should resemble the wrapper. (If a child
does not take after his father, he should take
after his mother.)
3064. Bíọmọdébáníaṣọbíìyá-ar/egravedotbelow,kòníèyí
tíìyá-ar/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowﬁp/ogravedotbelown/oacutedotbelown.
If a youth has a wrapper like her mother’s,
she does not have the one her mother used
to bear her.
7 (However rich or great a person
becomes, the person owes deference to his
or her parents.)
3065. Bíọmọdébápaeku,adáajẹ,bóbá
paẹyẹ,adáajẹ,ṣùgb/oacutedotbelownọj/oacutedotbelowtóbádáràn
gòdògbà,afàáwás/oacutedotbelowd/ogravedotbelowọbàbá-ar/egravedotbelow.
When a youth kills a rat, he eats it alone;
when he kills a bird, he eats it alone; but
when he is in serious trouble, he drags it
home to his father. (A youth does not re-
member his parents until he needs their
help.)
7. The wrapper referred to is the fabric that forms
the lower piece of a Yoruba woman’s attire. Nursing
mothers wrap their children on their backs inside the
cloth.
Withthefamily 303


--- PAGE 317 ---
E
3066. Èèyànbíìyáòsí;taníj/eacutedotbelowṣeọmọ-ọl/oacutedotbelowmọ
lóore?
There is no being like a mother; whoever did
another person’s child a favor? (A mother is
the surest support a person can ever hope
for.)
3067. Ehíntótayọ,wàhálàẹnuni.
A bucktooth is trouble for the mouth. (One
pays one way or another for one’s short-
comings. Or, the shortcomings of one’s
relatives spell problems for one also.)
3068. Èkóilágbaara-ar/egravedotbelowl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowọb/egravedotbelow:ilátáa
kókìkíòso;gb/ogravedotbelow/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowtáagb/eacutedotbelowk/egravedotbelowléòfà;ọmọìf/eacutedotbelow
táagb/eacutedotbelowk/egravedotbelowléòṣebíatirò.
Okro that goes to seed saves itself from
being stewed: the okro one boasted about
fails to fruit; the pumpkin one placed one’s
hopes on sends out no trailers; the beloved
child one relied on fails to do as one hoped.
(One can hope for no rewards for one’s pains
from an ungrateful child.)
3069. ‘‘Èyíwùmíkòwù/oacutedotbelow’’lọmọìyáméjì-íﬁ
ńjẹunl/oacutedotbelowt/ogravedotbelow/ogravedotbelowt/ogravedotbelow.
‘‘This appeals to me but not to you’’ is the
reason why two children of the same mother
eat separately. (Even the closest of relatives
may diﬀer in taste.)
Ẹ
3070. /Egravedotbelowńgbàdúràk/eacutedotbelowṣinilékú;ẹònííl/eacutedotbelowṣin
mìírànníranyínm/oacutedotbelow.
Y o up r a yf o rt h ed e a t ho ft h eh o u s e h o l d
horse; there will never be another horse in
your lineage. (Any household that wishes for
the destruction of its most illustrious mem-
ber will never again be blessed with a worthy
member.)
3071. /Egravedotbelow/egravedotbelowtánlelégbèẹyìn;ọmọbíbíinúẹni
lelégbèẹni.
Young palm fruits are the support of ripe
ones; one’s children are one’s support. (In
their old age parents have their children to
lean on.)
3072. /Egravedotbelowlàìl/egravedotbelowk/egravedotbelowòlójúàtokùnb/ogravedotbelow;alágb/egravedotbelowdẹò
rójúará.
A split bead lacks a hole for a thread; the
blacksmith has no time for relatives. (Some
occupations leave no room for the obser-
vance of courtesies.)
3073. Ẹl/eacutedotbelowbíòrunoríngbọọrọ.
A person with a large family does not chew a
long chewing stick. (If one has many depen-
dents, there will be great demands on one’s
resources.)
8
3074. Ẹl/eacutedotbelowbíòsinmi;ẹniabíireòráyè.
A person with a large family does not rest; a
person of good birth has no time to himself
or herself. (Whoever has a large family or is
very popular has many obligations and great
demands on his or her time.)
3075. Ẹniabíwọnbíkìíwùw/oacutedotbelown;ẹniẹl/eacutedotbelowniní
ńyáwọnlára.
Their blood relatives never ﬁnd favor with
them; only strangers evoke their enthusiasm.
(People always appreciate what is remote
more than what is near at hand.)
3076. Ẹníbímọ/ogravedotbelowrànníńp/ogravedotbelown/oacutedotbelowndàgbà.
Whoever mothers a problem child will bear
it on her back until it is weaned. (Oneself,
and no one else, bears the consequences of
one’s own actions.)
3077. Ẹnitíyókùúkìílaodóyáná.
A dying person does not split the mortar
8. Chewing sticks, the means for cleaning teeth, are
twigs or roots of certain plants. If a person has a long
one, relatives ask for pieces of it.
304 relationships


--- PAGE 318 ---
to kindle a ﬁre to warm himself or herself.
(However desperate one’s circumstances,
one should respect the interests of others.)
3078. Ẹnitóbáyọaráilé-er/egravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelownuyójogún
òfo.
Whoever makes himself or herself a nui-
sance to those of his or her household in-
herits nothing. (It pays to look well to one’s
relations with one’s family.)
F
3079. Fìlàlobìnrin,wọnkìíbáọdẹwọìtí.
Women are caps; they never accompany
the hunter into the dense forest. (Women
do not stick around when their men suﬀer
reverses.)
9
G
3080. Gángánlóbánitan;kòṣééﬁ/ogravedotbelowbẹr/eacutedotbelow.
His relationship to one is very slight; even
so it cannot be severed with a knife. (The
most distant relative still deserves to be
acknowledged and treated as such.)
I
3081. Ìf/eacutedotbelownikókóìpàk/oacutedotbelow;akìíﬁaṣọk/oacutedotbelowọ.
The knot at the occiput is something one
tolerates out of love; one cannot hang
clothes on it. (One does or endures certain
things without expecting material beneﬁts
from them.)
3082. Ìgbàòlèdiìgbàòyìnbókáﬁàbúròẹni
ṣaya.
No matter to what extent the era has become
9. A hunter’s cap is likely to be knocked oﬀ his head
by hanging branches when he enters a thick forest.
a white man’s era, one cannot take one’s
own sister as a wife. (There are some values
and habits that will survive the strong-
est foreign inﬂuences. Compare the next
entry.)
3083. Ìgbàòlèdiìgbàòyìnbók/oacutedotbelowmọẹnísọnù
kámáwàáa.
However strong the white man’s inﬂuence, if
one’s child is lost, one will go searching for
h i mo rh e r .( Ap e o p l e ’ sv a l u e sm u s ts u r v i v e
the strongest foreign inﬂuences. Compare
the preceding entry.)
3084. Ikúòdeníńpaọmọdéfúnìyá/egravedotbelow.
I ti sd e a t hf r o mo u t s i d et h a tk i l l sac h i l df o r
his or her mother. (A child not properly
instructed at home will learn a lesson from
strangers outside the home.)
3085. Ìlasaòsunw/ogravedotbelown;talóbíilá?
O k r ol e a fi sn og o o d ;w h og a v eb i r t ht o
the okro? (However great the oﬀspring,
he or she must yet acknowledge his or her
parents.)
3086. Ilélàńwòkátósọmọlórúkọ.
One considers the home before giving a
child [from it] a name. (A child’s character
is a good indication of the sort of home he
or she comes from.)
3087. Ilélatińkẹs/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowròde.
One adorns oneself with ﬁnery in one’s
home before stepping outside. (One’s char-
acter follows one from home into the world
outside.)
3088. Ilélàb/ogravedotbelowsinmioko.
T h eh o m ei sw h e r eo n er e t u r n sf o rr e s ta f t e r
the farm. (However long one wanders, one
eventually returns home.)
3089. Ilénib/ogravedotbelowyímáab/ogravedotbelowsí.
The home is the place the houseboy returns
Withthefamily 305


--- PAGE 319 ---
to in the end. (One may try, but one cannot
escape one’s destiny.)
3090. Iléọkọlobìnríntińtúnìpínyàn.
It is in the marital home that a woman’s
destiny is revised. (A woman’s destiny be-
gins anew when she goes to her husband’s
home.)
3091. IlénikúwàẹranÀjàyí;Àyànm/oacutedotbelow-ìpín
ẹranOlúgbòde.
The-home-is-where-death-lurks, the name
of Àjàyí’s goat; One’s-fate-is-set-at-one’s-
creation, the name of Olúgbòde’s goat. (If
o n e ’ sh o m eb a s ei ss e c u r e ,o n ei ss a f ef r o m
disaster; yet no one can avert his or her
fate.)
3092. Ilésanmídùnjuoyèlọ.
The-home-is-blissful-for-me is far better
than a chieftaincy title. (It is better to have a
peaceful home than to be a chief.)
10
3093. Ipinlójú,ikunnímú,aráiléẹním/ogravedotbelowdí/egravedotbelow:
àrùnlaráìtańpèé.
Eyes oozing matter, mucus in the nose: those
of one’s household know the cause, but
strangers attribute them to disease. (Only
those really close to a person know the real
reasons for his or her condition.)
3094. Ìṣ/eacutedotbelowàp/oacutedotbelownòlórí;tabiyamọlósàndí/egravedotbelow.
The bachelor’s privations are to no pur-
pose; those of a mother are somewhat better.
(Suﬀering is tolerable as long as it is not
purposeless.)
3095. Iṣ/eacutedotbelowḿbẹlókoòkútíapètíkòdáhùn.
T h e r ei sw o r kt ob ed o n eo nt h ef a r mo ft h e
dead person, who is called but does not re-
spond. (When a person becomes incapable
10. Ilésanmí is a common name that means ‘‘The
home is blissful for me.’’
of performing his or her duties, the relatives
inherit the obligation to take them up.)
3096. Iṣukìítakógbàgbéewé;àgbàdokìí
yọmọkógbàgbéìrùk/egravedotbelowr/egravedotbelow;kíningójẹgbàgbé
ọmọ-/ogravedotbelowmi?
The yam does not mature and forget the
leaves; the corn does not ripen and forget
the tassels; what would I eat that would
make me forget my children? (However suc-
cessful one might be, ones’s children would
still be uppermost in one’s mind.)
3097. Ìtàkùnníńṣeikúpa/ogravedotbelowk/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelow;obìnrinní
ńṣeikúpaọkùnrin.
Vines are the death of squirrels; women are
the death of men. (As dangerous as vines are
to the squirrels, so dangerous are women to
men.)
3098. Ìtàkùntósoigbá,tósoagbè,lóso
elégéde.
The same vine that grew a calabash and
grew a gourd also grew a pumpkin. (Said of
people who are of the same stock but harbor
enmity toward one another.)
3099. Ìtànìnàkílojú-uwaòtó;bóṣet/ogravedotbelowbọni,
ojú-uwátódí/egravedotbelowníb/egravedotbelow.
The story of the baboon is something we
do not know anything about, but when it
comes to the story of the monkey, we know
something about it.
11 (One may be ignorant
about the aﬀairs of other households but can
certainly speak to the aﬀairs of one’s own.)
3100. Iwájúlatińjogún;/egravedotbelowhìnlatińṣàgbà.
One inherits from one’s front, and one sets
an example at one’s back. (Deriving beneﬁts
from one’s elders, one is obligated to pass on
some beneﬁts to those who are younger.)
11. Monkeys are popular household pets, whereas
baboons are not.
306 relationships


--- PAGE 320 ---
3101. Ìyálàbání;aráòṣenǹkanfúnni.
One whould rather have a mother; relatives
hardly do one any favor. (A mother is to be
preferred over other kin.)
3102. Ìyániwúrà,babanijígí;ọj/oacutedotbelowìyákúni
wúrà-ábàj/eacutedotbelow;ọj/oacutedotbelowtíbabákúnijígílọ.
Mother is gold, father is glass; the day the
mother dies is the day the gold is ruined;
the day the father dies is the day the glass
is gone. (One’s parents are of great value,
but the mother is more precious than the
father.)
J
3103. ‘‘Jọmíjọmí,’’òkúòǹroròníńsọnidà.
‘‘Be just like me, be just like me!’’ makes
one an intolerable tyrant. (One should allow
others to be themselves.)
K
3104. Kíaditíbaàgb/oacutedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowlatińsọ/oacutedotbelowlójúọmọ
/egravedotbelow.
It is so that a deaf person might hear some-
thing that one says it in his or her child’s
presence. (One way of making one’s opin-
ion known to a person one cannot or dares
not speak to is to say it in the hearing of
someone close to that person.)
3105. Kíniaóṣefúnọmọàlètíyópeniní
baba?
What could one do for a bastard that would
induce him or her to call one ‘‘father’’? (A
favor done for unworthy and ungrateful
people is a favor done in vain.)
3106. Kòbánitanòjogúnẹni.
He-[or-she]-is-not-related-to-one does not
inherit from one. (Those one has nothing to
do with have no rights in one’s aﬀairs.)
M
3107. Máṣefìwàjọmí;ọmọolèlolèńjọ.
Do not take after me; a thief takes after a
thief ’s oﬀspring [or a thief ’s oﬀspring takes
after his parents]. (One should take after
one’s parents in character.)
3108. MàlúùtójẹèbùlóníkánaFúlàníní
patiyẹ.
T h ec o wt h a ta t ey a mp i e c e sc u tf o rp l a n t -
ing is the cause for the whipping that the
Fulbe man suﬀered.
12 (People are responsible
for the misdeeds of those in their charge:
respondeatsuperior.)
N
3109. ‘‘Ngóṣeìyá’’òlèjọìyá;‘‘Ngóṣebaba’’
òlèjọbaba;‘‘Wòs/ogravedotbelowdèmí’’òlèjọonís/ogravedotbelow;ojú
m/eacutedotbelowwàáòlèjọojúẹni.
‘‘I will be like a father to you’’ does not com-
pare to one’s real father; ‘‘I will be a mother
to you’’ is not the same as a real mother;
‘‘Watch the store for me’’ is not the same as
the owner of the store; ten eyes are not like
o n e ’ so w n .( As u b s t i t u t ei sn e v e ra sg o o da s
the real thing. Compare 3150.)
3110. Nínùlàńnuọmọẹyẹdàgbà.
Until it matures, the young bird is fed by
having food placed in its mouth. (People
have the responsibility to care for their
dependents until they are able to care for
themselves.)
O
3111. Obìnríndéléọkọógbàgbé/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelow.
On arriving at her marital home, a woman
12. The Fulbe man is the cowherd; Fulbe men are
identiﬁed with cowherding.
Withthefamily 307


--- PAGE 321 ---
forgets her suitors. (On leaving a stage in
one’s life, one should abandon the habits of
that stage.)
3112. Obínrintíkòìlórogúnòt/iacuteigravemàrùntí
ńṣèun.
A woman who does not yet have a co-wife
does not yet know what disease she has.
(Until one has enemies, one seldom knows
one’s ﬂaws.)
3113. Òdelàńṣàgbà,ilékanbíìbó;bóp/eacutedotbelowtítí,
àtiléàtòdeníḿb/ogravedotbelowwáákàn.
When one is abroad, one acts the venerable
sage, even though one’s homestead is as sour
as the sap of theìbóplant; but sooner or
later both the homestead and the outside
become sour. (One cannot conceal one’s
secret shame forever.)
3114. Odòkìíṣànkógbàgbéìsun.
A river does not ﬂow and forget its source.
(However far you may roam, always remem-
ber where you came from.)
3115. Ogún-mobí,ọmọkòrikò;Ọgb/ogravedotbelown-mo-
wòọmọÈrúwà;kàkàkábíẹgbàá/ogravedotbelowbùn,kábí
/ogravedotbelowkanṣoṣo/ogravedotbelowbùn,ókúkúyá.
Twenty children I have, a hyena’s litter;
thirty children I raised, Èrúwà’s brood;
rather than two hundred ill-groomed brats,
one would be better oﬀ with just one stupid
child.
13 ( T h em o r ec h i l d r e nap e r s o nh a s ,t h e
more likely they all are to turn out bad.)
3116. Òkòlọmọ:Ọl/oacutedotbelowrunníńwípékásọ/oacutedotbelowsíbi
tódára.
A child is [like] a stone: only God’s grace
guides one to throw it to a propitious place.
(It takes Providence to help one do right by
one’s children.)
13. Hyenas presumably have large litters, and the
people of Èrúwà, an Ìbàràpá town, presumably have
many children of doubtful character.
3117. Òkúọl/oacutedotbelowmọkìísunà-sùn-gbàgbé.
The corpse of a person who left children
behind does not forget itself in sleep. (An
expression of the belief that dead people
survived by young children will continue to
care for them from their new abode.)
3118. Oǹsìnníḿmọìwà.
T h es e r v a n ti sb e s tp l a c e dt ok n o w[ t h em a s -
ter’s] character. (Those dependent on you
can best tell what sort of person you are.)
3119. Oríkìíp/ogravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowjàkámámọtìyáẹni.
Heads are never so plentiful in the market-
place that one does not recognize one’s
mother’s. (One must always favor one’s
kin.)
3120. Òrìṣàiléẹnikìíhunni.
One’s household god never turns on one.
(One should always be able to count on
succor, not betrayal, from one’s own house-
hold.)
3121. Òrìṣàòníkà;aráiléẹniníńronipa.
T h eg o d sa r en o tw i c k e d ;i ti sp e o p l ef r o m
one’s household who kill one with defama-
tion. (One’s greatest enemies often come
from one’s own household.)
3122. Orogúnkìíjogúnorogún.
Co-wives do not inherit from co-wives.
(People with distinct interests should keep
them distinct.)
Ọ
3123. ‘‘Ọba,èmilẹrúẹ;Baṣ/ogravedotbelowrun,èmilẹrúẹ’’;
àtọbaàtiBaṣ/ogravedotbelowrun,wọnòmọiyeẹrútíw/oacutedotbelown
rà?
‘‘Oh King, I am your slave; Oh Chief Adviser
of the king, I am your slave’’; king and chief
adviser, don’t they know how many slaves
they bought? (It is devious to manufacture
308 relationships


--- PAGE 322 ---
kinship to illustrious people; illustrious
people know their own kin.)
3124. Ọkọẹnilodìẹni.
One’s husband is one’s closest kin. (There
s h o u l db en or e l a t i o n s h i pm o r ei n t i m a t e
than that between spouses.)
3125. Ọláàbàtàníḿmúodò-óṣàn;ọlá-a
babaníḿmúọmọyan.
It is the by the grace of the marshy land that
a river ﬂows; it is by the grace of the father
that the son struts. (The person who has
strong backers can aﬀord to strut.)
3126. Ọlanfẹnibabaẹyẹ,iyùnnibabaìl/egravedotbelowk/egravedotbelow;
ẹnitíabáf/eacutedotbelowìyá/egravedotbelowlọmọ/egravedotbelowńwunni.
The ọlanfẹbird is the father of all birds; the
coral bead is the father of all beads; it is
the oﬀspring of the person whose mother
one loves that are attractive. (One’s love for
a woman aﬀects one’s feelings toward her
children.)
3127. Ọmọàlè,iléníńtú.
A bastard does nothing but disrupt the
household. (Illegitimate children ruin fami-
lies.)
3128. Ọm/oacutedotbelowb/oacutedotbelowl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow-ọnínà,ódià-wò-m/oacutedotbelowjú.
[When] a child outgrows whipping, he be-
comes a person one looks at and rolls one’s
eyes in disgust. (When a child becomes an
adult and still has not learned to behave
well, one can only throw up one’s hands in
resignation.)
3129. Ọmọẹniòṣèdíb/egravedotbelowb/egravedotbelowr/egravedotbelow,kásòl/egravedotbelowk/egravedotbelowm/oacutedotbelow
ọmọẹlòmírànnídìí.
One does not, because one’s child’s waist is
too fat, put waist beads around the waist of
another person’s child. (One always loves
one’s own children best, despite their ﬂaws.)
3130. Ọmọolúgelegele-épaìdí/egravedotbelowm/oacutedotbelowbúúbú.
The olúgelegeléplant tidies up its base dili-
gently. (One should look well to one’s family
and home.)
14
3131. Ọmọọl/oacutedotbelowmọlàńpèníAlébíowú;bóbáṣe
tẹniniàpèéníAjíb/oacutedotbelowládé.
It is another person’s child that one names
Alébíowú; one’s own child one names
Ajíb/oacutedotbelowládé. (One always harbors a better
opinion and a better expectation of one’s
own than of other people’s.)
15
3132. Ọmọọl/oacutedotbelowmọlàńránníṣ/eacutedotbelowẹ‘‘détòru-tòru.’’
It is only another person’s child that one
sends on a return-unfailingly-even-after-
nightfall errand. (One always feels more free
to misuse other people’s property than one’s
own.)
3133. Ọmọọl/oacutedotbelowmọníńjẹAbéégúndé.
Only other people’s children are named
Abéégúndé. (One chooses only the most
appealing names for one’s own children.)
16
3134. Ọmọọl/oacutedotbelowmọníńpababaoníbaba.
It is another person’s child that kills another
person’s father. (Both the perpetrator and
the victim of an evil deed have relatives to
whom they relate diﬀerently. People often
do evil to other, unrelated, people.)
3135. Ọmọtíòníẹl/eacutedotbelowrùyóbàj/eacutedotbelow.
A child who fears no one will be rotten.
(Any person who refuses to be disciplined is
worth nothing.)
14. Olúgelegeleis a creeping plant that spreads and
kills oﬀ all undergrowth.
15. Alébíowúmeans ‘‘one who lies contentedly like
festering jealousy’’; Ajíb/oacutedotbelowládémeans ‘‘one who rises ac-
companied with prosperity.’’ The two are to be pictured
as in their characteristic morning poses.
16. Abéégúndémeans ‘‘One who arrives during the
annual eégúnfestival.’’ Only those who belong to the
cult may give such a name to their children; the sense
of the proverb seems to be that those who do not be-
long to the cult may not give their own children such a
name.
Withthefamily 309


--- PAGE 323 ---
3136. Ọmọtíòníyàákìídégbò/egravedotbelowhìn.
A motherless child should not get a sore on
his back. (Unless you have people to help
you out, do not get into trouble. Compare
1207.)
3137. Ọmọtóbuìyá/egravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowhìnjẹ,ẹnitíyóp/ogravedotbelown/oacutedotbelown
áṣiṣ/eacutedotbelow.
A child that bit its mother’s back: whoever
will carry it on her back has her work cut
out for her. (Children who cannot be dis-
ciplined by their parents pose even greater
problems for their caretakers. See the follow-
ing entry.)
3138. Ọmọtóbuìyá/egravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowhìnjẹ,kòsíalágbàp/ogravedotbelown
tój/eacutedotbelowp/ogravedotbelown/oacutedotbelown.
The child that bit its mother’s back, no
surrogate carrier will carry on her back.
(Children that cannot be controlled by
their parents will not easily ﬁnd caretakers.
Compare the preceding entry.)
3139. Ọmọtódáratibàbá/egravedotbelowni;ọmọburúkú
tìyá/egravedotbelowni.
A well-disciplined child is the father’s child;
an ill-bred child is the mother’s. (It is up to
the father to discipline the child; it is up to
the mother to see that the child accepts the
discipline.)
3140. Ọmọtóníkíyàáòunmásùn,òunnáàò
níífojúkanorun.
A child that is determined to keep its
mother awake will itself not catch a glimpse
of sleep. (People intent on making trouble
for others will not themselves remain un-
troubled. Compare 1693.)
3141. ‘‘Ọmọyìíṣegb/oacutedotbelownbáyìí?’’Óníbaba
nísàl/egravedotbelowni.
‘ ‘ H o wd i dt h i sc h i l dc o m et ob es ow i s e ? ’ ’I t
is only because he has a father somewhere.
(A well-bred child is evidence of his father’s
good inﬂuence.)
3142. Ọmọdétóyát/oacutedotbelowr/oacutedotbelowlóde,owóilélóná.
A child who borrows three pence on the
streets is actually spending household
money. (Members of the household will ulti-
mately be held responsible for the actions of
the minors in the household.)
3143. /Ogravedotbelowràntóbábáojúábáimú.
The trouble that befalls the eyes will also af-
fect the nose. (Whatever aﬄicts those close
to one aﬄicts oneself also.)
3144. /Ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowẹniníḿbánipil/egravedotbelow/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow,aráiléẹniní
ḿbanikóo.
It is a friend that helps one lay the foun-
dation of a venture; kinfolk help one carry
it to fruition. (Kin are more valuable than
friends.)
3145. /Ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowkítí-kítí,iyèkankàtà-kàtà:b/oacutedotbelowr/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelow
kítí-kítíbákú,iyèkankàtà-kàtàníńgbéesin.
The closest of friends, the most distant of
relatives: when the closest friend dies, the
most distant relatives are the ones who ar-
range the funeral. (The closest friend is not
as important as even distant relatives.)
3146. /Ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowàgbà,bíkòbáta/egravedotbelowd/eacutedotbelow,ogunníńta.
The word that issues out of the mouth of an
elder, if it does not hit at hunting, will hit at
war. (There is always considerable substance
and weight in what an elder says.)
3147. /Ogravedotbeloww/oacutedotbelownèèyànlàńpeajáníIfádèyí.
Only scarcity of human beings makes one
name a dog Ifádèyí.
17 (Said to mean that
one would never have had anything to do
with the person referred to if any other
alternative had been available.)
17. The name means ‘‘Ifá, the Oracle god, has pre-
served this one,’’ and it is usually given to children one
is grateful to the god for preserving.
310 relationships


--- PAGE 324 ---
Ṣ
3148. Ṣeigbáiléj/eacutedotbelowj/eacutedotbelow;aòmọìwàtítokoyóhù.
Handle the home calabash with care; no one
knows how the farm calabash will behave.
(Be good to the things and people you al-
ready have; you can never be sure what you
might end up with if you were to trade them
for new ones.)
T
3149. Tím/oacutedotbelow-tím/oacutedotbelowletíḿm/oacutedotbeloworí,tìm/oacutedotbelow-tìm/oacutedotbelow
lalám/ogravedotbelowńgúnam/ogravedotbelow.
Closely is the manner of the ear’s attachment
to the head; smoothly is the way the clay
worker pounds his clay. (An admonition to
people to remain intimate.)
W
3150. ‘‘Woìs/ogravedotbelowdèmí’’kìíjọonís/ogravedotbelow;‘‘Ngóṣe
babafúnọ’’òlèjọbaba.
‘‘Watch the stall for me’’ cannot be like the
store owner; ‘‘I will be like a father to you’’
can never be like a father. (Where kinship is
concerned, substitutes can never be like the
real thing. Compare 3109.)
Withthefamily 311


--- PAGE 325 ---
On relationships within the community
A
3151. Akìíbáẹnigbékámámọojúẹni.
One does not live with a person and yet not
k n o wh o wt od e a lw i t hh i mo rh e r .( T ok n o w
a person well is to know that person’s habits
and tastes.)
3152. Akìíbáẹnitankátúnfaninítanya.
One does not claim kinship with a person
and yet split the person’s thighs. (Sexual
activities between blood relatives are taboo.)
3153. Akìíbáọmọẹniṣerékódokoẹgba.
One does not play with one’s child and then
head for the bush of whips. (One should
keep the play in playing and not turn it into
a quarrel.)
3154. Akìítóóbánigbékámátòó/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelow
bánisọ.
One does not qualify to live with a person
without also qualifying to talk to the person.
(Friends and relatives have every right to
counsel with a person.)
3155. Akìíyanànaẹnilódì.
One does not refuse to speak to one’s family-
in-law. (Certain obligations must never be
neglected out of pique.)
3156. Ààyèọmọlàńf/eacutedotbelow;akìíf/eacutedotbelowòkúọmọ.
One courts a live person; one does not court
a dead person. (One should spare no eﬀort
to keep one’s child alive.)
3157. Adásínil/oacutedotbelowrùn,obìnrin/ogravedotbelowd/ogravedotbelowgọ:ẹl/eacutedotbelowrúńwá
ẹrú/egravedotbelow,óníkíw/oacutedotbelownj/eacutedotbelowkíọkọòuntiokodéná.
Person-who-involves-one-in-trouble, idiotic
woman: a slave owner comes searching for
h i sm i s s i n gs l a v e ,a n ds h es a y sh es h o u l d
wait until her husband returns from the
farm. (A loose mouth is a dangerous thing
for the owner and his or her kin.)
3158. Agbèníńjẹ/egravedotbelowgbinomi;àgbàlagbàníńjẹ
ìyà/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow.
It is the gourd that inherits the dregs of
water; it is the elder that inherits the un-
pleasantness of a dispute. (Every position
carries its responsibilities.)
1
3159. Àjọnitìlú;ọbalólagbo.
The assembly is for the people; to the king
belongs the crowd. (The populace may
gather, but only the king can unite them.)
2
3160. Àkèekèeòjògánfìdíjà;aráiléẹni-í
fojúdini.
The formidable scorpion ﬁghts with its tail;
members of one’s household belittle one.
(Those most familiar with you are likely to
show you disrespect. The scorpion’s ﬁght-
ing with its tail, rather than its arms, is here
1. The sediment remains in the gourd after the
water is gone; the elder must listen to the troubles of all
and sundry.
2. Àjọsuggests a gathering of individuals for consul-
tation; agbosuggests a coming-together for a ceremony
or celebration in common.


--- PAGE 326 ---
c o n s t r u e da sas i g no fc o n t e m p tf o rt h e
adversary.)
3161. AmúnibúniẹranÌbíyẹ;Ìbíyẹ-/eacutedotbelowf/oacutedotbelowjú/ogravedotbelowtún,
ẹran-anr/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowf/oacutedotbelowtòsì.
A-creature-that-makes-one-insult-another-
person, Ìbíyẹ’s goat; Ìbíyẹ is blind in the
r i g h te y e ,a n dh e rg o a ti sb l i n di nt h el e f t .
3
(If the parent and the child share the same
trait, one risks provoking the parent by
remarking on the trait in the child.)
3162. Aṣenilódeòtótilé;iléniw/oacutedotbelowntińṣeni.
The-enemy-outside is no match for the
enemy at home; one is done in in one’s
own home. (The enemy at home is more
formidable than the enemy abroad.)
3163. Aṣiwèrèèèyànníńkọṣ/eacutedotbelowàb/ogravedotbelowọjà.
Only an imbecile refuses to run an errand he
or she can do on the way from the market.
(One should not refuse to do a favor that
entails no hardship or inconvenience.)
3164. Aṣus/oacutedotbelownàníńﬁìyá-ar/egravedotbelowgbèpè.
A child who shits on the path brings down
curses on its mother. (A child’s behavior is a
reﬂection on its mother; a child’s misbehav-
ior exposes its parents to castigation.)
B
3165. Bàbálaláàbò;ìyálonírànw/oacutedotbelow;orogún
nikú.
A father is a protector; a mother is a helper;
a co-wife is death. (Two women who share
the same husband are deadly enemies.)
3166. Bíabáwípékíaráiléẹnimálòówó,
aráòdéníńyánil/oacutedotbelowfà.
3. If one angrily called an oﬀending goatẹran
olójúkan(one-eyed goat), one could be accused of say-
ing what the construction also means: ‘‘the goat of a
one-eyed person.’’
If one schemes so that one’s relatives may
not prosper, outsiders eventually receive one
as a pawn. (One who works to ensure that
o n e ’ sp e o p l ed on o ts u c c e e db e c o m e sf a i r
game for outsiders.)
3167. Bíakòbáﬁoògùnpaọmọìyáẹni,ọmọ
bàbáẹnikìísáfúnni.
If one did not kill one’s sibling by the same
mother with poison, one’s sibling by the
same father does not ﬂee. (If one has done
nothing to encourage them to do so, one’s
close relatives will not avoid one.)
3168. Bíakòbálèdijúkanọmọẹniníkòó,
ojúlàńlàsíl/egravedotbelowtíw/oacutedotbelownﬁńkànánl/oacutedotbelowmọríodó
lórí.
If one cannot close one’s eyes to rap one’s
child on the head, one will watch with wide-
open eyes as others hit him on the head
with a pestle. (If one will not discipline
one’s child, others will, and much more
mercilessly.)
3169. Bíakòbásọfúnọmọdépéèèyànlọkọ
ìyá-ar/egravedotbelow,anítaníńwágbaìyáòunl/eacutedotbelowkọjẹ
lójoojúm/oacutedotbelowyìí?
If a child is not told that a certain person is
its mother’s husband, the child asks who this
person is who comes everyday to take food
from its mother. (Without knowing the re-
lationship between two people, one cannot
understand their actions.)
3170. Bíàkùk/oacutedotbelowbákọláyé,àwọnẹgb/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowágbè
él/oacutedotbelowrun.
I fac o c kc r o w so ne a r t h ,i t sp e e r sr e s p o n d
in heaven. (A company always backs up its
leader.)
3171. Bíaráiléẹníbáńjẹkòkòròtíkòsunw/ogravedotbelown,
tíakòsọfúnun,hùrùh/egravedotbelowr/egravedotbelow-ẹr/egravedotbelowònííj/eacutedotbelowkásùn
lóru.
If a member of one’s household is eating bad
insects and is not cautioned, his or her hack-
Withinthecommunity 313


--- PAGE 327 ---
ing cough will not permit one any sleep dur-
ing the night. (If one does not counsel one’s
brother, one will share in his misfortune.)
3172. Bíẹniẹníbákúlókèèrè,àpẹta-ar/egravedotbelow
wálé.
If one’s relative dies far away from home,
the dead person’s relic is sent home. (How-
ever far a person wanders, something of that
person must eventually return home.)
3173. Bíikúiléòpani,tòdeòlèpani.
If the death at home does not kill one, the
death outside will not. (If one is secure at
home, one will be secure abroad.)
3174. Bíóbábáojú,ábáimúp/egravedotbelowlú.
Whatever disaster befalls the eye will also
befall the nose. (One shares in the fate of
people close to one.)
3175. Bíoríkan-ánbásunw/ogravedotbelownáranigba.
If a head is blessed with good fortune, it will
aﬀect a hundred others. (To be associated
with success is to beneﬁt from the success.)
3176. Binisí-binisí:/ogravedotbelowtáiléòríkòtòbinisí.
Push-one-into, push-one-into: one’s house-
hold enemy can ﬁnd no ditch to push one
into. (The enemy in your own home cannot
openly hurt you.)
E
3177. Èèyànẹnilàńﬁààyèọmọhàn;nígbàtó
bádòkúgbogboayéníńyọrí-ir/egravedotbelow.
One presents one’s live child only to one’s
kin; when it dies, the world makes itself
scarce. (One shares good fortune only with
those who will stand by in times of need.)
3178. Egbò-ók/egravedotbelow,inák/egravedotbelow,ohùnèèyàn-ánk/egravedotbelow.
The ulcer grows bigger, the ﬁre glows redder,
and one’s voice grows hoarse. (The unrelent-
ing misbehavior of others necessitates one’s
continuous admonition.)
3179. Èkútéilétófàk/ogravedotbelowsíl/egravedotbelowtóńj/ogravedotbelowbẹ,tẹnuẹni
lóf/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelow.
The house mouse that spares the sheath but
eats the knife is bent on provoking one. (A
person who deliberately provokes another is
spoiling for a ﬁght.)
3180. Enítere,èjìterelọjà-áﬁńkún.
The ﬁrst solitary person, then the second
solitary person: thus is the market ﬁlled. (A
collection of solitary individuals makes a
multitude. See the next entry.)
3181. Enítere,èjìtere,/ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbeloww/ogravedotbelowmù.
The ﬁrst solitary person, then the second
solitary person, eventually a multitude.
(This a variant of the preceding entry.)
3182. Èpìpàńpaara-ar/egravedotbelowóníòunńpaajá.
The hard tick is committing suicide but be-
lieves it is killing the dog. (The host’s death
is the parasite’s also; one destroys oneself
if one destroys one’s only support. A vul-
nerable person who does not lie low invites
disaster.)
Ẹ
3183. Ẹniẹl/eacutedotbelowniníńk/oacutedotbelowléfúnikán.
It is other people who build homes for
the termite. (One may beneﬁt from other
people’s labors.)
3184. Ẹníníìlúòdùn,kók/eacutedotbelowrùkógbaokolọ.
Whoever says the town is not pleasant
should pack his or her luggage and head for
the bush. (Antisocial people deserve to live
by themselves in the forest.)
3185. Ẹnitóbaọmọọl/oacutedotbelowmọlóríj/eacutedotbelow,òrìṣàinúilé
yóbatir/egravedotbelownáàj/eacutedotbelow.
314 relationships


--- PAGE 328 ---
Whoever ruins the lot of an innocent person
will have his own lot ruined by the god of
the hearth. (The gods visit retribution on
those who do evil to others.)
3186. Ẹnìkanníńkés/egravedotbelownílùú,tíaﬁńsọwípéà
ńlọsílùúakés/egravedotbelow.
O n l yo n ep e r s o ni nat o w nh a st oh a v eh i s
or her leg amputated before people will
say they are on their way to the amputee’s
town.
4 (One person’s blight rubs oﬀ on all
associated with him or her. Compare 3395.)
G
3187. Gà/mgravebàrípaFúlàní,kòl/eacutedotbelowj/oacutedotbelowńnú.
A Hausa person has killed a Fulani person;
there is no case to answer. (If the oﬀender
and the oﬀended are so close as to be vir-
tual twins, it is as though there has been no
oﬀense.
5 Compare 4970.)
Gb
3188. Gbódórùmíkíngbéàlàpàruọmọ-/ogravedotbelowrẹ.
Burden me with a mortar, and I will burden
your child with a denuded wall. (A vow to
pay like with like. Compare 3243.)
3189. Gbogboìkáfojúṣe/ogravedotbelowkan,àtà/mgravepàkò-óṣe
ti/egravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowt/ogravedotbelow.
All ﬁngers face in one direction; the thumb
alone goes its own way. (In a consensual
assembly, there is the loner who must go it
independently. Compare 3049.)
4. In Yoruba,ìlúakés/egravedotbelowcan mean either ‘‘amputee’s
town’’ or ‘‘amputees’ town.’’
5. The Hausa and the Fulani (Fulbe) live in the
northern parts of Nigeria and, as far as the Yoruba are
concerned, are indistinguishable.
I
3190. Ìbàdànkìígbeonílébíàjèjì.
The city Ibadan is never as hospitable to its
natives as to strangers. (Said of people who
are kinder to strangers than to their friends
or relatives.)
3191. Ifáníkájọwòó;moníkájọwòó;ohun
tíabájọwògígúnníńgún.
Ifá says we should mind it together; I say
we should mind it together; whatever all
mind together will come out just right.
(When all people pool their resources,
everything comes out right. This is a variant
of 3203.)
3192. Igiw/oacutedotbelowr/oacutedotbelowkúdanárú;èèyànburúkúbàsè
j/eacutedotbelow.
A crooked piece of wood scatters the ﬁre; an
evil person ruins a feast. (The presence of a
contrary person in a group robs the group
of any harmony.)
3193. Igúnpálórí,kòkanalábẹ.
The vulture’s baldness has nothing to do
with a barber. (Said of a certain person’s
troubles which are not of others’ making.)
3194. Igbóetíléòun/egravedotbelowgbin,àdàp/ogravedotbelowòwòòun
ìyà;yàráà-jùm/ogravedotbelow-gbéìtal/egravedotbelowninínú.
The forest close by the town is doomed to
cope with ﬁlth; a trading partnership ex-
poses one to suﬀering; a shared bedroom is
a breeding ground for mud-earth-dwelling
biting worms. (All relationships entail irri-
tants and require some capacity for accom-
modation.)
3195. Ìjàlódéloríndòwe.
It is the breaking out of a quarrel that turns
an innocent song into a satirical song.
(Innocent gestures take on hostile aspects in
a quarrel.)
Withinthecommunity 315


--- PAGE 329 ---
3196. Ìríniniìkíni;ìkíniniìj/eacutedotbelowni.
T os e eap e r s o ni st og r e e tt h ep e r s o n ;t ob e
greeted is to respond. (The well-bred person
greets people when he or she sees them, and
the well-bred person responds to greetings.)
3197. Ìwóniléoódẹ,Ìbaràniléàwòdì,atińpe
iléagánrán?
Ìwó is the home of the gray parrot; Ìbarà is
the home of the kite; what does one call the
home of the scarlet-billed Senegal parrot?
(Comment about a person who comes from
no one knows where.)
K
3198. Kíàdàbàsùú-sùúwífújẹdíẹdíẹ;k/eacutedotbelowyẹó
wíf/eacutedotbelowyẹ.
Let the pigeon talk to the woodpecker; let
bird speak to another bird. (Each person
should spread a matter under discussion to
as many ears as possible.)
3199. Kò-gbélé-kò-gb/oacutedotbelownàníńsìnkúàbíkú.
He-does-not-live-in-the-home-and-he-
does-not-live-on-the-path is the one who
buries the àbíkú.
(The footloose stranger will always be called
upon to help do things no one else wants
to do.)
3200. K/ogravedotbelowǹk/ogravedotbelowṣ/ogravedotbelowòdákuèlùb/oacutedotbelow.
The sieve does not sift yam ﬂour on its own.
(No individual is self-suﬃcient.)
L
3201. L/oacutedotbelowj/oacutedotbelowikú/ogravedotbelowtà,gbogbo/ogravedotbelowtàníńpéjọ.
On the day a merchant dies, all merchants
gather. (It is right and ﬁtting to do one’s
duty by one’s comrades.)
M
3202. ‘‘Mátaomisímilára’’kìídéodò;‘‘Má
farakànmí’’kìíwáọjà.
‘‘Do not splash water on me’’ should stay
away from the river; ‘‘Do not touch my per-
son’’ should stay away from the market.
(People who would rather be alone should
avoid gathering places. Compare 3216.)
3203. Moní‘‘Àjọwò,’’w/oacutedotbelownní‘‘Àjọwò’’;ohun
tíabájọwògígúnníńgún.
I said, ‘‘Let us mind it together,’’ and they
responded, ‘‘Let us mind it together’’; what-
ever has everyone’s attention and care comes
out straight. (Pooling resources ensures
success. This is a variant of 3191.)
3204. ‘‘Motiwí?’’‘‘B/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowlowí!’’/Egravedotbelow/egravedotbelowkannáà
làwọnméjèèjìńgb/eacutedotbelownusókè.
‘‘What did I say?’’ ‘‘So you said!’’ Both
mouths speak in unison. (Unanimous agree-
ment leaves no room for dispute.)
N
3205. ‘‘Ngòlèjẹìjẹkúj/egravedotbelow’’kìígbéàwùjọ/ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelow
èèyàn.
‘‘I will not eat rubbish’’ does not live in a
crowd. (One must have a thick skin if one
wishes to be part of a crowd.)
3206. ‘‘Ngònííf/eacutedotbelow,ngòníígbà’’:ibitósùnsí
lánàá,kòníísùnsíb/egravedotbelowlónìí.
‘ ‘ Iw i l ln e v e ra g r e e ,a n dIw i l ln e v e rc o n -
cede’’: wherever he slept last night, he will
not sleep there today. (A disagreeable per-
son is not welcome company anywhere for
long.)
316 relationships


--- PAGE 330 ---
O
3207. Òńwòmí,mòńwò/oacutedotbelow;taníṣeunnínú-
uwa?
All you do is look at me, and all I do is look
at you; which of us is any use to the other?
(A person who does not lift a hand to help
another deserves no help from that other in
return.)
3208. Ópaw/oacutedotbelowntánnínúọmọataare;kílàbá
túnfèèpo/egravedotbelowṣe?
He has removed all the seeds from the alli-
gator pepper; what now can one do with the
shell? (Said of a person who has taken the
best of some communal property, leaving
others with little that is of any use.)
3209. Ojúẹnilàḿbiaṣenilóhun.
It is in the presence of witnesses that one
challenges the person who caused one in-
jury. (One should make a point of exposing
one’s detractor or injurer to the public.)
3210. Ojúlùm/ogravedotbelowònííj/eacutedotbelowkánaìyá/ogravedotbelowgbàẹni.
The community will not let one ﬂog the
mother of one’s comrade. (Communal sanc-
tions prevent outrageous behavior. See the
following proverb for comparison.)
3211. Ojúlùm/ogravedotbelowònííj/eacutedotbelowkáhunósunìgb/eacutedotbelow.
The community will not let the miser sleep
in the wild. (Even the antisocial person
will beneﬁt from communal solicitousness.
Compare the preceding proverb.)
3212. Òkòlàńsọsígúnnugúnníyàmíràn;ibi
agbémọgúnlatińṣegúnlóore.
It is with stone missiles that the vulture is
greeted in foreign lands; only where the
vulture is known does it receive favorable
treatment. (Only where people know one’s
stature does one receive the respect one
deserves.)
3213. Onílù-úòf/eacutedotbelowkótú;abánigbélóńṣeéb/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelow.
The native of the town does not wish it to
break up; it is the doing of the sojourner.
(People with no stake in a venture might
wish to destroy; not so those with a stake
in it.)
3214. Oríkìíburúl/oacutedotbeloww/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelow.
One head is never [individually] unfortunate
in a large company. (Misfortune does not
single out a person from among a group.)
3215. ‘‘Òunlóm/ogravedotbelow’’kìímọníòunnìkan.
‘‘That is his business’’ never conﬁnes itself
to him. (A matter that concerns one person
inevitably comes to concern others also.)
3216. Òyìnbóòfáriwo,ók/oacutedotbelowlésígbó.
The white man dislikes noise; therefore he
built his house in the bush. (People who
cannot put up with the habits of others will
have to live in isolation.
6 Compare 3202.)
Ọ
3217. Ọbaníńgbaa-láì-lárá.
The king is the defense of the person who
has no kin. (The king is the ultimate protec-
tor of his people.)
3218. Ọb/egravedotbelowtódànù,òfòonílé,òfòàlejò.
The stew that spilled [is] a loss to the host
and a loss to the visitor. (The destruction of
anything valuable is a loss to everybody.)
3219. Ọk/oacutedotbelowkú,ọmọọbam/eacutedotbelowta-ápète;Ọb/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowmú
epo,Lálámúiy/ogravedotbelow,Àjùw/oacutedotbelownmúata.
The husband died, and three princesses
6. During the colonial period, Europeans lived
in reservations well removed from African dwellings.
Separated by a ‘‘sanitizing’’ buﬀer of forest, they thus
lived in the bush as far as Africans were concerned.
Withinthecommunity 317


--- PAGE 331 ---
made their contribution [to the feast]; Ọb/egravedotbelow
brought palm oil, Lálá brought salt, and
Àjùw/oacutedotbelown brought pepper. (Said of people
who are supposed to carry out a project
but who cannot eﬀectively coordinate their
eﬀorts.)
7
3220. Ọláadìẹnialámù-úﬁḿmuominínú
agada.
It is by the grace of the chicken that the liz-
ard can drink out of a potsherd. (People
may beneﬁt from others’ good fortune.)
8
3221. Ọmọdégb/oacutedotbelown,Ààr/eacutedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelown,laﬁńtẹil/egravedotbelowIf/egravedotbelow.
A youth is wise, and the chief is wise: that
is the principle by which people go about at
If/egravedotbelow. (A youth’s counsel is as worth entertain-
i n ga sac h i e f’ s . )
3222. Ọmọdéòjobì,àgbàòjoyè.
The youth does not eat kola nuts; the elder
does not win the chieftaincy title. (If you
do not cultivate others, even those lesser
than yourself, then you cannot expect any
consideration from them.)
3223. /Ogravedotbelowpẹtódarí,igbà-ák/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelow.
The palm tree whose top is bent to the
ground is rejected by the climbing rope. (If
you pose no challenge, people won’t expend
any eﬀort in dealing with you.)
3224. /Ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowèèyànkìíwọOròkíOrògbéwọn.
A multitude of people cannot enter the Orò
grove and be carried away by Orò. (There is
strength and security in numbers.)
3225. /Ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowèèyànníńj/eacutedotbelowjànmáà.
It is a multitude of people that is called
7. The three princesses were married to the dead
man, but what they have brought will not suﬃce to
make a feast.
8. The lizard drinks the water left out in a potsherd
for the chicken.
a congregation. (No one person can be a
multitude.)
3226. /Ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowleṣúﬁyaigilóko.
It is by means of their numbers that locusts
t e a rd o w nab r a n c ho nt h ef a r m .( T h e r ei s
strength in numbers.)
3227. /Ogravedotbelowrànhànnìyàn-hànnìyàn;/ogravedotbelowràn
hànnìyàn-hànnìyàn,èèyànlàńﬁhàn.
Terrible, terrible problems; terrible prob-
lems must be brought to people’s attention.
(Never keep your problems to yourself.)
9
3228. /Ogravedotbelowràntóbáṣeojúìlúòfarasin.
Whatever happened in the presence of the
whole town cannot be kept secret. (It is
pointless to be secretive about something
everybody already knows about.)
3229. /Ogravedotbelowrunńyab/ogravedotbelow,kìíṣ/ogravedotbelowrànẹnìkan.
The sky falling down is not any one per-
son’s problem. (One should not be overly
concerned at the threat of a danger that is
general. See the following entry.)
3230. /Ogravedotbelowrunńyab/ogravedotbelow,òńyẹrí;ìwọnìkanni?
The sky is falling and you are ducking your
head; are you the only one [in danger]?
(There is no sense in trying to avoid a dan-
ger that is general. See the previous entry.)
3231. /Ogravedotbelowṣínmọìw/egravedotbelow,inúḿbíẹyẹoko.
The ﬁsh eagle knows how to swim; the other
birds of the forest seethe with anger. (People
are ever jealous of others’ accomplishments.)
3232. /Ogravedotbelowt/ogravedotbelow/ogravedotbelowt/ogravedotbelowèyílànaìgbín?Ìpére-ékúoò
sunkún,ìlák/ogravedotbelowṣẹ-/eacutedotbelowkúoòg bààw/egravedotbelow,obáẹl/eacutedotbelowtẹ
l/oacutedotbelownàot/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelow,odòńgbéìṣáwùrúlọoní‘‘D/egravedotbelow/egravedotbelow,
d/egravedotbelow/egravedotbelow,máarà’’;talòńṣeànafún?
What sort of in-law are you to the snail? A
9. The expression hánnìyàn(or, better,hàn-ǹ-yàn
for hanèèyàn) literally means ‘‘show people.’’
318 relationships


--- PAGE 332 ---
small snail dies and you do not cry; tiny
snails die and you do not abstain from eat-
ing; you see the grasshopper on the path
and you step on it; the stream is carry-
ing rounded small snails away and you say
‘‘Float gently away!’’ To whom do you per-
form in-law obligations? (Said of people
who display no fellow feeling with anyone.)
3233. /Ogravedotbelowtùnìbáp/ogravedotbelowtóÌbàdàn,à-múró-yaróni
òj/eacutedotbelow.
/Ogravedotbelowtùn could have grown as populous as
Ibadan but for the addiction of its people
to vengeance. (Insistence on vengeance will
disperse a community.)
3234. /Ogravedotbelowtúnwẹòsì,òsìwẹ/ogravedotbelowtúnlọw/oacutedotbelowﬁḿm/oacutedotbelow.
The right washing the left and the left wash-
ing the right is the way to get the hands
clean. (Success in a venture depends on
cooperation.)
3235. Ọw/oacutedotbelowepolayéḿbánilá,ayékìíbáni
láw/oacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowj/egravedotbelow.
The world will join one in licking ﬁngers
dripping with palm oil but not in licking
ﬁngers dripping with blood. (People will
share your good fortune with you, but not
your misfortune.)
3236. /Ogravedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowni/ogravedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowikán,/ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowni/ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowèèrùn.
The orderliness is the orderliness of termites;
the multiplicity is the multiplicity of the
swarming brown ants. (Said in describing a
great multitude attending an event.)
3237. Ọw/oacutedotbelowọmọdéòtópẹpẹ,ọw/oacutedotbelowàgbàòwọ
kèrègbè;iṣ/eacutedotbelowtíàgbà-ábábẹọmọdékómáṣek/ogravedotbelow
/oacutedotbelow;gbogbowalaníohuntíalèṣefúnra-awa.
The youth’s hand cannot reach the rafters,
and the elder’s hand cannot enter the gourd;
the youth should not refuse to run the
errand on which the elder sends him or her;
each one of us can do something for the
other. (Everybody needs someone some-
time; therefore, one should not refuse to aid
others, even those one thinks one will never
need.)
3238. Ọw/oacutedotbelowpúp/ogravedotbelowníńpaosùn.
Many hands are required to rub camwood
powder on the body. (Many hands cooperat-
ing ensure that a task is thoroughly done.)
3239. /Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelowògb/oacutedotbelow‘‘Wòde,’’Ìjèṣàògb/oacutedotbelow‘‘Wọdà,’’
/Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelow‘‘Wọdà’’bíẹnígb/oacutedotbelowFá.
/Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow people do not understand ‘‘Wòde,’’
Ìjèṣà people do not understand ‘‘Wọdà’’
[‘‘Ìwọdà?’’]; /Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow people understand ‘‘Wọ
dà’’ as well as they understand Ifá. (What
one person knows, another person does
not know; together they can solve all their
problems.)
10
P
3240. Pàǹlààkàṣùníḿbágbọọrọiṣuwá.
A large loaf of corn meal is what comes of a
big yam.
11 (The good that one does brings a
recompense in kind in the future. Compare
3321.)
3241. Pípélàńpégb/oacutedotbelown,akìípég/ogravedotbelow.
People assemble to seek wisdom collec-
tively; people do not assemble in order to
become stupid. (Consultation should lead to
wisdom, not folly.)
S
3242. S/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow-s/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowwà,b/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowniẹnímáagb/oacutedotbelow
ḿbẹ.
10. Wòdein Ìjèṣà would mean ‘‘Look outside.’’Ìwọ
dà?in /Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow would mean ‘‘Where are you?’’
11. In plain language the statement isÀkàṣùpàǹlà
níńmúiṣugbọọrọwá, ‘‘A huge loaf of corn meal is what
brings a long yam.’’
Withinthecommunity 319


--- PAGE 333 ---
There is the loquacious person, and so
also there is the person willing to listen.
(If people are willing to talk, others will be
willing to listen.)
T
3243. T/egravedotbelowmínt/egravedotbelow/oacutedotbelow,layégbà.
Step on me and I will step on you is what
life takes. (In life we must act toward others
as they act toward us. Compare 3188.)
3244. Tijúfúnmikíntijúfúnọ;ẹnitótijú
fúnnilàńtijúfún.
Behave with decorum toward me, and I
will behave with decorum toward you; only
those who approach one with decorum earn
decorum in return. (Act toward people the
way you would like them to act toward you.)
3245. Túlùú-túlùú,ẹyẹElé/mgravepe.
Town disperser, the Elé/mgravepe bird. (A person
who carries rumors from people to people
will cause dissension in the community.)
Y
3246. Yánníbo-ómúerèérún;gb/egravedotbelowgìrì-íṣàn.
Yánníbo chewed up the black-eyed peas;
the black-eyed-pea stew is watery. (Said of
people who ruin or deplete what was set
aside for the beneﬁt of a whole group.)
3247. ‘‘Yóbàáọ,’’kìíbaẹnìkanmọ.
‘‘A pox on you!’’ does not limit its eﬀect to
only one person. (Ill fortune invoked for
speciﬁc people aﬀects others close to them.)
320 relationships


--- PAGE 334 ---
On relationships with elders
A
3248. Akìít/eacutedotbelownífúnẹniiléjókòó.
One does not spread a mat for a member
of the household to sit on. (Acquaintances
should not insist on being waited upon like
strangers.)
3249. A-bániṣe-mábàániṣe-m/oacutedotbelow:àbùṣà
fáláṣejùkété-kété.
He-that-once-fraternized-with-one-but-
stops-doing-so: one would do well to give
such a person a wide berth. (A friend turned
enemy is a danger to be avoided.)
3250. A-bániw/oacutedotbelowràn-bá-ò-rídá;ófúnniléyìítí
kòwuni;ópaọmọtúnọmọr/ogravedotbelow.
He-who-helps-one-ﬁnd-trouble-when-one-
has-none gives what one does not want; he
kills a child and returns to soothe the child.
(A person who involves one in diﬃculties
by his actions is no friend, however much
he might pretend to be. See the following
entry.)
3251. A-bániw/oacutedotbelowràn-bá-ò-rídá;óyék/oacutedotbelowńdú-
k/oacutedotbelowńdús/eacutedotbelowyinẹl/eacutedotbelowyin;ódiòkútas/eacutedotbelowrùẹnitó
fúy/eacutedotbelow.
He-who-helps-one-ﬁnd-trouble-when-one-
has-none lays huge things among other
people’s eggs; he packs rocks into the load
of a person who[se load] is light.
1 ( T h i si sa
variant of the preceding entry.)
1. Here is an example of peculiar proverbial con-
structions. Instead of ódiòkútas/eacutedotbelowrùẹnit/eacutedotbelowrù-ur/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowfúy/eacutedotbelow
(‘‘he packs rocks into the load of the person whose
3252. Àdàp/ogravedotbelowowóníḿmúìjàwá.
Saving money in joint accounts results in
quarrels. (Certain things should not be a
part of friendship.)
3253. Adébipanikìíṣ/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowẹni.
He who inﬂicts hunger on one is no friend.
(Know your enemy.)
3254. Ajéníḿbaojú/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowj/eacutedotbelow.
It is money that brings a frown to the brow
of friendship. (Nothing ruins a friendship
more surely than the intrusion of money.)
3255. Àpákìíj/ogravedotbelowl/ogravedotbelowkódàbíaraẹni;kájàkár/eacutedotbelow
òdàbí/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowìpil/egravedotbelowṣ/egravedotbelow.
However smooth a scar is, it is never the
same as the original skin; a mended quarrel
is not like original friendship. (Relationships
may be mended, but it is better if they never
need mending.)
3256. A-ríre-báni-jẹ,àgb/ogravedotbelownìsàl/egravedotbelow;òkúkú
láàár/ogravedotbelow,àgb/ogravedotbelown-/oacutedotbelownyàkótódal/eacutedotbelow.
A-thing-that-shares-only-good-things-with-
one, the lower jaw; a person dies in the
morning, and the jaw separates before night-
fall. (Fair-weather friends are like the lower
jaw that separates from the head as soon as
the owner dies.)
load is light’’), we haveódiòkútas/eacutedotbelowrùẹnitófúy/eacutedotbelow(‘‘he
packs rocks into the load of a person who is light’’).
The hearer, of course, understands that ‘‘light’’ is meant
to describe the load.


--- PAGE 335 ---
B
3257. Bíabágbáilégbá/ogravedotbelownà,/ogravedotbelowd/ogravedotbelowààtànlà
ńdàásí.
After one has swept the house and the path-
ways, one dumps the dirt at the rubbish
heap. (However long a matter is discussed,
its resolution devolves to the proper agent.
Compare 4857.)
3258. Bíijóbádiijóàgbà,ìlùayípadà.
When the dance becomes a dance of elders,
the drumming should change. (One must
match one’s behavior to one’s circum-
stances.)
3259. Bíọmọdéláṣọbíàgbà,kòlèlákìísàbí
àgbà.
A youth may have as many clothes as an
elder, but he will not have as many rags as
an elder. (Though a youth may enjoy the
same rank as an elder, he cannot match the
elder in experience.)
E
3260. Ègbénifúnọmọtóníbàbáòúnkéré.
W o eb e t i d et h ec h i l dw h os a y sh i so rh e r
father is insigniﬁcant. (Children who belittle
their father deserve the worst fate possible.)
Ẹ
3261. /Egravedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelowniwájú:alugbọnbaba.
One’s older brother [is a suitable] substitute
father. (Respect others of your elders as you
would your parents.)
3262. Ẹnitíabádéìlúòtóẹnitíadéìlúm/ogravedotbelow.
The person with whom one came to a town
is not as important as the person one came
to know after arriving in the town. (A cur-
rent friend or benefactor is more important
than a sometime friend or benefactor.)
3263. Ẹnitíabánídìíàbàníńj/eacutedotbelowbaba.
The person one ﬁnds settled at the granary
is the lord of the place. (One should give
d u er a g a r dt ot h o s ew h oh a v eb e e nt op l a c e s ,
or accomplished things, before one’s time.
Compare 3326 and 3456.)
I
3264. Ìjàòm/egravedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelown.
A quarrel does not know who is the elder.
(In a quarrel one is likely to forget all pro-
prieties.)
3265. Ìkonkoso-ótiiripaeku,ìw/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowtiiripa
ẹja,ọkàabàbà-átiiriwoolóko;bíọmọdéó
bàáàgbàjẹuntítiiriníńtiiri.
The mousetrap leans to one side to kill
the mouse; the hook bends in order to kill
the ﬁsh; the guinea corn leans sideways to
w a t c ht h ef a r m e r ;i fac h i l dw i l le a tw i t ha n
elder, it is proper for the child to lean to the
side. (One must defer to one’s elders and
superiors and not be too forward in their
company.)
3266. Ipaab/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowlokùnńt/ogravedotbelow.
It is the path blazed by the needle that the
thread follows. (One should emulate one’s
elders.)
K
3267. Kád/ogravedotbelowbál/egravedotbelow,kápaìgb/ogravedotbelownw/oacutedotbelowm/oacutedotbelow:óníohun
tíńṣefúnni.
To prostrate oneself and bring one’s hands
together: there are certain things one gains
from so doing. (Paying due homage to one’s
elders brings good things one’s way.)
2
2. The posture described is the Yoruba man’s way of
showing respect to his elders.
322 relationships


--- PAGE 336 ---
O
3268. ‘‘Óḿb/ogravedotbelow!’’lóyẹbaba;bíbabábádé,
/ogravedotbelowrántán.
‘ ‘ W a t c ho u t ,h e r eh ec o m e s ’ ’i sw h a tb e ﬁ t s
the patriarch; after he has arrived, there
is no more threat. (Fear of what a person
m i g h td oi so f t e nam o r ep o w e r f u ld e t e r r e n t
than what the person is actually capable of
doing. Compare 1081.)
Ọ
3269. Ọmọdéf/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowkú,oníẹnuàgbàńrùn.
A child seeks death [when] he says the
mouth of an elder stinks. (Disrespect for
elders is a death wish.)
3270. Ọmọdékìíwòṣ/ogravedotbelowṣ/ogravedotbelowníbùjókòóàgbà.
A youth does not stare when in the com-
pany of elders. (Etiquette demands that
youth avert its eyes from age, or at least look
deferentially at it.)
3271. /Ogravedotbelow-pani-nítànníńﬁojúléẹnihanni.
It is the person who tells one one’s own his-
tory that shows one the doorway to one’s
own home. (We would do well to pay at-
tention to the words of the sages who know
more than we do about our own lineage.)
3272. /Ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowtíapékíbabamágb/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelow,babaní
ńparí/egravedotbelow.
A matter that one tries to keep from the ears
of the patriarch will eventually come before
the patriarch for resolution. (The elders have
a right to be privy to all important matters,
because keeping order and peace is their
responsibility.)
3273. /Ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowtíoníkọlàábásọ,ab/eacutedotbelowgée.
Whatever statement the circumciser makes
is cut oﬀ by a razor.
3 (When the person in
charge has spoken, the discussion is over.
The following is a variant.)
3274. /Ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowtíọbábásọ,ab/eacutedotbelowgée.
Whatever the king says is severed by a razor.
(The king’s word is ﬁnal. See the previous
entry.)3. The expression ab/eacutedotbelowgée,literally ‘‘it is severed by
a razor,’’ is employed to indicate ﬁnality. In this case the
proverb plays on the idea that the circumciser uses a
sharp razor to ply his trade.
Withelders 323


--- PAGE 337 ---
On relationships with friends
and acquaintances
A
3275. Akìíbáẹrúmul/egravedotbelow,kábáolúwamul/egravedotbelow,
kámádaẹnìkan.
One cannot make a pact with the slave and
make a pact with the master and not betray
one of them. (One cannot enter into alliance
with people whose interests are in conﬂict.)
3276. Akìídúp/eacutedotbelowaraẹni.
One does not give thanks to oneself. (Grati-
tude is superﬂuous among close friends or
relatives.)
3277. Akìíﬁibisúolóore.
One does not return evil to one’s benefactor.
(Never render evil for good.)
3278. Akìíﬁò tít/oacutedotbelowsínúgbàwìnìkà.
One does not leave truthfulness inside to
purchase wickedness on credit. (Never go
out of your way to injure others.)
3279. Akìíﬁ/ogravedotbelowràn-anpápálọẹja;akìíﬁ
/ogravedotbelowràn-anodòlọàfè.
One does not invite a ﬁsh to the grassland;
one does not entice the ﬁeld mouse to the
stream. (Do not expect people to destroy
themselves at your bidding.)
3280. Akìígbaàkàkàl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowakítì;akìígba
iléebabaẹnil/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowẹni.
One does not deny the monkey the habit
of squatting; one does not wrest a person’s
father’s home from him. (Respect others’
rights.)
3281. Akìígbàl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow-ọ‘‘Mérìí.’’
One does not take from ‘‘I do not have.’’
(Never seek to take from the destitute the
little they do have.)
3282. Akìíría-r/eacutedotbelow-má-jà;akìíría-jà-má-
rè/eacutedotbelow.
No one ever sees friends who do not quarrel;
no one ever sees people who quarrel and
never make up. (Friendship and quarrels
cannot go on forever, unbroken.)
3283. Akìíṣe/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowèròkáy/ogravedotbelow;èròyórelébó
d/ogravedotbelowla.
One does not befriend a sojourner and re-
joice; the sojourner will leave for home
come tomorrow. (Permanent ties are to be
preferred to ﬂeeting ones.)
3284. Akìíṣìp/egravedotbelow-ẹ‘‘Nàró’’fábuké.
One does not give the advice ‘‘Stand up
straight’’ to a humpback. (Do not impose
impossible conditions on others.)
3285. Àńdáhùnsígbèsè;góńgóorí/egravedotbelowlakìí
kán.
One may intervene in the discussion of
a debt, but one does not break its spike.
(Though one may discuss others’ debts, one
has no obligation to settle them.)
3286. Abanij/eacutedotbelowbaara/egravedotbelowj/eacutedotbelow.
A detractor injures his own reputation.
(A person who maligns other people re-


--- PAGE 338 ---
ﬂects badly on his own character. See the
following entry.)
3287. Abanij/eacutedotbelowòníígbayì.
A detractor will not earn a good reputation.
(This is a variant of the previous entry.)
3288. A-báni-jẹ-má-bàáni-ṣe,ìfàèèyàn;ẹníjẹ
dídùnníńjẹkíkan.
He-who-shares-one’s-food-but-does-not-
share-one’s-tasks [is a] freeloader; he who
eats the sweet should also eat the sour.
(People should not be fair-weather friends.)
3289. Abánikú/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowṣ/ogravedotbeloww/oacutedotbelown;abánikú,ogunní
ḿbanilọ.
A friend who would die with one is rare;
he who would do so accompanies one even
to war. (Few friends will risk death by ac-
companying one to a war that they have no
interest in.)
3290. Abánir/eacutedotbelowﬁàfoìjàsíl/egravedotbelow.
A person who befriends another should
make allowances for quarrels. (It is realis-
tic to expect that a friendship will not be
without occasional quarrels.)
3291. Àdánùńláńlánifúnẹnitóf/eacutedotbelowni,tíaò
f/eacutedotbelow.
W h a tag r e a tl o s si ti sf o rap e r s o nw h ol o v e s
you but that you do not love. (Unrequited
love is a painful thing.)
3292. Àdàp/ogravedotbelowm/oacutedotbelowobìnrinòṣééyanjú.
Ac o n g r e s so fw o m e n[ o rw i t hw o m e n ]
is not easy to unravel. (Problems in cer-
tain relationships defy intervention from
outside.)
3293. Adáríjininíńṣ/egravedotbelowt/eacutedotbelowẹj/oacutedotbelow.
He who forgives takes the wind out of the
case’s sails. (To forgive is to be magnani-
mous.)
3294. Adì/eacutedotbelowdàmílóògùnnù;mof/oacutedotbelowọl/eacutedotbelowyin.
The chicken spilled my medicine; I broke its
eggs. (One pays back tit for tat.)
3295. A-dùn-ún-jẹbíàjẹp/ogravedotbelow.
A delight to eat, like something one shares
with others. (It is more delightful to share
food than to eat alone.)
3296. Aﬁniṣ/egravedotbelowsínàlè,óníòunójẹìb/eacutedotbelowpẹ.
Concubine-who-would-disgrace-one says
she would like some papaya. (True love
and true friendship make no impossible
demands. This is a variant of 3322.)
3297. Afínjúméjìkìíwoòjìjiwọnnínúagada.
Two fops will not share the same mirror.
(Arrogance leaves no room for rivalry.)
3298. Àﬁohunwéohun,àf/ogravedotbelowrànwé/ogravedotbelowràn;ﬁ/ogravedotbelowràn
jìkálèyinni.
Recalling-similar-matters-of-the-past,
recalling-similar-problems-of-the-past, for-
give an oﬀense and earn praise. (One should
forgive and not keep recalling past oﬀenses.
See 1554 and the following entry.)
3299. À-ﬁ-/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow-wé-/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowòj/eacutedotbelowkí/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowtánb/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow.
Allowing-a-current-matter-to-remind-one-
of-similar-matters-in-the-past prevents a
quarrel from ending easily. (This is similar
to the previous entry.)
3300. Af/oacutedotbelowjúonílù;atiroàrìnjó;bàtá/ogravedotbelowg/egravedotbelowd/egravedotbelow;
ṣaworoòkòtó.
A blind drummer; a lame dancer;bàtádrum
made from banana stem; bells made of snail
shells. (All of a kind.)
1
3301. Àgùntàntóbáajárìnáj/egravedotbelowgb/eacutedotbelow.
As h e e pt h a tf r a t e r n i z e sw i t hd o g sw i l le a t
1. The banana stem is no substitute for the/ogravedotbelowm/ogravedotbelow
usually used to make this type of drum, and snail shells
are poor substitutes for the usual brass bells.
Withfriendsandacquaintances 325


--- PAGE 339 ---
excrement. (One inevitably assumes the
habits of one’s constant company.)
3302. Àgbàòsínílùú/ogravedotbelowk/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelow.
There are no elders in the town of squirrels.
(Some cultures lack proper regard for age.
Compare 4224.)
3303. Àgbàtíkòf/ogravedotbelowm/oacutedotbelowniníkùnkìíf/ogravedotbelowm/oacutedotbelowni
lórí.
An elder who does not make an impression
on one’s stomach does not make an impres-
sion on one’s mind. (If a venerable elder
cannot feed you, he may not command you,
either.)
3304. Àgbàtíkòyánil/eacutedotbelowgbàáìk/ogravedotbelowk/ogravedotbelow,bóbá
dáṣ/eacutedotbelowilésíl/egravedotbelowakìílọ.
An elder who does not secretly lend one six
pence: if he embarks on building a house,
one does not show up to help. (One returns
favor for favor.)
3305. Àgbàtóbúèwelèweḿbú.
It is an elder who insults a youth that a
youth insults. (Elders earn respect only if
they respect others. Compare the following
two entries.)
3306. Àgbàtógbagbàdù,ógbaìtùnú.
A ne l d e rw h oh a se x p e r i e n c e dad i s a s t e rh a s
earned commiseration. (Be sensitive to other
people’s diﬃculties.)
3307. Àgbàtógbinèbùìkà,oríọmọ-ọr/egravedotbelowniyó
hùsí.
An elder who plants yams of wickedness will
see them sprout on the head of his child.
(The wickedness of the father will be visited
on the children. Compare 702 and 1306.)
3308. Àgbàtójẹà-jẹ-ì-w/egravedotbelowhìnniyóruẹrù-u
r/egravedotbelowdélé.
The elder who eats with abandon will carry
his own load to the house. (If an elder oﬀers
no food to the youth around him, he cannot
expect any help from them.)
2
3309. Àgbàlagbàkìímékudáníkódiamùn-
rín.
An elder does not hold a rat and see it turn
into a lizard. (One should be able to rely on
an elder.)
3310. ÀgbàlagbàńfìbínúlọsÍlọrin,aníkóra
tìróòb/ogravedotbelow.
An elder is on his way to Ìlọrin in anger, and
we ask him to bring back galena for us.
3 (Be
sensitive to others’ problems. Compare the
following entry.)
3311. Àgbàlagbàńfìr/oacutedotbelowjúr/ogravedotbelowrun,aníkókílékó
k/oacutedotbelownà;ojúrerelóﬁńlọ?
An elder is making his way to heaven with
great reluctance, and we ask him to give our
regards to all and sundry; is he departing
cheerfully? (One should be sensitive to other
people’s predicaments. This is a variant of
the preceding entry.)
3312. Àgbàráòjò-óbánijà,óbáojúdeẹnilọ.
The rain ﬂood quarrels with one yet passes
in front of one’s house.
4 (In spite of dis-
agreements, people must still act in concert
when necessary.)
2. Àjẹìw/egravedotbelowhìnliterally means ‘‘eating without look-
ing back’’: in other words, eating without considering
what is proper. What is proper is for elders to leave a
little of their food for the young people. That gesture is
rewarded by the youths, who will stop the elder from
doing any task and do it themselves. If the elder omits
this gesture, he loses the consideration and respect of
the youth.
3. Galena is used as a cosmetic on the eyelashes and
eyebrows.
4. In Yoruba etiquette, people who meet or pass
must exchange greetings, whether they know each other
or not, but quarrels do make people ignore this rule.
Since rainwater cannot exchange greetings with the
owners of the homes it ﬂows past, it is here construed
as having a quarrel with them.
326 relationships


--- PAGE 340 ---
3313. Àgb/egravedotbelowjẹ-/eacutedotbelowgbàw/oacutedotbelownlàtán,w/oacutedotbelownníkápaá
nípáńṣá.
After the pumpkin had saved them (in a
famine), they ordered that it be cut into
ordinary calabash. (Never forget those who
stick by you in your times of diﬃculty.)
3314. Àìﬁnipeni,àìfèèyànpèèyànlaráoko-óﬁ
ńsánìbàǹt/eacutedotbeloww/ogravedotbelowlú.
Lack-of-regard-for-anyone, lack-of-regard-
for-people makes the bush dweller enter the
town in his loincloth. (Self-respect implies
respect for others.)
3315. Ajákìígbàgbéolóore.
A dog never forgets a benefactor. (One will,
or should, always remember one’s benefac-
tor.)
3316. Ajákọimíẹl/eacutedotbelowd/egravedotbelow;ẹl/eacutedotbelowd/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowkọimíajá.
The dog snubs the pig’s excrement; the pig
snubs the dog’s excrement. (Neither party in
a relationship will accept disrespect from the
other.)
3317. Ajátóyókìíbáàìyóṣeré.
A satiated dog does not frolic with a hun-
gry dog. (Avoid levity in the company of
benighted people.)
3318. Ajègbodòńwáẹnikúnra.
The-eater-of-new-yams seeks people to
join him. (A culprit always wants company.
Compare 4912.)
3319. Àjọjẹòdùnbíẹnìkanòní;bíabánílà
ńṣeàjọjẹ.
Sharing of food is not pleasant if one par-
ticipant has nothing; it is when one has
something that one shares. (Those who
share expect something in return.)
3320. Àjọsùnníḿmúináwásáṣọ.
Sleeping together infects clothes with lice.
(One takes on some of the blemishes of one’s
associates.)
3321. Àkàṣùbà/mgravebàlóṣùàgà,iṣugbọọrọ
l/eacutedotbelowj/ogravedotbelowdún.
A sizable corn loaf in the month before the
harvest, a long yam in the month of the har-
vest. (A good turn when it is needed will be
repaid with accretion. Compare 3240.)
3322. Àlètíyóﬁniṣ/egravedotbelowsínníńbèrèìb/eacutedotbelowpẹ.
It is a concubine who wishes to disgrace one
that demands pawpaw. (Those who deliber-
ately force one into compromising behavior
seek to disgrace one. This is a variant of
3296.)
3323. À-múró-yaróòj/eacutedotbelowkí/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowótán.
Repaying-injury-with-injury prevents
the settlement of disputes. (As long as a
wronged person insists on revenge, a quarrel
will not be settled.)
3324. Àpáǹtètèḿbẹláyé;kòsíl/oacutedotbelownà/ogravedotbelowrun.
‘ ‘ L e t ’ ss e ew h ow i l lb eﬁ r s tt og e tt h e r e ’ ’i s
found on this earth; it is not found on the
way to heaven.
5 (No one vies to be the ﬁrst
in heaven.)
3325. A-p/oacutedotbelown-ori-kéréògb/oacutedotbelownbía-yọwó-má-rà.
The-person-who-skimps-on-his-or-her-
merchandise is not as clever as the would-
be-customer-who-prices-the-merchandise-
but-resists-buying. (The seller may attempt
to scalp, but the buyer may refuse to buy.)
3326. Àràbànibàbá;ẹniabálábànibaba.
The silk-cotton tree is the father; the person
one ﬁnds at the hut is the lord. (Just as the
silk-cotton tree sways over all other trees,
the person who is ﬁrst in a place holds sway
over all others. Compare 3263 and 3456.)
5. Àpáǹtètèis a game children on an errand play
when there are alternate routes to their destination. The
children split into two groups, each party taking one
route and trying to arrive ﬁrst.
Withfriendsandacquaintances 327


--- PAGE 341 ---
3327. Àrífínilé-ìgb/eacutedotbelow,tíḿmúọmọdéwoìhòòhò
àgbà.
The disgrace that comes of using a commu-
nal latrine exposes an elder’s nakedness to
the young. (The contingencies of living in a
group sometimes expose one to insults one
would otherwise avoid.)
3328. Àrífíntíejò-óﬁyánahun.
Lack of proper regard makes a snake bite a
tortoise. (It is adding insult to injury for a
person to be belittled by someone far below
h i mo rh e r . )
3329. À-rí-ìgbọd/ogravedotbelow-wí,ẹranilétíńfojúdọdẹ.
Something-seen-but-unmentionable: a do-
mestic animal that disdains a hunter. (The
domestic animal may strut with impunity
before a hunter.)
3330. À-ríni-m/oacutedotbelowninià-kíni-m/oacutedotbelowni.
Seeing-one-with-a-person is greeting-one-
with-a-person. (The sort of reception one
receives depends on the sort of company one
is in.)
3331. A-rojú-fúnni-láwìn-ọjà-ásànjua-rojú-
sinni-lówólọ.
One-who-reluctantly-sells-to-one-on-credit
is preferable to one-who-reluctantly-asks-
for-his-money. (Someone who reluctantly
gives one something increases one’s stock
nonetheless; someone who reluctantly takes
from one decreases one’s stock. See the next
entry also.)
3332. A-r/oacutedotbelowjú-fúnni-lóhun-únsànjua-r/oacutedotbelowjú-
gbà-álọ.
One-who-reluctantly-gives-one-something
is preferable to one-who-reluctantly-takes-
it-back. (See the preceding entry.)
3333. AsínwínÌká,aṣiwèrèÌlúká,w/oacutedotbelowndáríjọ,
w/oacutedotbelowníàwọnńṣ/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelow.
The mad people of Ìká and the imbeciles
of Ìlúká got together and said they were all
friends. (Like people keep like company.)
3334. Àsọt/eacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelowkòj/eacutedotbelowkíìw/ogravedotbelowfàdiẹrúolówó.
A standing arrangement keeps the pawn
from becoming a slave of the creditor. (To
agree beforehand is to prevent misunder-
standings later.)
3335. Aṣiwèrèèèyànníńwípé/egravedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelownòtó;ẹnia
báníwájúníńṣebabafúnni.
Only an imbecile says that those older than
he or she are of no account; those who came
before one can ﬁll the role of father. (Never
disdain an elder.)
3336. Aṣọkan-ánkángunsáraeégúnju/ogravedotbelowkan
lọ.
One cloth is closer to the masquerader’s
body than others. (Some friends or relatives
are dearer than others.)
3337. A-t/ogravedotbelowrun-wáá-dọb/egravedotbelow-síná,eégún-unsálà.
One-who-comes-all-the-way-from-heaven-
to-upset-stew-on-the-ﬁre: masquerader
of the Muslim day of worship. (The mas-
querader who disrupts one’s projects is an
unwelcome visitor from heaven.)
3338. Awoníńperíawo.
Only mysteries can communicate with mys-
teries. (Only the initiate can gain access to
mysteries and their import.)
3339. Àwówówónitiirínwó;ìd/ogravedotbelowbál/egravedotbelownit/egravedotbelowbìtì;
bájábágbéegungunad/ogravedotbelowbál/egravedotbelowgbọọrọ.
Crashing completely is the mark of four
hundred; lying prone is the mark of the
snare; when a dog ﬁnds a bone, it lies down
ﬂat. (The proper posture before one’s elders
is a prone position.)
6
6. The proverb evokes images of things that lie
prone in order to indicate to the person to whom the
proverb is addressed what is expected of him, or to
328 relationships


--- PAGE 342 ---
B
3340. Bíabáńdíjeníbiiṣ/eacutedotbelow,ọw/oacutedotbelowamáayáni.
If people compete at a task, the task is soon
done. (Competition promotes eﬃciency.)
3341. Bíabáríọl/oacutedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowẹni,ṣ/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow-ṣ/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowlàńdà.
When one sees one’s conﬁdant, one runs
at the mouth like a spout. (In the right
company, one is uninhibited.)
7
3342. Bíabátoríigigbaodì,aṣeináfúnni
yá.
If one makes enemies because of wood, it
should make ﬁre for one to warm oneself.
(One should have something to show for
one’s pains.)
3343. Bíakòbáfìjàpàdé,akìífìjàtúká.
If people did not come together in a quarrel,
they should not part in a quarrel. (Friend-
ship should not be permitted to turn to
enmity.)
3344. Bíakòbájàakìír/eacutedotbelow.
If we have not quarreled, we cannot be
friends. (Friends do not appreciate each
other until after a quarrel.)
3345. Bíakòbápàdélókè ,aópàdélódò.
If we do not meet up on high, we will meet
down below. (Paths that have crossed will
somewhere, somehow, cross again.)
3346. Bíakòbáríohunfúnòrìṣàèrò,akìí
gbatorí-ir/egravedotbelow.
If one has nothing to oﬀer the god of trav-
indicate acceptance of the posture one knows one must
assume.
7. The worddà,‘‘to become,’’ is indistinguishable
from dà,‘‘to spill.’’ If one assumes the ﬁrst meaning,
then s/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelows/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowis ‘‘one who speaks [a great deal]’’; how-
ever, with the second meaning,s/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelows/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowbecomes an
onomatopoeic representation of the sound of pouring
water.
elers, one does not take from him what he
has. (If one has nothing to give another per-
son, one should not take what that person
has.)
3347. Bíàgbàlagbàkòbáríbijókòó,gbédìí-
gbédìíagbéọmọdé.
If an elder can ﬁnd no place to sit, lift-
bottom-lift-bottom lifts the youth. (If a
youth does not voluntarily show respect to
elders, forces beyond his control will compel
him.)
3348. Bíàgbàlagbà-ábáńs/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow,t/oacutedotbelowmọdéò
yájú,bóp/eacutedotbelowtítíámọohuntíw/oacutedotbelownńṣe.
If elders confer and the youth does not
exceed his station, sooner or later he will
know what they conferred about. (The well-
behaved youth will learn the way of the
elders.)
3349. Bíaráiléẹníbáforísọ,tíakòbám/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelow
kí,ìjàníńdà.
If a member of one’s household bumps his
or her head and one is careless in expressing
one’s sympathy, a quarrel results. (Sympathy
extended the wrong way leads to quarrels.)
3350. Bíaṣáájúòbám/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowrìn,ìgb/eacutedotbelowlará/egravedotbelowhìn
ńw/ogravedotbelow.
If the leader does not know his way, the
follower winds up in the bush. (The incom-
petence of the leader spells disaster for the
followers.)
3351. Bíèèyàn-ánbáṣeunkásọpéóṣeun;
bíèèyàn-ánbáṣèèyànkásọpéóṣèèyàn;
nítorípé,ohuntíaṣe,óyẹkógbeni.
If a person deserves gratitude, we should
s a yt h a th ed e s e r v e sg r a t i t u d e ;i fap e r s o ni s
k i n d l y ,w es h o u l ds a yt h a th ei sk i n d l y ,b e -
cause one should reap the rewards of one’s
actions. (A person’s goodness should be
publicly acknowledged.)
Withfriendsandacquaintances 329


--- PAGE 343 ---
3352. Bíekòlóbájúbàil/egravedotbelow,il/egravedotbelowálanu.
If the worm pays homage to the earth, the
earth opens for it. (The proper approach
will open any door.)
3353. Bíewébáp/eacutedotbelowláraọṣẹ,ádọṣẹ.
If a leaf remains long enough around soap,
it becomes part of the soap.
8 (People who re-
main long enough in association eventually
become alike.)
3354. Bí/egravedotbelowbìtìòpaeku,akóẹyìnf/eacutedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowyìn.
If the snare does not kill the rat, it returns
the kernel bait to the owner. (If a performer
will not carry out a task for which he or she
has received payment, he or she returns the
payment.)
3355. Bíẹl/eacutedotbelowd/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowbápàf/ogravedotbelowtán,ẹnirerení
ḿmáa-áwáﬁyílára.
After a pig has wallowed in the mud, it seeks
a good person to soil with the mud. (Evil
people always look for virtuous people to
implicate. Compare 3739.)
3356. Bíinábáwọlé,òkùnkùnaparadà.
When light enters the house, darkness re-
moves itself. (When one’s superiors arrive,
one yields authority to them.)
3357. Bíkòtó/egravedotbelowrù,kòtóìsájú?
If it does not strike fear, does it not merit
deference? (If one would not do a thing out
of fear, could one not do it out of respect or
as a favor?)
3358. ‘‘Bíobáṣemímàṣe/oacutedotbelow’’nigioko-óﬁ
ńdádé.
‘‘If you injure me, I will injure you in re-
turn’’; it is thus that trees in the forest sprout
crowns. (Rivalry or antagonism is often the
spur for glorious achievements.)
8. The traditional soap is wrapped in leaves.
3359. Bíótińṣeiṣu/ogravedotbelowbẹlóyé;bíótińṣèyàwó
ọkọ-ọr/egravedotbelowlóm/ogravedotbelow;bíotińṣemíẹbi/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelow-/egravedotbelowmi.
H o wt h ey a mf e e l si sk n o w no n l yt ot h e
knife; how the wife feels is known only to
the husband; for how I feel, ask my friend.
(The people closest to a person know best
that person’s condition.)
3360. BíótiwùkíOlúk/ogravedotbelowtúngbójútó,Aja-
gùnnànibàbá-ar/egravedotbelow.
However brave theOlúk/ogravedotbelowtúnmight be, the
Ajagùnnàis his father.
9 (However great the
s o nt u r n so u tt ob e ,h em u s ts t i l ld e f e rt o
his father; however successful the youth, he
owes respect to the elders.)
3361. Bíótiwùkíọmọdétètèjító,/ogravedotbelownàniyó
bàákùkùté.
However early the youth may rise from the
bed, he will ﬁnd the stump already on the
road. (In some respects, the youth cannot
compete with his elders.)
3362. Bíoríkan-ánsunw/ogravedotbelown,aranigba.
If one head is fortunate, it will aﬀect others.
(One person’s good fortune spills over to his
or her associates.)
3363. Bíorogúnìyáẹníbájuìyáẹnilọ,ìyálà
ńpèé.
If one’s mother’s co-wife is older than one’s
mother, one calls her mother. (One shows
the same respect to all elders as one would
show to one’s parents.)
3364. Bíowóbáp/ogravedotbelow/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowàtèròap/ogravedotbelow;bówóbá
tángbogbowọnawábigbàlọ.
If money is plentiful, friends and guests are
plentiful; when the money is gone, all of
them will ﬁnd other places to go. (People
will swarm around the rich but disappear
when reverses occur.)
9. These terms are chieftaincy titles.
330 relationships


--- PAGE 344 ---
3365. Bíọmọdébámáasó,awoiwájú;bí
àgbàábámáasó,awo/egravedotbelowhìn.
If a youth wants to fart, he looks ahead;
if an elder wants to fart, he looks behind.
(The youth should consider what his elders
will make of his actions, whereas the elder
should consider what example his actions
set for the youth. Compare 881.)
3366. Bíọmọdébáḿbáàgbàjẹun,títiiriní
ḿmáaátiiri.
If a youth eats with an elder, he must show
great diﬃdence. (In the company of elders,
the youth must be well-behaved.)
3367. Bíọmọdébáníbabaòunòtóẹnitíà
ńsárébá,bàbá-ar/egravedotbelowaníọmọòunòtóẹnitíà
ńdúródè.
If a youth says that his father is not worth
catching up with, the father will say that
his son is not worth waiting for. (A person
who rejects his or her parents deserves to be
disowned by them.)
3368. Bíọmọdébáṣuimíbúburú,èsìsìlaﬁ
ńnùúnídìí.
If a youth expels foul excrement, one wipes
his anus with nettle leaves. (A grievous
oﬀense deserves adequate punishment.)
3369. Bíọtíbáńpani,ṣéòorùnńpab/ogravedotbelowtí;oró
táadáọkàlọkàńdánisan.
If wine intoxicates one, the fermented
corn was beaten by the sun also; it is the
pain one inﬂicted on the corn that is being
avenged. (If one is wronged by the person
one has wronged, one has no ground for
complaint.)
3370. Bíyóṣeèmi,bíyóṣeìwọ,kìíj/eacutedotbelowkáṣu
sókoa-láì-rójú.
It-might-happen-to-me, it-might-happen-
to-you stops one from defecating on the
farm of the person who has no time to tend
it. (One does not take advantage of the
weak, for one does not know what might
happen to one in the future.)
3371. Bó-mọ-gín-ń-gín-ní-eegun-ní-ńlọtí
ḿbáọmọ-ọr/egravedotbelowpínìr/egravedotbelow;Bó-mọ-jéḿpé-orí-ní-
ńtanitíḿbábaba-ar/egravedotbelowpínagb/ogravedotbelownrù.
However-tiny-it-may-be-it-goes-to-the-
bones shares a cricket with his son;
However-light-it-may-be-it-makes-one’s-
skull-smart shares the carrying of the basket
with his father. (A father who does not treat
his son with generosity will not receive
much regard from the son.)
10
3372. ‘‘Bùnmimbùnọ’’l/ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowńké.
‘‘Give to me and I will give to you’’ is the cry
of the toad. (Reciprocity is best in human
relations.)
3373. Búni-búni,a-bèébú-w/ogravedotbelowntì-w/ogravedotbelowntì.
The person who insults others: a-person-
whose-nature-deserves-many-insults. (The
person with many ﬂaws is typically the most
ready to insult others.)
D
3374. Dídùnlódùntíàḿb/oacutedotbelowr/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowj/egravedotbelowkọ;tilé
oge-étooge-éjẹ.
It is because a relationship is pleasant that
one eats corn loaf with one’s friend; what
each dandy has at home is enough food for
him. (If a friendship sours, each friend will
survive without the other. Compare 2103.)
E
3375. Èèyànbúburúbaèèyànrerej/eacutedotbelow.
Evil people give good people a bad name. (A
10. The cricket is so small that the father should
leave it to the son; a son must not permit his father to
carry any load.
Withfriendsandacquaintances 331


--- PAGE 345 ---
good person in the company of bad people
shares their reputation.)
3376. Èèyànloògùnèèyàn.
People are the antidote for people. (People
may be a bane, but they may also be a
succor; with people behind one, one can
withstand much from other people.)
3377. Èkùr/oacutedotbelowlalábàákú/egravedotbelowwà.
Palm kernel is inseparable company for
beans. (Wherever one sees a certain person,
one is sure to see another certain person.)
3378. Eléérúníńṣọkọalátà;w/oacutedotbelownbímọw/oacutedotbelownsọ
/oacutedotbelowníÒwó-ṣ/ogravedotbelowkan.
An ash seller marries a seller ofatàwood;
on having a child they name it The-trades-
are-united. (The people concerned are all of
a kind.)
3379. Epinrinníńwúepinrinsíl/egravedotbelow;òkú/ogravedotbelowgá-
láńtáníńwúòkúògolonto.
It is epinrin[a secret] that exposesepinrin;
it is a half-shrouded corpse that exposes a
shroudless corpse. (Exposure of one secret
calls for the exposure of another; the per-
son whose secret is exposed will expose the
exposer’s secret.)
Ẹ
3380. ‘‘Ẹkúàtij/oacutedotbelow’’mọara-awọnrí.
‘‘It’s been a long time’’ signals previous ac-
q u a i n t a n c e .( H o wp e o p l eb e h a v et o w a r d
one another can be explained by what went
on between [or among] them in the past.
Compare 2482.)
3381. Ẹgb/eacutedotbelowbúburúníḿbaìwàrerej/eacutedotbelow.
Bad company ruins good character. (The
reputation of one’s company rubs oﬀ on
one.)
3382. Ẹniabínibíńdani,áḿb/ogravedotbelowǹtórí/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelow.
The person born of the same parents with
one might betray one, let alone one’s friends.
(Trust no one, neither relatives nor friends.)
3383. Ẹniaf/eacutedotbelowkìílárùnlára.
Ap e r s o no n el o v e si sn e v e ra ﬄ i c t e dw i t h
a disease. (One is always blind to the ﬂaws
of those one loves. Compare the following
entry.)
3384. Ẹniaf/eacutedotbelowkìíṣìwàhù.
A beloved person can do nothing wrong.
(To be loved is to be infallible. Compare the
preceding entry.)
3385. Ẹniaf/eacutedotbelowkìít/eacutedotbelow;ṣùgb/oacutedotbelownkámáṣàṣejù
níb/egravedotbelow.
A beloved person never suﬀers disgrace,
but he or she must not overstep bounds. (A
favored person retains the favor only as long
as he or she behaves decorously.)
3386. Ẹniaf/eacutedotbelowrànníńrínifín.
It is a person one loves who acts with dis-
respect toward one. (It is those to whom
one permits familiarity who take liberties in
one’s presence.)
3387. Ẹniàḿbámutábàkóy/ogravedotbelow;ehínní
ńp/oacutedotbelownni.
The person whose snuﬀ one shares should
be happy; all one gets from it is stained
teeth. (He whose favor one accepts should
know that even the acceptance of the favor
has its burdens.)
3388. Ẹniàḿbárìnlàńfìwàjọ.
It is the person whose company one keeps
that one emulates. (One should match one’s
comportment to one’s company.)
3389. Ẹnibíakànníńheakàn.
Only crablike people gather crabs. (Like
attracts like. Compare 4927 and 4928.)
332 relationships


--- PAGE 346 ---
3390. Ẹnitíabáf/eacutedotbelowrànlàńtijúfún.
It is people one likes that one takes care
not to oﬀend. (One’s consideration should
be for one’s friends, not for indiﬀerent
people.)
3391. Ẹnitíabáròdelàḿbárelé;ẹniajábá
wálajáḿbálọ.
One returns home with the person one went
out with; the dog departs with the person
it came with. (One should not drop one’s
partner or collaborator in the midst of an
engagement. Compare 3393.)
3392. Ẹnitíabásùntìlàńjarunpálù.
It is the person with whom one sleeps that
one thrashes against in restless sleep. (One
should conﬁne one’s aﬀairs to people with
whom one keeps company.)
3393. Ẹnitíajábáwásódelajáḿbárelé.
Whoever the dog came out with is the per-
son the dog returns home with. (One should
remain faithful to one’s companions. This is
a variant of 3391.)
3394. Ẹranníńmúnijẹìdin;/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowẹniníńmúni
ruẹrù/ogravedotbelowtáẹni.
It is meat that makes one eat maggots; it is
one’s friend that makes one carry an enemy’s
load. (To please those one likes and re-
spects, one often has to do things one ﬁnds
distasteful.)
3395. Ẹrúkanníḿmúnibúigbaẹrú.
A single slave causes one to insult two
hundred slaves. (The misbehavior of one
member of a group brings dishonor to all
members of the group. Compare 3186.)
F
3396. Fírífírílojúńrímú.
The eyes glimpse the nose only indistinctly.
(A statement that someone is all but impos-
sible to see or ﬁnd.)
11
I
3397. Igiàbáf/egravedotbelowhìntìíl/eacutedotbelowgùn-ún;ẹniàbáﬁnú
hànńkaj/oacutedotbelowẹni.
The tree one would lean on has thorns; the
person one would conﬁde in is spreading
evil stories about one. (There is no one to
trust but oneself.)
3398. Igitótóerinlerinńfarar/ogravedotbelow.
It is a tree that is as mighty as the elephant
that the elephant leans on. (One should seek
a worthy enough person to rely on.)
3399. Ìkatót/oacutedotbelowsímúlàńnàsímú.
It is a ﬁnger proper for the nose that one
pokes at the nose. (One should know the
proper way to approach others—according
to their status. Compare 564.)
3400. Ìsúnm/oacutedotbelowninìmọni;èèyàngbéòkèèrè
níyì.
One knows a person by being close to the
person; those who live afar enjoy high re-
gard. (One’s true nature reveals itself at close
quarters. Compare 3024.)
3401. Ìwàájọìwàníńj/eacutedotbelow/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowjọ/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelow.
Compatibility of character means compat-
ibility in friendship. (Friendship succeeds
only when the friends are compatible in
their habits.)
3402. Ìyáẹgb/eacutedotbelowmọoyeọmọtíòúnbí.
The matron knows just how many children
she gave birth to. (When the chips are down,
one gives priority to one’s own interests.)
12
11. The proverb is usually addressed to people one
s e e so n l yo n c ei nav e r yl o n gw h i l e .
12. Ìyáẹgb/eacutedotbelow,which translates as ‘‘matron,’’ literally
Withfriendsandacquaintances 333


--- PAGE 347 ---
3403. Ìyáodóòunọmọ/egravedotbelowòníjà;àgb/egravedotbelowlódájà
síl/egravedotbelowfúnwọn;ọmọodókìínaìyá/egravedotbelowlásán.
The mortar and the pestle have no quar-
rel between them; it is the farmer that has
caused the quarrel; the pestle would not
pound the mortar otherwise. (Said when
extraneous matters cause a rift between two
friends.)
3404. Ìyáọbátóópèníìyáẹbọ;ìyá-abaál/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelow
tóópèníìyáàj/eacutedotbelow;Olúṣ/egravedotbelowy/eacutedotbelowtóópèníOlúfàya.
The king’s mother is worthy of the desig-
nation ‘‘mother of mysteries’’; the chief ’s
mother is worthy of the appellation ‘‘mother
of witches’’; Olúṣ/egravedotbelowye [He who makes merry]
can also be named Olúfàya [He who tears
things apart]. (Those brought together by
merrymaking may be dispersed by dissen-
sion.)
K
3405. Kábánijẹòníkámábàániwá/ogravedotbelowràn.
Sharing one’s food with others does not stop
them from getting one into trouble. (You
cannot trust people simply because you
fraternize with them.)
3406. Kaèèw/ogravedotbelowfúnmikínkaèèwọfúnẹ.
Tell me your taboos and I will tell you my
taboos. (When friends know and avoid what
friends dislike, the friendship will last.)
3407. Kájàkár/eacutedotbelowkòdàbí/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowìpil/egravedotbelowṣ/egravedotbelow;àpákìí
jinnákódàbíaraẹni.
Friendship made up after a quarrel is not
like the original friendship; the scar left by
a sore cannot be like virgin skin. (Anything
that was spoiled and then repaired can never
return to its original state.)
means ‘‘mother of the society.’’ Although in that role
the matron seeks the welfare of the group, in a crisis she
will favor her own children.
3408. Káàkirilàńṣ/eacutedotbelowgi,ojúkanlàńdìí.
Firewood is gathered from all over, but it
is all tied together at one place. (After all
members of an assembly have voiced their
opinions, the leader of the group puts it all
together in a statement.)
3409. K/eacutedotbelowt/eacutedotbelowp/eacutedotbelowlórí:ẹṣin/ogravedotbelowtáẹni.
‘‘It is a miserably scrawny thing’’: one’s
enemy’s horse. (One is always inclined to
belittle one’s enemy’s accomplishments.)
3410. ‘‘KíniLágbájálèṣe?’’Ìjàníḿbẹníb/egravedotbelow?
What can So-and-So do? A quarrel brought
it about. (Quarrels are the usual reasons
for one person to question the worth of
another.)
3411. Kì-í-jẹ-ilá-kì-í-jẹ-ìlasa:ilé/egravedotbelowníńgbé.
He-will-not-eat-okro-and-he-will-not-eat-
okro-leaves keeps to his or her own home.
(A person who will not do what others do
will have no one for company.)
3412. Kòsíohuntódùnbí/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowòtít/oacutedotbelow;kòsíibi
tíalèﬁwéiléẹni.
There is nothing quite as pleasing as true
friendship; there is no place comparable to
one’s own home. (True friendship is a rare
blessing, and one’s home is one’s paradise.)
3413. Kòsíohuntóp/ogravedotbelowtóeṣú;bóbáẹniníléa
báẹnilóko.
There is nothing as plentiful as locusts; if
they catch up with one at home, they also
catch up with one on the farm. (Said of a
person or people one cannot get away from,
no matter what one does.)
M
3414. Mọìwàfóníwàloògùn/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelow.
Knowing and accepting each person’s char-
acter for what it is is the medicine for friend-
334 relationships


--- PAGE 348 ---
ship. (Mutual tolerance is indispensable in
friendship.)
O
3415. Ogúnọmọdékìíṣerégbaogúnọdún.
Twenty children will not play together for
twenty years. (All relationships end some-
time.)
3416. Ogúnpaará,odò-ógbéiyèkanlọ,àjọbí
sọnùl/oacutedotbelownàÌkòròdú,aòtúnr/eacutedotbelownibárìnm/oacutedotbelow,àﬁ
ẹnitíńtanni.
Death took one’s kin; the river carries oﬀ
one’s siblings; one’s blood relations dis-
appear on the road to Ìkòròdú; one has
nobody left to keep one company save those
intent on deceiving one. (An expression of
the statement that one has lost all those one
could rely on.)
3417. Ohunm/eacutedotbelowtalakìíwípék/oacutedotbelowr/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowẹnimáṣe:
akìíwípék/oacutedotbelowr/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowẹnimák/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowlé;akìíwípé
k/oacutedotbelowr/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowẹnimánìíobìnrin;akìíwípék/oacutedotbelowr/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowẹni
málọsídàál/egravedotbelow.
Three things one does not tell one’s friend
not to do: one does not tell a friend not to
build a house; one does not tell a friend not
to take a wife; one does not tell a friend not
to travel. (One does not deny a friend the
good things of life.)
3418. Ohuntíakátájẹlóﬁńlọèrò/ogravedotbelownà.
It is what the squirrel eats that it invites the
wayfarer to share.
13 (One will inevitably be
smeared by the blemish on those whose
company one keeps.)
3419. Olóhunòníígb/egravedotbelowsan,aáw/ogravedotbelowòsìníítán.
The owner will not accept compensation,
13. The proverb refers to the fact that from up in the
branches squirrels drop bits of whatever they are eating
in the path of wayfarers.
but the grumbling will never end. (Used for
situations in which a person ruins the prop-
erty of another person who is very close;
the owner cannot properly accept replace-
ment or compensation, yet he will never
stop grumbling about his loss.)
3420. Olówóńj/eacutedotbelowArógan;Ìw/ogravedotbelowfàńj/eacutedotbelowAgúnmát/egravedotbelow;
ebètíw/oacutedotbelownbákọ/egravedotbelowhìnniwọnóﬁtúuká.
The creditor is named Arógan; the pawned
servant is named Agúnmát/egravedotbelow; the heap they
make they will scatter with their backs.
14
( A n yv e n t u r ei nw h i c ht h e r ea r et w om a s t e r s
will end in disaster.)
3421. Oníbàtàníńfojúd/egravedotbelowgún;ẹniabáńf/eacutedotbelowní
ńfojúdini.
It is someone wearing shoes who can take
thorns lightly; it is a person one loves who
dares take one lightly. (We are more likely
to take advantage of people close to us than
those we do not know.)
3422. Oníṣègùnlólèṣọkọ/Egravedotbelowb/egravedotbelow;aláwàdàlólè
ṣọkọòṣónú.
Only a medicine man can be a husband
to /Egravedotbelowb/egravedotbelow;
15 only a person with a sense of hu-
mor can be the husband of a surly woman.
(A successful partnership depends on the
compatibility of those involved.)
3423. Orílóńdúrófúnàgb/ogravedotbelownmumi.
The head must remain still to enable the
chin to drink. (Without the aid and sacriﬁce
of another person, one would be incapable
of achieving what one has achieved.)
16
14. Aróganmeans ‘‘One who stands bolt upright,’’
and Agúnmát/egravedotbelowmeans ‘‘One who is ramrod straight and
never bends.’’ Obviously, if neither will give, there will
be a lot of ﬁghting.
15. /Egravedotbelowb/egravedotbelow, a name that means ‘‘Plea,’’ obviously once
belonged to a real person.
16. ‘‘Dúrófún,’’ literally ‘‘Stand up for,’’ is used
in the proverb in the sense of ‘‘Stand still for’’; the
Withfriendsandacquaintances 335


--- PAGE 349 ---
Ọ
3424. /Ogravedotbelowbúnbairúaṣọj/eacutedotbelow.
The ﬁlthy person destroys the appeal of a
style of clothing. (Anything a ﬁlthy person
touches is ruined for others.)
3425. Ọgb/oacutedotbelownníńp/eacutedotbelowkótóranẹni;wèrèkì
ígbèéranèèyàn;wèrèÌbàdànlóranará
Ògbóm/ogravedotbelowṣ/oacutedotbelow.
Only wisdom takes a long time to rub oﬀ
on others; imbecility does not take long to
aﬀect others; it is the imbecility plaguing
Ibadan people that rubbed oﬀ on the people
of Ògbóm/ogravedotbelowṣ/oacutedotbelow.
17 (If you keep a person’s com-
pany, you sooner or later will be infected
with the person’s bad habits.)
3426. Ọgbọọgb/ogravedotbelownlàńrọìjánu,/ogravedotbelowk/ogravedotbelow/ogravedotbelowkanlà
ḿmọìwàèèyàn;àbámọìwàèèyàn,àbábùn
ọoòf/eacutedotbelowẹ;adunnijọjọbíabájọ.
In the thirties one manufactures bridles;
one by one one learns people’s character;
had I known a certain person’s character
when she was oﬀered to me, I would not
have married her: a situation that hurts like
‘‘had I known.’’ (If it were possible to know
people’s character beforehand, one would
more easily choose those one would have
anything to do with.)
3427. Ọj/oacutedotbelowtóbáburúlàḿmọẹníf/eacutedotbelowni.
It is on bitter days that one knows who loves
one. (A friend in need is a true friend.)
3428. Ọkọbíẹm/oacutedotbelow;ayabíàfè;alárinàbíàgó.
Husband like a ﬁeld mouse; wife like a
spotted grass mouse; go-between like the
àgór a t .( T h r e eo fak i n d . )
real intention, though, is to stand up for, or support,
somebody.
17. Ògbóm/ogravedotbelowṣ/oacutedotbelow is a town near Ibadan; they are
closely related in culture and history.
3429. Ọmọaráyekìíf/eacutedotbelowkárúnọb/egravedotbelowláwo.
The people of this world never wish that one
eat stew in a dish. (People seldom like to see
others prosper.)
3430. Ọmọaráyeòbánijẹọw/oacutedotbelowkanìyà;ọw/oacutedotbelow
kan/egravedotbelowwàniw/oacutedotbelownḿbánijẹ.
The people of this world never join one in
enduring a little bit of suﬀering; it is only
a little bit of black-eyed peas that they will
join one to enjoy. (People will share your
good fortune, not your misfortune.)
3431. Ọmọarúgbóòj/eacutedotbelowkáṣàánúarúgbó.
The aged person’s child stops one from ex-
tending charity toward the aged person.
(The character of one’s close relatives often
determines how people act toward one.)
3432. /Ogravedotbelownalàńpàdéf/egravedotbelowr/egravedotbelow.
It is on the pathway that people meet ﬂeet-
ingly. (One should not be too eager to take
one’s leave when one visits other people at
home.)
3433. /Ogravedotbelowp/egravedotbelowr/egravedotbelowk/eacutedotbelowt/egravedotbelowńdàgbà,inúadám/ogravedotbelowḿbàj/eacutedotbelow;a
dibabatáninúḿbíwọn.
The small palm tree grows bigger, and the
cutter of palm leaves becomes angry; we
grow in greatness, and they become angry.
(People are consumed with jealous anger
when they see others prosper.)
3434. /Ogravedotbelowrànṣẹniwò,kámọẹnitóf/eacutedotbelowni.
Misfortune should befall one so one might
know who really loves one. (We know our
true friends only when we are in trouble.)
3435. /Ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowabánikúṣ/ogravedotbeloww/oacutedotbelown.
Friends who will die with one are rare. (Do
not expect a friend to die for you or with
you.)
3436. /Ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowaláb/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowkìígbé/ogravedotbelowtún.
The friend of a needle wielder does not sit
336 relationships


--- PAGE 350 ---
to his or her right. (One should know, and
allow for, the idiosyncrasies of one’s close
friends.)
3437. /Ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowdí/egravedotbelow,/ogravedotbelowtádí/egravedotbelow,níńṣeikúpani.
A little friendship, a little enmity, is what
kills people. (Intermittent friendship does
not make for peace of mind.)
3438. /Ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowèké,èké/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelow;olè,olè.
A false friend, a friendly fraud: both are like
thieves. (Never have anything to do with
friends who prove false and frauds who act
friendly.)
3439. /Ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowẹniníḿmúniruẹrù/ogravedotbelowtáẹni.
It is a friend that makes one carry an
enemy’s load. (Obligations one owes a friend
may sometimes entail doing things one
would otherwise not contemplate.)
3440. /Ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowlàńwákún/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelow,akìíwá/ogravedotbelowtákún
/ogravedotbelowtá.
One seeks to add friends to friends, not
enemies to enemies. (Always look for more
friends and fewer enemies.)
3441. Ọrẹńj/eacutedotbelowọrẹ,/ogravedotbelowtàńj/eacutedotbelow/ogravedotbelowtà;akìídúp/eacutedotbelowẹ
‘‘Mota/ogravedotbelowpọ.’’
A gift is one thing, and a sale is quite a dif-
ferent thing; one does not thank ‘‘I sold it to
you cheap.’’ (Selling cheap is not the same as
making a gift.)
3442. /Ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowòf/eacutedotbelowẹl/egravedotbelowta,elèjìl/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowgbà.
Friendship does not accommodate a third
person; it accommodates only a second
person. (Two is company; three is confu-
sion.)
3443. /Ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowòf/eacutedotbelowir/oacutedotbelow;awoòf/eacutedotbelowìtànjẹ.
Friendship does not brook lying; secret
covenants do not brook deceit. (Always be
true and honest in your dealings with those
close to you.)
3444. /Ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowọdúnm/eacutedotbelowtaòṣééﬁnúhàntán;
Júdáàsì-íbáJésùṣ/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowọdúnm/eacutedotbelowta,ótaá
níjà/mgravebá.
A friend of three years is not to be trusted
completely; Judas was a friend to Jesus for
three years, yet he played him false. (Never
place your complete trust in a friend, no
matter how long your friendship.)
3445. /Ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowp/ogravedotbelow;ìwààtìkàinú-uwọnòd/oacutedotbelowgba.
Friends abound, but their character and
their wickedness are very diﬀerent. (Friend-
ship does not mean compatibility or mutual
good will.)
3446. /Ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowpur/oacutedotbelowkan,èmípàkan;/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowníkíngbé
apáejòlájà,moníkógbéitanẹjanípẹpẹ.
My friend engaged in some deviousness, and
I responded with my own deviousness; my
friend told me to help myself to the arm of a
snake on his rafters, and I asked him to help
himself to the thigh of a ﬁsh on my shelf.
(One should meet cunning with cunning.)
3447. /Ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowtíàkàràḿbáepoṣeòkéré.
The friendship that àkàràmaintains with
palm oil is not something to take lightly.
18
(Said of friendship that is obsessive and
problematic.)
P
3448. Pòpóòròàtèṣíkìíbaolókodìgbàro.
Last year’s cornstalk will not stand erect as
long as the farmer. (The closest of friends
and companions eventually go their separate
ways.)
18. Àkàrà,black-eyed-bean fritters, are fried in
palm oil.
Withfriendsandacquaintances 337


--- PAGE 351 ---
R
3449. R/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowojú;ojúniaf/eacutedotbelowni,ṣùtìl/eacutedotbelowhìn.
Friendship that depends on presence oﬀers
friendship in one’s presence but despises one
when one is absent. (Friendship that does
not persist in one’s absence is not worth
much.)
Ṣ
3450. Ṣàṣàèeyànníńfẹnil/eacutedotbelowhìnbíaòsínílé;
tajátẹranníńf/eacutedotbelownilójúẹni.
Few people love one when one is absent;
every dog and goat loves one when one is
present. (Never trust that those who show
you aﬀection in your presence will express
the same sentiments in your absence.)
3451. Ṣe-fún-mi-kí-nṣe-fún-ọloògùn/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelow.
You-do-me-a-favor-and-I-do-you-a-favor is
the medicine for friendship. (Reciprocity is
essential in friendship. Compare the follow-
ing entry.)
3452. Ṣe-mí-kí-mbi-/oacutedotbelowloògùn/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelow.
You-oﬀend-me-and-I-talk-the-matter-over-
with-you is the medicine for friendship.
(Friendship is maintained by talking prob-
lems out, not by holding grudges. Compare
the preceding entry.)
T
3453. Togbótogbólàńríagogo.
The bell is always seen in the company of its
ringer. (Said of things or people that always
go together.)
338 relationships


--- PAGE 352 ---
On relationships with strangers
A
3454. Àńgirasèfúnàlejòjẹ,óní‘‘Iléyìímà
dùnláé!’’
One extends oneself to feed a visitor, and
he remarks, ‘‘What abundance exists in this
home!’’ (The visitor has no way of knowing
the extent to which the host incurs debt for
his, the visitor’s, beneﬁt. Compare proverb
474.)
3455. Àjòjìtóbúbaál/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowdiẹrùtan.
A stranger who insults the chief has packed
his load. (A defenseless person who pro-
vokes the greatest power in the vicinity
authors his or her own disaster.)
B
3456. Baáléàlejònibabaàlejò.
The visitor’s host is the visitor’s father. (The
host is father to the visitor. Compare 3263
and 3326.)
3457. Baálélọl/oacutedotbelowrànawo.
The landlord is the proper keeper of secrets.
(One should not keep one’s secret problems
from the head of one’s household.)
3458. Bíil/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowbárorò,tópa/ogravedotbeloww/egravedotbelow,oríolókoni
yódàálé.
If the earth is unkind and kills a helper
on the farm, the responsibility falls on the
owner of the farm. (The host is responsible
for the guest.)
Ẹ
3459. Ẹnitíóńrínilàńrín;èèyàntíkòrín
èèyàn,aòg bọd/ogravedotbelowrínin;/egravedotbelowríndiméjìadìjà.
You may laugh only at a person who laughs
at you, not at a person who does not laugh
at you; when laughter becomes two, a quar-
rel results. (One seeks a quarrel when one
laughs at others with whom one does not
share a joking relationship.)
M
3460. ‘‘Máalọ,àlejò’’kìítiẹnuoníléwá.
‘‘Stranger, it is time you departed’’ does not
come from the mouth of a host. (Visitors
should know when they have used up their
welcome; a host should be gracious, even
when the visitor is an insensitive boor.)
O
3461. Omiàjèjìtów/ogravedotbelowlú,pípar/eacutedotbelowníńpar/eacutedotbelow.
Whatever strange water enters a town in-
evitably disappears. (A newcomer to a
community must adapt to its ways or face
disaster.)
S
3462. ‘‘Súnm/oacutedotbelowhùn-ún,afé/eacutedotbelowṣoròilé-ewa,’’kì
íj/eacutedotbelowkálejòdionílé.
‘‘Move aside; we are about to perform some


--- PAGE 353 ---
secret rites of our lineage’’ keeps a sojourner
from becoming a member of the house-
hold. (Exclusion from intimate aﬀairs will
remind the visitor that he or she does not
belong.)
340 relationships


--- PAGE 354 ---
On relationships with the less fortunate
A
3463. Akìíbábabataif/ogravedotbelowntánkátúnba
ọmọtaeṣinṣinkúrò.
One does not lance an abscess for a father
and then help the son chase ﬂies away [from
open wounds]. (One should not be expected
to be a benefactor to one generation and to
the next one also.)
3464. Akìídáọmọòkúlóró;akìíṣeìkàfún
ọmọòrukàn.
One does not misuse an orphan; one does
not act cruelly to one’s blood brother. (One
should be considerate of those in need and
also of one’s relatives.)
3465. Afúnijẹkìífúnità.
The person who will give one food to eat
will not give one food to sell. (There is a
limit to charity.)
3466. Àgbàtánlàńgb/ogravedotbelowlẹ:bíadáṣọf/oacutedotbelowlẹàpaá
láró;bíalaniníjààsìníndélé.
One should go the whole way in rescuing
al a z yp e r s o n :i fo n em a k e sag a r m e n tf o r
him, one should also dye it; if one extricates
h i mf r o maﬁ g h t ,o n es h o u l da l s ow a l kh i m
home. (Never do things by halves.)
1
3467. Àì-dúp/eacutedotbelow-oore-ànàmúoorésúniíṣe.
Failure-to-show-gratitude-for-yesterday’s-
1. The lazy person is unlikely to wash his clothes;
dyeing them will conceal the dirt. And until the lazy
coward is safely within his own walls, he could be
attacked again by his assailants.
favor dissuades benefactors from extending
favors. (If one shows no gratitude for previ-
ous kindnesses, one stops receiving favors.
Compare 878.)
3468. Araòniìw/ogravedotbelowfàbíonígb/ogravedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow;a-bánikówó
larańni.
The pawn is never as troubled as his guaran-
tor; it is the person who stands for another
who is apprehensive. (The guarantor has
more reason to worry than the debtor.)
3469. Àríṣelàríkà;àríkàbabaìrègún.
What-one-is-able-to-do is what-one-has-to-
list; what-one-has-to-list gives one ground
for recrimination. (If one does another a
favor, one has some ground to reproach the
recipient if he deserves it.)
3470. ‘‘Ata-àmidandan,iy/ogravedotbelow-/ogravedotbelowmidandan,’’
olóríèpè.
‘‘My pepper indeed, my salt indeed’’: the
most formidable of curses. (Never do evil to
your benefactor.)
2
3471. À-wín-ì-sanòríowówín.
The-borrower-who-does-not-repay ﬁnds
no money to borrow. (He who defaults on
a loan forfeits his opportunities for other
loans.)
2. The curse of a person whose salt and pepper the
cursed person has eaten is most dangerous.


--- PAGE 355 ---
B
3472. Bíaṣiwèrè-ébáseàsè,ọlọgb/oacutedotbelownajẹ/eacutedotbelow.
If an imbecile prepares a feast, the wise per-
son will eat it. (The fool is there for the wise
to take advantage of.)
E
3473. Èkútéilénítẹnitópaòunòdunòunbí
ẹnitógbéòunṣánl/egravedotbelow.
The house mouse says he is not as hurt by
the person who killed him as by the per-
s o nw h od a s h e dh i mo nt h eﬂ o o r .( Im a y
forgive the person who vanquished me but
not the person who took advantage of me
afterward.)
342 relationships


--- PAGE 356 ---
Human Nature
four


--- PAGE 357 ---



--- PAGE 358 ---
On fate (and reciprocity)
A
3474. Àbáàṣẹbọ;àbáàṣoògùn;bíatipéaó
rìíláyélàńrí.
Even though one makes sacriﬁces, and even
though one procures charms, however one is
covenanted to turn out on earth is how one
will turn out. (Neither sacriﬁces nor charms
will alter a person’s destiny.)
3475. AbímọlÓwu,w/oacutedotbelownní‘‘akọmbábo?’’
Èwoniyóṣọmọníb/egravedotbelow?
A child is born in Òwu and people inquire,
‘‘Boy or girl?’’ Which can be expected to
turn out well?
1 (A sentiment that Òwu
people are uniformly worthless; a sugges-
tion, therefore, that all members of a certain
group are uniformly worthless.)
3476. Abímọníléọgb/oacutedotbelown,amúureléìm/ogravedotbelowràn
lọwò,nígbàtíóḿb/ogravedotbelowópàdéòyel/oacutedotbelownà;ọgb/oacutedotbelown
nikòníígb/oacutedotbelownni,tàbí/ogravedotbelowrànnikòníím/ogravedotbelow;tàbí
òyenikònííyée?
A child is born into the house of wisdom,
is sent to the house of discernment for up-
bringing, and while returning comes upon
intelligence; can he lack wisdom, can he lack
discernment, or can he lack intelligence? (A
child is never better or worse than the sort
of upbringing he receives. Compare 2737.)
3477. Akìípékíọmọdémáfẹehíngan-gan-
ranbóbátùú;ètènikòríﬁbòó.
One does not order a child not to expose his
buckteeth if doing so soothes him; what he
1. Òwu is an ancient /Egravedotbelowgbá Yoruba town.
lacks are enough lips to cover them. (Do not
force people to act against their nature.)
3478. Akìíríbúburúl/eacutedotbelowhìnAgà.
One never sees misfortune after Agà,the
month of May. (A time comes when all one’s
problems will be over.)
2
3479. Akìíríọmọọbakámárìíàmìọbalára
/egravedotbelow.
O n en e v e rs e e sap r i n c eo rp r i n c e s sw i t h o u t
seeing his or her mark of royalty. (People
show their worth and breeding by their
comportment. Also, a person from an illus-
trious lineage should not be seen going
about in rags or in bad company.)
3480. AkìíyinaráÌj/eacutedotbelowm/ogravedotbelowpéómọas/eacutedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowhun;
aní‘‘Àmònímànáal/eacutedotbelowànánimoﬁpèteìdí/egravedotbelow.’’
One does not praise an Ìj/eacutedotbelowm/ogravedotbelow person as an
expert at weaving sieves, for then he will
boast, ‘‘Only last night did I start on it!’’
(Compare 639.)
3481. Akúnl/egravedotbelowayànpín;adáyétánojú
ńyánni.
We kneel and choose our destiny, but on
reaching earth we are disillusioned. (How-
ever unfortunate, one’s destiny is one’s own
choice.
3 Compare 3496 and 4612.)
2. May is the month of harvest; thereafter, any
dearth of food ends and festivals and celebrations
commence. (See also note 13 at 3531.)
3. At the basis of the proverb is the Yoruba belief


--- PAGE 359 ---
3482. ‘‘AòmọeyítíỌl/oacutedotbelowrunóṣe’’òj/eacutedotbelowábínú
kú.
‘‘We know not what God will do’’ stops one
from committing suicide. (As long as one
lives, one may hope.)
3483. Aséẹtu,aòséẹtu,ọparúngbáanídìí;
/ogravedotbelowrànẹtunibí?
We shot and missed the antelope; we shot
and did not miss the antelope, and the bam-
boo hits its rear; is the antelope at fault?
(One cannot always determine one’s own
fate.)
3484. AsọọmọníṢódé,ólọsíbiódé;asọ
ọmọníṢób/ogravedotbelow,ólọsájòóbọ;awásọọmọní
Ṣórìnlọ,ólọsájòkòdém/oacutedotbelow,àńs/ogravedotbelow.Tanikòm/ogravedotbelow
péilélọmọ-/oacutedotbelowtimúorúkọànùlọ?
A child named Ṣódé goes on a journey and
returns; a child named Ṣób/ogravedotbelow travels afar and
returns; then a child named Ṣórìnlọ travels
away and does not return, and people won-
der why. Who does not know that the child
left home with a name that assures his loss?
4
(An expression of the belief that people act
according to their names. Give a dog a bad
n a m e...)
3485. Aṣeàlapàl/oacutedotbelowṣ/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowkòyẹ/eacutedotbelow;aṣeohun
gbogbofúngi,oyẹigi.
We decorate a bare, freestanding wall; the
result is not pleasing, but whatever decora-
tion a tree receives becomes it. (Eﬀorts at
improvement are wasted on some people.)
5
3486. Ààfáà-ás/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowòjò-ókù;óníỌl/oacutedotbelowrunún
j/eacutedotbelowrìíòun.
that before incarnation, each person kneels before the
Creator to choose his or her destiny on earth.
4. The names mean, respectively, Oṣó (someone
connected with certain mysteries) arrives, Oṣó returns,
and Oṣó walks away.
5. A bare wall left standing after the collapse of
a house will not show oﬀ decorations to advantage,
w h e r e a sc a r v i n g so nat r e el o o kg o o d .
The Muslim priest makes a statement, and
thunder rumbles; he says God is bearing
him witness. (The opportunist will turn
everything to his or her advantage.)
3487. Àbíjọlàḿmọìtan.
It is through resemblance that one knows
those who are related. (People show their
aﬃnity by their similar behavior or appear-
ance.)
3488. Àbíkúńlọ,ìyá/egravedotbelowńpèé.
A child destined to die is on its way [to
dying]; its mother is calling it back.
6 (No
one can stop fate.)
3489. Àdàbàòwáoúnjẹs/eacutedotbelownuòrofó;oníká-
lukúníńwáoúnjẹs/eacutedotbelownuara-ar/egravedotbelow.
The dove does not put food into the mouth
of the fruit pigeon; each person ﬁnds food
for his or her own mouth. (Each person is
responsible for his or her own welfare.)
3490. Àgbìgbòlómóríìyàwáyé;orítómáa
gbeniòd/eacutedotbelowrùpani.
It is àgbìgbòthat chose an evil destiny for
itself; the head that will be one’s succor
will not weigh one down. (A thing that will
be one’s salvation will not also torment
one.)
7
3491. Agbọj/oacutedotbelowkìígbaọj/oacutedotbelowkantì.
What is destined to occupy one’s day will
not fail to consume it. (Fate cannot be
averted.)
8
6. Àbíkú(see note 3 to 2639), children the Yoruba
believe to have made a pact before birth that they will
die before maturity, are an explanation for the high
incidence of infant mortality.
7. Àgbìgbòis a bird with an unusually big head. The
proverb shifts from orí,the physical head, to orí,the
embodiment of one’s destiny.
8. There is no day on which death cannot take its
intended victim.
346 human nature


--- PAGE 360 ---
3492. Àìdéikúlàńsoààjàm/oacutedotbelowrùn;bíkúbádé
ajáààjàsíl/egravedotbelowagbéaláàjàlọ.
It is when death has not come calling that
one ties charms around one’s neck; when
death comes calling, it rips the charm away
and carries its wearer oﬀ. (This proverb is
essentially the same as 3982.)
3493. Àjíb/ogravedotbelowwábálàḿbáilààt/eacutedotbelowlẹw/oacutedotbelow;aòmọ
ẹnitókọ/oacutedotbelow;àjíb/ogravedotbelowwábálowóàdásan;aòmọ
ẹnitójẹ/eacutedotbelow.
The lines of the palm are things that pre-
exist the owner’s awareness; no one knows
who made them; a debt the whole commu-
nity must contribute to repay is an ageless
d e b t ;n oo n ek n o w sw h oi n c u r r e di t .( C e r -
tain things defy human knowledge, and the
sins of fathers are sometimes visited on their
oﬀspring generations later. Compare 3503.)
3494. Àkèrépèteìy/eacutedotbelow;ìyáolódòniògbà
fúnun.
The frog tried for wings; it was the river-
mother that refused her consent. (But for
the forces of Nature, frogs would ﬂy.)
3495. Àk/oacutedotbelowdáoróòdàbíàdágb/egravedotbelowhìn.
The ﬁrst injury is nothing like the last. (The
injury one inﬂicts is nothing compared to
the injury one will receive in retaliation.
Compare 4785.)
3496. Àkúnl/egravedotbelowyànlàdáyébá;akúnl/egravedotbelowayan
ìpín;adáyétánojúńroni.
What-was-chosen-on-the-knees is what-
is-encountered-on-earth; one kneels and
chooses a destiny, but on reaching earth
one is disconsolate. (A person’s fortunes on
earth result from the person’s choices at his
or her creation; however much one might la-
ment one’s fortunes on earth, they are one’s
choice and responsibility. Compare 3481.)
3497. Àlùm/oacutedotbelownì:óníẹnitíòúnbáwàl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow-ọ
r/egravedotbelowlóniòun.
Prosperity: it says that the person in whose
possession it is found is its owner. (Good
fortune is no respecter of persons; it stays
with whoever gets his or her hands on it.)
3498. Àníyànladì/eacutedotbelowﬁimúṣe;adìẹkìífọnkun.
A chicken’s nose is merely obligatory; a
chicken does not blow its nose. (Certain
things one endures as a matter of obligation;
one can easily do without them.)
3499. ÀránsíỌl/oacutedotbelowrunòséni;ọk/ogravedotbelowìbàj/eacutedotbelowòsél/egravedotbelow.
Whatever God sends in your direction will
not miss you; a vehicle destined for disaster
will not escape it. (One cannot escape one’s
destiny.)
3500. Asùngbè-oyúnlọmọńjọ.
I ti st h ep e r s o nw h os l e e p sn e x tt oap r e g -
nant woman that her child resembles. (A
person will inevitably manifest the traits of
h i so rh e rp e d i g r e e . )
3501. Aṣ/eacutedotbelowgi-íṣew/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelow-w/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowwọigbó;wàwàlọdẹ
ńṣetọokùn/ogravedotbelownà;kòsóhuntóríòlèﬁniṣe;orí
ẹniníḿmúnijọba.
The wood gatherer walks stealthily into
the bush; the hunter stalks briskly through
the bush path; there is nothing one’s head
cannot make one do; it is one’s head that
makes one a king. (One’s destiny may lead
one astray, and one’s destiny may bring one
good fortune.)
3502. Aṣọpupakìíbáòkúr/ogravedotbelowrun.
Purple cloth never accompanies the dead
to heaven. (One individual has no part in
another individual’s fate.)
3503. Àt/eacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowlabáilà;aòmọenitókọ/oacutedotbelow.
The lines of the palm were always there;
no one knows who drew them. (One’s des-
tiny is hidden from one. This is a variant of
3493.)
Onfate 347


--- PAGE 361 ---
3504. Àtikékerélàràmàjà-átińlalék/oacutedotbelow.
It is from its youth that the crab learns to
build its house. (The nature of the adult is
apparent in the child.)
3505. Àyànm/oacutedotbelowògbóògùn.
Destiny does not respond to medicine. (No
medicine can cure fate.)
3506. Ayésanmíòsegb/egravedotbelowdu;èèyànlásánòní
làárì;ọbanilàárìẹni.
Being prosperous does not entitle one to
gb/egravedotbelowdudrums; an ordinary person has no
regality; it is in a king that regality resides.
(Certain qualities are congenital, not to be
acquired in life.)
3507. Ay/ogravedotbelowòrúbọ.
Happiness oﬀers no sacriﬁces. (When one
is happy and contented, one has no need of
sacriﬁce.)
B
3508. Bániwíkìíbánidéb/egravedotbelow.
The counselor does not share the conse-
quences [of one’s choices] with one. (The
adviser has no responsibility; only the doer
does.)
3509. Bíabábẹoṣóoṣóágb/oacutedotbelow;bíabábẹàj/eacutedotbelow
àj/eacutedotbelowágb/oacutedotbelow;ṣùgb/oacutedotbelownkí-ni-ngó-jẹkìígb/oacutedotbelow.
If one pleads with a wizard, the wizard
should be appeased; if one pleads with a
witch, the witch should be appeased; but
what-will-I-eat is never appeased. (One does
not assuage hunger with pleas.)
3510. Bíabáńﬁèèpo/egravedotbelowpàsúọtí,ẹnímáayóá
yó.
[Even] were one to sell wine by the peanut-
shell measure, those who will be intoxicated
will be intoxicated. (Even in the midst of
dearth, those who are destined to prosper
will prosper. Compare the next entry.)
3511. Bíabáńgúnyánnínúewé,tíàńseb/egravedotbelow
nínúèèpo/egravedotbelowpà,ẹnímáayóáyó.
Even though one makes pounded yams in a
leaf and cooks stew in a peanut shell, who
will be full will be full. (Even in the midst
of dearth, those destined to prosper will
prosper. Compare the preceding entry.)
3512. Bíadì/eacutedotbelowbáṣeogún,tóṣeọgb/ogravedotbelown,àgòni
yódèé.
Whether chickens number twenty or thirty,
they will yield to being covered by the coop.
(Certain fates cannot be averted by numbers
alone.)
3513. Bíal/eacutedotbelowẹniyótirí,òwúr/ogravedotbelowẹniniyóﬁhàn.
How a person’s night will be is revealed by
the person’s morning. (A person’s nature
reveals itself from youth.)
3514. Bíinútirílobìńyàn.
The omen revealed by the divinatory kola
is determined by the nature of one’s heart.
9
(The gods respond to one according to the
goodness of one’s heart.)
3515. Bíológbòóbápámipámi,yów/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelow.
A cat may skirt the water for a long time,
but in the end it will enter the water. (An
inevitability may be delayed but will not be
avoided.)
3516. BíỌl/oacutedotbelowrunńṣerere,àníÓńṣeibi.
When God is doing good, someone says
he is doing evil. (Those who do not under-
stand God’s grand design fault some of his
actions.)
3517. BíỌl/oacutedotbelowrunòpani,ẹnìkanòlèpani.
If God does not kill one, nobody can kill
one. (Only God can order people’s fates. A
variant is BíỌl/oacutedotbelowrunòpaniọbaòlèpani:‘‘If
9. Kola nuts are used in divination; the way they lie
after being cast reveals the omen or message.
348 human nature


--- PAGE 362 ---
God does not kill one, the king cannot kill
one.’’)
3518. Bíyóbal/egravedotbelow,bíyóbal/egravedotbelownilabalábáﬁ
ńwọgbólọ;araàìbal/egravedotbelownitàwòdì.
As though it would land, as though it would
land is the way a butterﬂy enters into the
bush; restlessness is the lot of the eagle. (Al-
though it might seem otherwise, a person
headed for disaster will not escape it.)
10
E
3519. Eṣúájẹ,eṣúámu,eṣúálọ;níboni
alátampokoów/ogravedotbelow?
The locusts will eat, the locusts will drink,
and the locusts will depart; where will the
grasshopper hide? (After the despoiler has
done his or her damage, will the heirs not
reap the consequences?)
3520. Ewúr/eacutedotbelowtójẹṣílèkanp/ogravedotbelowm/oacutedotbeloweèríjẹ
àdùbáǹsìọj/oacutedotbelowm/eacutedotbelowta.
The goat that eats a shilling along with corn
bran has eaten for three days in advance.
(Whoever squanders valuable resources will
pay with privation.)
Ẹ
3521. /Egravedotbelowdáńlùlùìbàj/eacutedotbelow;Ọl/oacutedotbelowrunniòj/eacutedotbelowkódún.
Humans beat the drum of disgrace, but God
prevents it from making a sound. (Others
seek one’s disgrace, but God has foiled their
plan.)
3522. /Egravedotbelowhìn-inketelòfòńṣe.
It is the back of the calabash that loses out
on all good things. (It is some people’s fate
always to get the short end of things.)
10. This proverb is among the many that are used
primarily in incantations; this one would make it
impossible for a person to avoid disaster.
3523. Ẹnitíyóbàj/eacutedotbelowtibàj/eacutedotbelowtán;ẹnitíyó
bàlùm/ogravedotbelowlókù.
The person whose lot it is to be spoiled is
spoiled already; only the person whose lot
is to rot remains to be seen. (One wastes
one’s eﬀort in attempting to improve an
incorrigible person.)
3524. Ẹnitóńrínniòníìbáwí;oríẹniníńpé
kárínni.
Those who laugh at one have no blame; it is
destiny that places one in a position of being
laughed at. (One should blame not others
but one’s own fortune for whatever fate one
suﬀers.)
3525. /Egravedotbelowr/egravedotbelowk/eacutedotbelowolókùnrùn:áwúkótób/eacutedotbelow.
The cheeks of the diseased person will swell
before they burst. (Things will get a great
deal more painful before there is any relief.)
3526. /Egravedotbelowrúk/oacutedotbelow,oríaaka;/egravedotbelowrúàáké,oríaaka;
aakanìkannigitówànígbóni?
For a haft for the hoe, the choice is theaaka
tree; for a haft for the axe, the choice is the
aakat r e e ;i st h eaakatree the only one in
the forest?
11 (A person should not be the one
to whom every oﬀense or crime is traced.)
3527. Ẹs/egravedotbelowtíyóbù,p/egravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowòrànán.
A gashed foot that will fester is not helped
by ‘‘Easy does it!’’ (Mere expression of sym-
p a t h yi so fl i t t l eu s et oap e r s o ni nd e s p e r a t e
straits.)
3528. Ẹṣinkìíwókómú/egravedotbelowkàn-anr/egravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowrun.
A horse does not fall and take its tethering
post to heaven with it.
12 (One suﬀers one’s
fate alone; one cannot share it with others.)
11. Aakais Lecaniodiscuscupaniodes (Sapindaceae);
see Abraham 40.
12. In this construction, falling is a euphemism for
dying.
Onfate 349


--- PAGE 363 ---
F
3529. ‘‘Fínnáfúnmi!’’‘‘Ngòfínnáfúnọ!’’ní
ńdájàsíl/egravedotbelowlárọ.
‘‘Blow the furnace for me!’’ ‘‘I will not blow
the furnace for you!’’ results in a ﬁght at
the forge. (If responsibilities are not clearly
speciﬁed among friends, quarrels result.)
Gb
3530. ‘‘Gbaàkàṣùbà/mgravebà’’lóṣùagàni‘‘Gba
iṣugbọọrọ’’l/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowj/ogravedotbelowdún.
‘‘Have a huge loaf [of corn meal] in May’’
translates to ‘‘Have a long yam’’ after the
harvest. (A favor one does a person who
is in diﬃculty is not forgotten. The four
following entries are variants.)
3531. ‘‘Gbaàkàṣùbà/mgravebà’’lóṣùagàni‘‘Gbé
ńnúagánrán’’l/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowj/ogravedotbelowdún.
‘‘Have a huge loaf [of corn meal]’’ during
May translates to ‘‘Take some of myagánrán
yams’’ after the harvest. (A person whom
one helps out of diﬃculty will remember
to reward one when he or she comes into
some fortune. The preceding entry and the
following three entries are variants.)
13
3532. ‘‘Gbaàkàṣù’’níàbọjàni‘‘Gbaiṣu
b/ogravedotbelow/ogravedotbelowkù’’níàm/oacutedotbelowdún.
‘‘Take a loaf [of corn meal]’’ on returning
from the market translates to ‘‘Take a huge
yam’’ a year hence. (A good turn will attract
a good turn in return. The preceding two
and following two entries are variants.)
3533. ‘‘GbaiṣufúnỌmọlàńk/eacutedotbelow’’níléni‘‘Gba
iy/ogravedotbelowfúnÒṣoko’’lóko.
13. Oṣùagà, the month of May, is hard on farmers
because it comes after the last year’s harvest has been
exhausted and before the new harvest.
‘‘Take this yam for Ọmọlàńk/eacutedotbelow’’ at home
translates to ‘‘Take this salt for Òṣoko’’ on
the farm. (A favor one does when one has
the advantage will be rewarded when one is
in need. The preceding three entries and the
following entry are variants.)
3534. Gbàmílójòkíngbàọl/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowrùn.
A i dm ei nt i m e so fr a i ns oIc a na i dy o ui n
times of drought. (A person who extends
aid to those in diﬃculty will receive aid from
them when he or she is in diﬃculty. The
preceding four entries are variants.)
I
3535. Ibitíatijẹunogójì,kas/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowokòó.
Where one eats food worth 40 cowries, one
should make a speech worth 20 cowries.
(One should make some eﬀort to earn one’s
keep.)
3536. Ibitíàgbà-ábápinsílọmọdétiḿbáa.
Wherever age comes to rest, there youth will
catch up with it. (Sooner or later the youth
of today will put on the mantle of the elders
and become just like them.)
3537. Igígbẹníjùódègbé.
The tree dries up in the forest and it be-
comes worthless. (When one has lost the
qualities that make one desirable, one is
done for.)
3538. Ìkàkìíﬁoníkàsíl/egravedotbelow.
Wickedness never leaves the wicked. (The
wicked person can never change his or her
nature.)
3539. Ilénialáṣọ-/oacutedotbelowjókòósítíòkùkù-úwọlét/ogravedotbelow
/oacutedotbelow.
The weaver was at home when the woof
entered to seek him or her out. (The good
350 human nature


--- PAGE 364 ---
destined to come one’s way will ﬁnd one
even if one does not venture out of the
house.)
3540. Ilétóbámáawókìígb/oacutedotbelowtiigiay/egravedotbelowg/egravedotbelowr/egravedotbelow;
ohuntóbámáaṣenikìíníàkókòkan.
A house that is destined to collapse will not
be saved by slipping posts; disaster that is
destined to befall one is not daunted by what
season it is. (No one can deﬂect fate.)
3541. Ináilélẹrankońyágb/egravedotbelowhìn,àﬁèyítóbá
ringbókú.
It is the household ﬁre that warms [or
roasts] an animal in the end, except for
those that die wandering in the bush. (The
person who besmirches the good name of
his or her community when he or she is
abroad must return home eventually to give
an account.)
3542. Inániyójàábàtàtádì/eacutedotbeloww/ogravedotbelow.
It is ﬁre that will remove the shoes a chicken
wears.
14 (A foolish person will sooner or
later reap the reward of his or her folly.)
3543. Inúẹ-/eacutedotbelowdáraòńy/ogravedotbelow;oríẹ-/eacutedotbelowdáraná?
Because you harbor good will toward others,
you are happy; has good fortune come
your way? (One is not necessarily fortu-
nate simply because one harbors good will
toward others. Compare the next entry.)
3544. Inúrereòjọorírere.
Good nature (or good will toward others)
is not the same as good fortune. (The good
person is not necessarily safe from misfor-
tune. Compare the preceding entry.)
3545. Ìpínògokìít/eacutedotbelow;baarúlórírerenínúẹṣin.
A person destined for glory will not suﬀer
14. The reference is to the practice of searing the
skin on a chicken’s legs before peeling it oﬀ.
disgrace; an exceptionally powerful horse is
fortunate among horses. (A person destined
to shine will not fail to do so.)
3546. Ìpín/ogravedotbelowjẹunkìíj/eacutedotbelowkínákú.
The destiny of the person who will eat will
keep the ﬁre from going out. (Providence
will take care of one’s needs.)
3547. Ireẹnikìíkọjáẹni.
The good fortune destined for one will not
pass one by. (One’s destined good fortune
will not be deﬂected.)
3548. ÌrìnÀṣàk/eacutedotbelowòpap/ogravedotbelowm/oacutedotbelowtiỌw/oacutedotbelowolú;Àṣàk/eacutedotbelow
ńlọiléọkọ,Ọw/oacutedotbelowolúńre/ogravedotbelowrun.
Àṣàk/eacutedotbelow’s path is not the same as Ọw/oacutedotbelowolú’s
path; Àṣàk/eacutedotbelow is bound for her spouse’s home,
whereas Ọw/oacutedotbelowolú is bound for heaven. (Dif-
ferent people have diﬀerent destinies.)
3549. Irùtóbàléẹninípàk/oacutedotbelowòníòunòní
gbénimì;Ọl/oacutedotbelowrunọbaniòj/eacutedotbelowkíipá/egravedotbelowkáa.
The gadﬂy that alighted on one’s occiput
is not reticent about swallowing one; only
God Almighty denied it the power to do so.
(One’s enemies are unrelenting in their eﬀort
to do harm; only God has thwarted them.)
3550. Ìṣetí/egravedotbelowfúùfù-l/egravedotbelowl/egravedotbelowńṣe/ogravedotbelowrun,bíkòwó,bí
kòya,Ọl/oacutedotbelowrunọbanikòj/eacutedotbelow.
The way the wind belabors the sky, that the
sky does not collapse or tear into pieces is
thanks to God Almighty. (Only the gods
have kept one from falling into the hands of
one’s enemies.)
3551. Ìṣ/eacutedotbelowòmojú;ìyàòmàw/ogravedotbelow;ebípaàlejò,ojú
tóilé,ojúátóko.
Poverty cares not who owns which eyes;
suﬀering does not pay attention to skin
complexion; when hunger grips the stranger,
the eyes that have seen the house will see
the farm. (Hard times do not spare anyone;
every person must gird himself or herself.)
Onfate 351


--- PAGE 365 ---
3552. Ìwòtíàńwoàparòbíikáﬁdálá,oríẹyẹ
niòpẹyẹ.
The way one eyes a partridge betrays one’s
wish to cook it in okro stew; it is the bird’s
head [or providence] that kept death from
the bird. (One’s enemies would like to see
one dead, but one’s destiny will not let them
have their way.)
K
3553. Káﬁẹfunt/oacutedotbelowileaje,káfosùnt/oacutedotbelowléìl/egravedotbelowk/egravedotbelow;
àk/oacutedotbelowdáoríkìígbéìsàl/egravedotbelowọjà.
Let us whitewash the house of riches and
paint that of beads with camwood; the head
created at the beginning of time does not
languish at the marketplace. (Whoever is
destined to prosper will not fail to do so.)
3554. Kángun-kàngùn-kángunákángun
síbìkan.
Reckless, uncontrolled to-and-froing will in-
evitably wind up someplace.
15 (Recklessness
leads to disaster).
3555. Kìíṣeẹj/oacutedotbeloweléhíngan-gan-ran;òrìṣàló
dáatíkòﬁawọbòó.
The blame does not belong to the per-
son with protruding teeth; it was the god
w h oc r e a t e dh i mo rh e rt h a tf a i l e dt oc o v e r
them with enough skin. (One should not
be faulted for things over which one has no
control.)
3556. Kòsíalábàáròtójuoríẹni.
There is no commiserator that surpasses
15. The word kángunmeans ‘‘to end up some-
where,’’ whereas the ideophonekángun-kàngùn-kángun
is used to describe the staggering sort of movement one
would associate with drunkenness. The two expressions
are not etymologically linked, but their phonological
commonalities permit a play on the expressions for
semantic eﬀect.
one’s head. (The best support one has is
one’s own head, one’s protective spirit.)
3557. Kòsíìgbàtíọmọawoònííṣawo.
There is no escaping the time when a per-
son born into a cult must become initiated
into its mysteries. (One cannot avoid one’s
ordained calling.)
3558. Kọṣ/eacutedotbelow-kọṣ/eacutedotbelowkankìíkọiṣ/eacutedotbelowỌl/oacutedotbelowrun.
No recalcitrant person ever refuses God’s
errand. (No one can refuse to do God’s
bidding.)
L
3559. Lílọníńk/eacutedotbelowhìn-inb/ogravedotbelowí.
Departure is the inevitable fate of the house-
boy. (However much a servant may be made
to feel like family, he should know that his
eventual separation is inevitable.)
M
3560. Màkàn-màkànloyèńkàn.
Chieftaincy titles go around in turns. (One’s
good fortune will come one’s way in due
time.)
3561. Múorílọ,mámùúẹwàlọ;òòj/oacutedotbelowlẹwà
ńd/egravedotbelowhìn,oríníḿbánigbéléọkọ.
Go with your head, not with your beauty;
beauty abandons one in a day, but one’s
head remains with one in the marital
home.
16 (A woman should care more about
good character than about beauty.)
16. Again, orí,the agency that controls a person’s
fortune, is identiﬁed with the head; hence its designa-
tion by the same word.
352 human nature


--- PAGE 366 ---
N
3562. Níinúil/egravedotbelowkúlOròńjẹ.
Where the dead are buried, there Orò feeds.
(Some people’s misfortune is other people’s
good fortune.)
3563. Níníowókàdáràni;àìníowókàdáràni.
Being blessed with money is a matter of des-
tiny; not having money is also a matter of
destiny. (One’s earthly fortune is a matter of
destiny beyond one’s control.)
O
3564. Ówuàgùàlàkóm/oacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelowbíòṣùpá,Ọl/oacutedotbelowrun
ọbaniòj/eacutedotbelow.
The planet Venus would like to be as bright
as the moon, but God the King would not
permit it to be. (Everyone wishes to be as
great as the greatest person, but each indi-
vidual’s destiny is decisive. The following
three entries are variants.)
3565. Ówuaṣiwèrèkóruigbá-ar/egravedotbelowd/oacutedotbelowjà,ará
ilé/egravedotbelowniòj/eacutedotbelow.
The mad person would wish to carry her
calabash as far as the market, except that
the members of her household would not
let her. (Communal constraints are to be
thanked for curbing people’s propensity
to indulge in licentious behavior. The pre-
ceding entry and the following two are
variants.)
3566. Ówuewúr/eacutedotbelowkóbímọ/egravedotbelowníòbúkọ,Ọl/oacutedotbelowrun
ọbaniòfun;ówuàgùntànb/ogravedotbelowl/ogravedotbelowj/ogravedotbelowkóbímọ
/egravedotbelowlágbò,Ọl/oacutedotbelowrunọbaniòfúnun;ówuadìẹ
òkòkókóbímọ/egravedotbelowlákùkọ,Ọl/oacutedotbelowrunọbaniò
fúnun.
The goat would wish that its kid was a he-
goat, only God the King did not consent; the
robust sheep would wish its lamb was a ram,
only God the King would not agree; the big
hen would wish its chick was a cock, only
God the King would not grant her wish.
(Everybody wishes for great things, but God
does not grant all wishes. The preceding two
and the following are variants.)
3567. Ówuẹtukógbéogúnọdúnnígbó,
ṣùgb/oacutedotbelownówuonípàkútékód/oacutedotbelowjàl/oacutedotbelowla.
The antelope would like to live for twenty
years in the bush, but the setter of snares
would like it to reach the market on the
morrow. (Diﬀerent people’s interests often
conﬂict. The preceding three entries are
variants.)
3568. Òfòòj/eacutedotbelowkíọl/oacutedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowóp/ogravedotbelow.
Gainless ventures limit the ranks of the rich.
(Everybody craves success, but not all are
favored by fortune.)
3569. Òkèténítòunlóbáòuntíoun-únf/egravedotbelowhìn
tiná.
The giant bush rat says a misfortune befell
it and caused it to sit warming itself by the
ﬁre. (It was a grave disaster that caused one
to be found in disgraceful or embarrassing
circumstances.)
3570. Olóríburúkúkìíreokoikàn;bóbáre
okoikàn,iláníńkáwálé.
An ill-fated person does not go to a locust-
bean farm; if he should go to a locust-bean
f a r m ,h ew i l lr e t u r nh o m ew i t ho k r a .( Ap e r -
son destined to fail will always ﬁnd a way to
fail.)
3571. Omilèèyàn;bóbáṣànwáatúnṣàn
padà.
Humans are streams; they ﬂow forth and
ﬂow back. (People are not ﬁxed in one loca-
tion; no one knows where he or she will ﬁnd
himself or herself in the future.)
3572. Omitíamáamukìíṣànkọjáẹni.
T h ew a t e ro n ei sd e s t i n e dt od r i n kw i l l
Onfate 353


--- PAGE 367 ---
not ﬂow past. (One’s destiny will not pass
one by.)
3573. Òmùg/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowlèṣìṣekódọgb/oacutedotbelown;oríyàt/ogravedotbelowsórí.
The fool may commit a blunder that comes
to seem as wisdom; heads diﬀer from one
another. (Although some pay dearly for
their mistakes, others beneﬁt from mistakes
that fortuitously prove fortunate; it is all a
matter of chance.)
3574. Ònílarí,kòs/eacutedotbelownitóm/ogravedotbelowla.
Today is all we see; nobody knows tomor-
row. (No one knows what the future will
bring.)
3575. Oríburúkúl/ogravedotbelowb/oacutedotbelowní;/ogravedotbelowbọòl/eacutedotbelownubíẹṣin.
What the monkey has is ill luck; the mon-
key does not have a mouth like a horse’s. (It
is ill luck that brings unusual or unnatural
misfortunes.)
17
3576. Oríburúkútíḿmúọmọdépínitan
ẹran.
[It is] a great misfortune that entitles a
young person to the thigh of an animal.
(Used when adverse circumstances force
people to do ordinarily unacceptable
things.)
18
3577. Oríinúkìíj/eacutedotbelowkítòdesunw/ogravedotbelown.
The unseen head prevents the visible head
from prospering. (A person’s chosen [evil]
destiny will always keep him from prosper-
ing.)
3578. Orílaﬁmm/eacutedotbelowranláwo.
It is one’s luck that determines the piece
17. The monkey is restrained, or saddled, as a pet,
even though no one wants to ride it.
18. When an animal is killed for food, the thigh
usually goes to the oldest person in the household. The
youth gets the share in this case because all the elderly
people have died oﬀ.
of meat one takes from a plate.19 (How one
fares in life depends on luck.)
3579. Orílómọibiẹs/egravedotbelowńrè.
The head alone knows where the feet will
go. (One never knows where one’s destiny
will lead.)
3580. Oríloníṣe;/egravedotbelowdálèrè.
The head acts; one’s nature determines one’s
reward. (People act as their heads direct
them; their reward is according to their
nature.)
3581. Orítíkòníírúnàgbàdosùnníńgbéni
koẹl/eacutedotbelowrùiṣukan.
A head [destiny] that will not chew corn for
supper brings a certain bearer of yams one’s
way. (When matters seem hopeless, a way
out will surely materialize for the fortunate
person.)
3582. Orítíyógbenikìípanil/eacutedotbelowrù.
A head that will make one prosper will not
prove too heavy for one to carry. (Whatever
is destined to make one prosper will not
cause inconvenience.)
3583. Orítómáadádé,nínúagoroodẹníńti-
íyọ/oacutedotbelowwá;ọrùntíyóloèjìgbàìl/egravedotbelowk/egravedotbelow,nínú
agoroodẹníńti-íyọ/oacutedotbelowwá;bèbè-ìdítíyólo
m/oacutedotbelowsàajì,aṣọọbatókónáyanran-yanran,
nínúagoroodẹníńti-íyọ/oacutedotbelowwá.
The head that will wear a crown is so des-
tined from before the birth of the gods; the
neck that will be adorned with beads is so
destined from before the birth of the gods;
the waist that will wearm/oacutedotbelowsàajì,the cloth of
kings that is soft and shiny, is so destined
from before the birth of the gods. (One only
lives a course that was predetermined before
one’s birth.)
19. When people eat from a communal dish, no one
can be sure what piece of meat will fall to his or her lot.
354 human nature


--- PAGE 368 ---
3584. Orítómáajẹ/ogravedotbelowg/egravedotbelowd/egravedotbelowsùnkìígb/oacutedotbelow;bíw/oacutedotbelown
báńgbéyánb/ogravedotbelowwáfun,yóf/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelownidandan.
A head destined to eat plantains for supper
will not escape that destiny; if pounded yam
is being brought, it [the dish] will unfail-
ingly break. (There is no antidote or cure for
ill luck.)
3585. ÒrìṣàtíṢàngóòbálèmú,erélólèsá.
Whatever god Ṣango cannot catch must in-
deed be ﬂeet of foot. (Only extraordinarily
good fortune can save people from fate.)
3586. Òrìṣàtódáẹnuníbùúmọohuntíòunó
ﬁsíi.
The god who made the mouth horizontal
k n o w sw h a t[ f o o d ]h ew i l lp u ti ni t .( T h e
gods have a plan and a reason for whatever
t h e yh a v ec r e a t e d . )
3587. Òwútíìyágb/ogravedotbelownlọmọńran.
It is the cotton that the mother ﬂuﬀs that the
daughter spins. (Children take after their
parents.)
Ọ
3588. Ọkànẹnilàlùfáàẹni.
One’s heart is one’s priest. (The quality
of one’s heart determines how good one’s
fortune will be.)
3589. Ọl/oacutedotbelowrunlógbeÌgbìràgẹṣin.
It was God that placed an Ìgbìra man on
a horse. (One should not be angry at the
upstart who makes it big and becomes gar-
rulous; the blame is God’s.)
20
3590. Ọmọaráyéòf/eacutedotbelowkárẹrùkás/ogravedotbelow;oríẹniní
ńsọni.
The people of this world never want to see
20. The Yoruba consider Ìgbìrà people to be bump-
kins.
one carry a load and later set it down; only
one’s guardian spirit helps one set the load
down.
21 (People do not oﬀer to help others
out of diﬃculties; only providence does.)
3591. /Ogravedotbelowpáòlèpaagogo;abínúẹniòlèpa
kádàrádà.
A stick cannot kill a bell; ill wishers cannot
alter a person’s destiny. (No amount of ill
will by others will change God’s plan for a
person.)
3592. /Ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowèèyànlówùkókọw/oacutedotbelowbàpò,kádàrá
niòj/eacutedotbelow.
Many people would wish to dip their hands
into their pockets, but destiny prevents their
doing so. (Everybody wishes to be rich, but
destiny says otherwise.)
22
3593. /Ogravedotbelowtáńlùlùìbàj/eacutedotbelow,Ọl/oacutedotbelowrunòj/eacutedotbelowkódún.
One’s enemy is beating the drum of defa-
mation, but God won’t let it make a sound.
(God has frustrated the schemes of one’s
enemies.)
R
3594. Rìkíṣíògb/oacutedotbelowoògùn;Ọl/oacutedotbelowrunníḿbáni
ṣ/egravedotbelowt/eacutedotbelow-ẹrìkíṣí.
Intrigue cannot be combatted with medi-
cine; only God can help one conquer in-
trigue. (Only God can help one overcome
one’e enemies.)
S
3595. Saorímásaoògùn;oògùnníọj/oacutedotbelowìp/oacutedotbelownjú,
oríl/oacutedotbelowj/oacutedotbelowgbogbo.
21. Oríhere refers to the mystical force that deter-
mines each person’s destiny. Chance would equate to
fortune or luck.
22. The gesture of dipping the hand into the pocket
is for the purpose of pulling out money.
Onfate 355


--- PAGE 369 ---
Trust in your head and not in medicine;
medicine is for the day of hardship, but your
head is for every day. (It is better to trust in
one’s genius than in medicinal charms.)
Ṣ
3596. Ṣátánìlómúàt/ogravedotbelowsíààfáàwá;ẹl/eacutedotbelowhàákìí
jáde,ààfáàkìíyànlè.
Satan is to blame for the imam’s gonorrhea;
the wife conﬁned in the harem does not ven-
ture outdoors, and the imam does not keep
an illicit lover. (One has to be most inventive
to explain away a problem for which there
can be no one else to blame.)
T
3597. Taníńf/eacutedotbelowkájí?Aráyéòf/eacutedotbelownif/oacutedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow,àforí
ẹni.
Who ever wants one to wake up? People
never wish wealth for one, only one’s head
does. (People seldom wish that others pros-
per.)
3598. Tẹnímáasunw/ogravedotbelownkìígb/oacutedotbelow.
No one can block the path of good fortune
for someone destined to prosper. (No one
can stop another’s destiny.)
W
3599. Wíwòtéwúr/eacutedotbelowńwoalápatàbíikókú;orí
ẹniniòpani.
The look the goat gives the butcher wishes
death for the latter; only one’s head does
not deliver one to death. (Those adversely
aﬀected by year lawful duties may hate
you, but your head will protect you from
their machinations. Compare the following
entry.)
3600. Wíwòtíàńwàparò,bíikáﬁdálá,orí
ẹyẹniòpẹyẹ.
The way one eyes a partridge betrays a desire
to cook it in okro stew; only the bird’s head
says no to death. (One’s enemies look at
one with death in their eyes, but one’s des-
tiny says no to their desires. Compare the
preceding entry.)
3601. W/oacutedotbelownní/ogravedotbelownà-áwàníbìkan,oòbèèrè
l/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbeloworí.
They say a path is open somewhere, and
you did not ask your head [guiding spirit].
(Always seek the guidance of your guiding
power.)
356 human nature


--- PAGE 370 ---
On human vulnerability and limitations
A
3602. Af/eacutedotbelowẹnílé,af/eacutedotbelowẹlóko;b/oacutedotbelowm/oacutedotbelowbátilóyún,
kòparíná?
She is courted at home; she is courted on the
farm; once the girl becomes pregnant, will
there not be an end to courting? (However
attractive and desirable a woman may be,
once she becomes pregnant, she no longer
attracts suitors.)
3603. Akáàgbìgbòm/oacutedotbeloworíigi;ókubíẹy/eacutedotbelowti
máafò.
The bird àgbìgbòis treed; we shall see how it
will manage to escape.
1 (The game is up.)
3604. Akìígbéàárínojìèèyànkámáṣìwí.
One cannot live amid forty people and never
m i s s p e a k .( I ti si m p o s s i b l et ol i v ei nag r o u p
and never cause oﬀense.)
3605. Akìímọil/egravedotbelowọjà-ágbá.
One never knows how to sweep a market.
(If there is a multitude to please, one will
always leave some people disgruntled.)
3606. Akìím/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowgúnmò/oacutedotbelowt/egravedotbelowkíyánewùràmá
l/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowmọ.
One is never so good at pounding and
smoothing that the pounded yams one
makes with ewùràyams [also water yams]
will not be lumpy. (Certain tasks defeat even
the experts.)
1. This bird’s large head presumably might interfere
with its ﬂight. If the bird is well and truly treed, then, of
course, it cannot escape.
3607. Akìím/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbeloww/egravedotbelowkákáyéjá;b/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowkìnníkan
òwàájá;báaṣooretítíákùsíbìkan.
One is never so expert a swimmer that one
swims the whole world; no great man ever
swam it; no matter how much good one
does there will be some omission. (No one
can be all-wise in worldly matters.)
3608. Akìínàrókáọdún.
One cannot stand upright year-round.
(Everybody falls sometime.)
3609. Akìíríwàoníwàkáfọw/oacutedotbelowjurí.
One does not see other people’s behav-
ior and make the hand gesture indicating
the warding-oﬀ of abomination from one’s
head. (Do not rush to judge other people’s
behavior without knowing their reason.)
2
3610. Akìíṣeọmọjuọmọ/oacutedotbelowlé;akìíseọmọ
òrìṣàjuààfín.
One cannot be a better child than the gecko;
one cannot be a more favored child of the
gods than the albino. (No matter how hard
one tries, one cannot, as an outsider, dis-
place the favorite.)
3
2. The gesture as described is intended to ward oﬀ
any impending evil.
3. Ọmọ/oacutedotbelowlé(gecko) means, literally, ‘‘child of the
house,’’ and the gecko is always to be found on the walls
of houses; the albino is among those aﬄicted people
who are considered special wards of the gods.


--- PAGE 371 ---
3611. Akìíwáyékámáàlárùnkanlára;
ìjà-ìgborolàrùnÌbàdàn.
One does not come into this world and not
have a disease; street ﬁghting is the disease
of Ibadan people. (Ibadan people cannot
help street ﬁghting; other people have other
peculiar second natures.)
3612. Alègbéomilénádeelégbò,ṣùgb/oacutedotbelownaò
lèwẹẹs/egravedotbelowdèé.
One may heat water in preparation for the
person with an ulcer, but one cannot clean
t h eu l c e ru n t i lh eo rs h ea r r i v e s .( T h e r ei sa
limit to the help one can render another per-
son, especially a person who will not make
an eﬀort on his or her own behalf.)
3613. Aníkíohuntówuniwá,ohuntódára-á
b/oacutedotbelowsíl/egravedotbelow;bódáratíkòwunińk/oacutedotbelow?
We call for something to which we are at-
tracted, and something beautiful presents
itself; what if we are not attracted to it de-
spite its beauty? (Beauty is in the eyes of the
beholder.)
3614. Aníkómúwá,óníkòsí;ahunnilójú
alágbe.
He is asked for alms and says he has nothing
to give; to the beggar he appears as a miser.
(People are often unmindful of the fact that
other people have their own problems.)
3615. Àńk/oacutedotbelowléikin,àńy/ogravedotbelowd/egravedotbelowd/egravedotbelowim/ogravedotbelow,hòròniilé
àgbék/eacutedotbelowhìn.
Though we build houses of thatch, though
we make corridors of palm leaves, it is to a
grave that we will retire in the end. (What-
ever a person’s riches, in the end he or she
winds up in a grave.)
3616. Apeẹl/eacutedotbelowf/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelow-ọt/egravedotbelowt/egravedotbelow,oni,‘‘Tààtànk/oacutedotbelow.’’
We hail a spinach seller, and she protests
that her spinach is not from the dung heap.
(The evildoer’s conscience will betray him
or her.)
3617. Arìnfààlójúak/eacutedotbelowgàn;ayankàṣàlójú
abúni;abúniòníokòónílé.
One strolls nonchalantly before a detrac-
tor; one struts proudly before a slanderer;
the slanderer has not 20 cowries at home.
(One need not pay a worthless detractor any
mind.)
3618. Aṣeohungbogbotán;tiẹl/eacutedotbelownulókù.
We have done all we can do; what detractors
will say is another matter. (Even after doing
one’s best, one cannot control what critics
will say.)
3619. Ààlà-átó,ìmàleòdúródeara-awọn.
The time for ablutions arrives; Muslims do
not wait for one another. (Each person bears
his or her own responsibility.)
3620. Àánúojúòj/eacutedotbelowkáfọw/oacutedotbelowbojú;ìb/egravedotbelowrùejòò
jékátẹọmọejòm/oacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelow.
Compassion keeps one from covering one’s
eyes; fear of the snake keeps one from step-
ping on its young. (One’s good behavior
may be due to goodness or to fear of what
repercussions misbehavior might entail.)
4
3621. Àáyáṣ/eacutedotbelowjú,ọmọ-ọr/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowkiọw/oacutedotbelowb/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelow.
The colobus monkey blinks, and its child
pokes its ﬁngers into the monkey’s eyes.
(Children are a handful for their parents,
who cannot always be quick enough to stop
their mischief.)
3622. Abanilóríj/eacutedotbelow:ilé-er/egravedotbelowníńtiímúabẹwá.
He who will deface one’s head brings his
razor from his own house.
5 (Detractors do
4. Àánúojú, translated as ‘‘compassion,’’ literally
means either ‘‘kindness that resides in the eyes,’’ or
‘‘kindness toward the eyes’’ (hence compassion for the
eyes). The play on the expression therefore permits the
understanding of the ﬁrst part of the proverb as stat-
ing that one’s compassion for the eyes keeps one from
covering them.
5. Abanilóríj/eacutedotbelowliterally means ‘‘spoiler of another’s
358 human nature


--- PAGE 372 ---
not depend on the cooperation of those they
malign.)
3623. Abarapátigbogboèèyàn;òkùnrùn
tẹnìkanṣoṣo.
Sprightliness is everybody’s; indisposition
is one person’s alone. (People will fraternize
with a lively person; nobody fraternizes with
a sickly person.)
3624. Àbàtátakétébíẹnipékòbáodòtan.
The marsh stands apart as though it is not
r e l a t e dt ot h er i v e r .( I ti sf u t i l et od e n yr e -
sponsibility for, or knowledge of, an event
when the evidence of the truth is obvious
and incontrovertible. Some people some-
times ﬁnd it expedient to deny any relation-
ship with relatives.)
3625. Ab/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowjádìí,àkísàńy/ogravedotbelowṣ/egravedotbelowṣ/egravedotbelow;óròpé
òyìnbóògúnm/oacutedotbelow.
The needle’s eye breaks, and the cloth re-
joices; it thinks the white man has ceased
making needles. (Do not rejoice at your
formidable adversary’s temporary discomﬁ-
ture.)
3626. Àbík/eacutedotbelowhìn-ingb/egravedotbelowgẹtíńyọolókol/eacutedotbelownu.
The last born of the brown monkey: the
nemesis of the farmer. (Said of a problem
that deﬁes easy solution.)
6
3627. Àbíkúsọolóògùndèké.
A child that is born to die makes a quack
out of the medicine man. (No amount of
eﬀort to the contrary will prevent what is
ordained. Compare 2747.)
head’’ but in this instance suggests spoiling the cut of
one’s hair.
6. The youngest of a brood of monkeys is char-
acteristically a brat. The construction is technically a
descriptive phrase that has no main verb, literally, ‘‘The
last born of the monkey, that infuriates the farmer.’’ The
word tí(that) is understood in this case to be equivalent
to ni(it is that).
3628. Abínúẹnikòs/eacutedotbelow/ogravedotbelowràndeni.
He who wants no good for one does not
plead one’s innocence in one’s absence.
(Expect no kindness from an enemy.)
3629. Àb/ogravedotbelowlàńyailé/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowtíkòwuni.
It is on one’s way back home from a trip
that one stops at the home of a friend one
does not like. (One will always ﬁnd ways
to temporize on an unpalatable obliga-
tion.)
3630. A-bọ-eégúnòréégún;ab/ogravedotbelowrìṣàòrórìṣà;
ìmàléforíbal/egravedotbelowkòr/Oacutedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowrun.
The worshiper of eégúndoes not see eégún;
the worshiper of a god does not see the
god; the Muslim bows to the ground [at
prayer] but does not see the High God.
(One often does not see the person one
serves.)
3631. A-bojú-gòdògbàkìíríranl/oacutedotbelownàméjì.
A person with huge eyes does not see in
two directions at once. (The size of the eyes
oﬀers no special advantage.)
3632. Abukélóruẹrùòrìṣàmás/ogravedotbelow.
A humpback carries a god-imposed bur-
den that cannot be laid down. (Congenital
conditions cannot be easily vacated.)
3633. Abukésùnkákàbíẹnítasíná.
The humpback sleeps all spread out like
one bloated in a ﬁre. (Deformity prevents
graceful sleeping postures.)
3634. A-búni-l/oacutedotbelowlẹòmọohuntíńṣeni.
The person who calls one a lazy person does
not know what one’s problem is. (No one
knows others’ private woes.)
3635. Àdábánìjà;ẹnitíìjàòbáníńpera-ar/egravedotbelow
l/oacutedotbelowkùnrin.
Fights are uninvited plagues; it is he who is
not visited by a ﬁght that boasts about his
Onhumanvulnerability 359


--- PAGE 373 ---
manhood. (Manliness is sometimes a matter
of good fortune.)7
3636. Àdàbàònááníàńkùngb/eacutedotbelow;inájó,ẹy/eacutedotbelowfò
lọ.
The dove is not bothered that one sets ﬁre
to the brush; the ﬁre rages, and the bird ﬂies
away. (One cannot be hurt by eventualities
to which one is immune.)
3637. Adánilóróòṣééf/egravedotbelowhìntì.
A person who habitually causes others pain
is no one to trust. (Know your enemy.)
3638. Adáramáṣuòsí.
There is no one so beautiful or handsome
that she or he never has to empty her or his
bowels. (Even the most illustrious person is
still human.)
3639. Adì/eacutedotbelowbàlókùn;araòrọokùn,araòrọ
adìẹ.
The chicken alighted on a rope; the rope
cannot relax, and the chicken cannot relax.
(One person’s problems are problems also
for those close to him or her.)
3640. Adìẹìbál/oacutedotbelowk/oacutedotbelow,ìbáﬁààtànṣen-ǹkan.
Had the chicken a hoe, it would have
worked wonders with the dung heap.
8 (One’s
accomplishments are often limited by one’s
means rather than by one’s aspirations.)
3641. Adìẹńlàágùn;ìhùùhùniòj/eacutedotbelowkám/ogravedotbelow.
The chicken sweats, but its down prevents
us from knowing. (Everybody has his or her
problems, although strangers may not guess.
Compare 4041.)
7. The combinationàdábá(uninvited problem) and
ìjà(ﬁght) suggests ìjà/mgravebá(disaster).
8. Judging by what the chicken does to the dung
heap with its talons alone, perhaps it is a good thing
that it does not have a hoe.
3642. Adìẹòpìpìkìírápágunorílé.
The ﬂightless chicken never has the wings
to ﬂy to the top of the roof. (One’s enemies
will not have the means to injure one; or,
ap e r s o nw i l ln e v e rh a v et h em e a n st o
thrive.)
3643. Aditíwonil/eacutedotbelownusùn-ùn.
The deaf person stares ﬁxedly at people’s
mouths. (One acts according to one’s capa-
bilities.)
3644. Af/eacutedotbelowf/eacutedotbelowńgbáerukulálá;/egravedotbelowfúùfùńmiewé
àgb/oacutedotbelownjìà-jìà.
The wind whips the dust into a storm; the
strong breeze whips the coconut leaves to a
frenzy. (Everyone is beset with problems.)
3645. Àgádámádìẹd/ogravedotbelowlẹ.
The grass shelter makes the chicken lazy.
(Too much ease discourages resourceful-
ness.)
3646. Agílítí,a-bara-yíyi.
Lizard, thick-skinned creature. (To each his
or her ﬂaws.)
3647. Àgùntànòìt/iacuteigravekúàńwìíníná;bóbáwá
kúńk/oacutedotbelow?
The sheep is not yet dead, and it is already
being massaged with ﬁre to burn the hair
oﬀ its skin; what will happen then after its
d e a t h ?( I fp e o p l ed oe v i lt oap e r s o nw h e n
the person is present, what can one expect
them to do when the person is not?)
3648. Àgùntànòpaaṣọèṣídà.
The sheep does not change its clothing from
year to year. (Old habits die hard.)
3649. Àgùntànpòpóṣeońdèl/oacutedotbelowrùn:oníkálukú
a-bi-ti/egravedotbelow-lára.
Sacriﬁcial sheep with leather charms around
i t sn e c k :e a c hp e r s o nh a sh i so rh e ro w n
problems. (To each his or her problems.)
360 human nature


--- PAGE 374 ---
3650. ÀgbàÌjèṣàòlèṣàìjobì.
An Ìjèṣà elder cannot refrain from chewing
kola nuts. (Do not begrudge people what
they crave.)
3651. Agbádáyal/oacutedotbelowrùn,óbàj/eacutedotbelow.
The grand traditional garment rips around
the neck and becomes ruined. (An object
that loses its utility loses it value.)
3652. A-gbáhéré-yánánia-gbénú-oko-yá-
òòrùn.
Person-who-sits-by-the-ﬁre-inside-the-
hut is one-who-suns-himself-on-the-farm.
(One’s habits follow one, whether at home
or on the farm.)
3653. Àgb/egravedotbelowrokoroko,wọnkàṣàìgbàgbéewé
kansébè.
However thoroughly a farmer might weed
his farm, he will not fail to overlook some
leaf on a mound. (No one can achieve per-
fection.)
3654. Agb/oacutedotbelownminíńwóléẹja;apàjùbàníńwólé
àparò;òlùgbóńgbótìǹlàniw/oacutedotbelownﬁńṣ/eacutedotbelowgun
ògúlùtu.
Who drains the stream destroys the home
of the ﬁsh; who clears the forest for farm-
ing destroys the home of the partridge; a
huge cudgel is the weapon for conquering
what is left of a wall. (Each situation has its
proper medicine, and each person his or her
nemesis.)
3655. Ahúnbuòkèlè,ọmọ-ọr/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowlanu,óníó
gb/oacutedotbelowb/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowòunrí?
Tortoise takes a morsel of food and its child
opens its mouth; Tortoise asks wherever did
the child hear such a report about it? (Never
e x p e c tap e r s o nt oa c tc o n t r a r yt oh i so rh e r
nature.)
9
9. Another reference toahun,tortoise, as embody-
ing miserliness, so that its name has come to mean
‘‘miser.’’
3656. Ahuntóyọkùn,omilómuyó.
A miser who has a potbelly got it by drink-
ing water. (A shiftless person’s prosperity
comes by unwholesome means.)
10
3657. Àìm/ogravedotbelowkìípaọmọ.
Ignorance does not kill a child. (There are
worse things in a child than ignorance.)
3658. Àìm/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowjónikìíj/eacutedotbelowkíàlejòójó.
It is ignorance about dancing that keeps a
stranger from dancing. (Ignorance about the
customs of a place keeps the outsider from
full integration.)
3659. Àìtètèjíinú/ogravedotbelowtáńdùn,ajítáninúḿbí
wọn.
One’s lateness in getting up in the morning
makes one’s enemies happy; once one is up
and about, they become angry. (One’s ene-
mies always rejoice at the prospect of one’s
demise.)
3660. Ajáẹgb/egravedotbelowrúnògb/oacutedotbeloworúkọ.
A dog bought for 1,000 cowries does not
recognize or heed its name. (One cannot
teach a cheap dog anything. One gets what
o n ep a y sf o r . )
3661. Ajáníńláomil/eacutedotbelowbàá-l/eacutedotbelowbàá;eṣinṣinò
kúnàtẹìl/egravedotbelowk/egravedotbelow;ọmọríigbáòfìdíkal/egravedotbelowkógún
r/eacutedotbelowgí-r/eacutedotbelowgí.
It is a dog that licks water with its tongue;
ﬂies will not ﬁll a tray for beads; the lid
of a calabash cannot sit straight upright.
(Certain things are characteristic of certain
people; each has his or her limitations.)
3662. Ajáòyìnbódára,ókuàtiṣọdẹ.
The white man’s dog is beautiful, but it lacks
10. The Yoruba regard a potbelly as evidence of
rich feeding and therefore of prosperity. The miser,
of course, is too stingy with his money to spend it on
food.
Onhumanvulnerability 361


--- PAGE 375 ---
the ability to hunt. (A beautiful thing that
has no use is nothing to be desired.)
3663. Ajátópaikúnlónìíḿb/ogravedotbelowwápa/ogravedotbelowyàl/oacutedotbelowla;
kámáfìbínúpajá.
A dog that kills a squirrel today will kill a
cane rat tomorrow; one should, therefore,
not kill the dog in anger. (One should not
write anybody oﬀ because the person has
suﬀered one setback.)
3664. Àjàpáníbíòúnbájẹ,tíòúnmu,tíòún
yó,araòunayá;ṣùgb/oacutedotbelownìgbàtíòúnbárántí
iránìdíòun,òunabús/eacutedotbelowkúnp/egravedotbelowr/egravedotbelow.
Tortoise says when it has eaten and drunk
to its ﬁll, it becomes cheerful, but when it
remembers its coccyx, it breaks into tears.
(Even in the best of circumstances one is left
with some blemish.)
3665. Àj/eacutedotbelowòlèjẹòkú.
A witch cannot eat the dead. (A person
dies only once and, once dead, is safe from
witches and enemies.)
3666. Ajédéjẹkìíjẹ/ogravedotbelowkanmọ.
A-person-who-sneakily-eats-shrimps does
not stop after eating only one. (Small trans-
gressions tend to become a habit.)
3667. AkátáńdÍfá,ẹtàńdìbò,ìkamùdùn
ńyìnbọnìdí;w/oacutedotbelownníkíníńrùn?
The akátábird is consulting the oracle,
the civet cat is casting lots, and the stink
ant is expelling gas; yet people ask what is
smelling. (Certain phenomena have their
unmistakable signs.)
11
3668. Akáyínòmọefùrù-úpè.
A person with a missing tooth does not
11. Given the circumstances, the stink is inevitable;
the cause is obvious. The three creatures named are
reputed for their smell.
know how to pronounceefùrù.12 (One is
limited by one’s nature.)
3669. Ak/oacutedotbelowk/oacutedotbelowdáj/oacutedotbelowl/ogravedotbelowtáẹl/eacutedotbelowj/oacutedotbelow.
The ﬁrst judge is the enemy of the litigant.
(Few people take criticism kindly.)
3670. Akọkọlúkọẹbọníńpaigúnl/eacutedotbelowrù.
It is a veritable masculine [high-quality]
oﬀering that weighs down the vulture. (Cer-
tain obligations make one regret taking
them on.)
13
3671. A-k/oacutedotbelowni-ká-bàj/eacutedotbelowòṣeti/egravedotbelowb/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelow.
He-who-coaches-one-into-ruin does not
manage his own aﬀairs the same way. (Peo-
ple who will preside over the destruction of
others know how to protect themselves.)
3672. Àkùk/oacutedotbelowkìípamọ.
A rooster does not hatch eggs. (There is
a limit to what one can expect of people;
c e r t a i nt h i n g sa r ec o n t r a r yt on a t u r e . )
3673. Alágb/egravedotbelowd/eacutedotbelowòf/eacutedotbelowkíoguntánláyé.
The blacksmith [who makes weapons] does
not wish for an end of wars on earth. (Self-
interest is paramount.)
3674. Alákàràkìíf/eacutedotbelowkíẹnìkejìgbéagbada.
The seller of bean fritters does not wish that
another person acquire a deep-frying pot.
(No trader wants competition.)
3675. Alákàṣùòf/eacutedotbelowkíẹnitóràáyó.
The seller of corn-meal loaves does not
12. Efùrùis a type of yam. A gap in the teeth makes
pronouncing the ‘‘f ’’ sound diﬃcult.
13. The proverb is often found in the form of an ex-
clamation at an oppressive duty, but in that case theni
(ní)is replaced withtí.The proverb refers to Vulture’s
volunteering to take an oﬀering to heaven to induce
God to send rain and then being caught in the deluge
on its way back (see note 72 to 1003).
362 human nature


--- PAGE 376 ---
wish buyers to be full. (Self-interest is para-
mount.)
3676. Aláṣọdúdúl/ogravedotbelowtáayé;èèyànbíàparò
layéńf/eacutedotbelow.
The person in black is begrudged by human-
kind; humankind loves people like par-
tridges. (People love those they can take
advantage of.)
14
3677. Àp/oacutedotbelowntọrọọb/egravedotbelow;kòmọoyeàńkólá.
The bachelor begs for stew; he does not
know how much okro costs. (A person
ignorant of a trade does not appreciate its
diﬃculties.)
3678. Àròyéniṣ/eacutedotbelowìbakà;kíniṣ/eacutedotbelowẹyẹlóko?
Chattering is the burden of the Senegal
canary; what is the trait of the birds on the
farm? (Said of a talkative or idle person.)
3679. Asòtít/oacutedotbelowògbéil/egravedotbelow/Egravedotbelowy/ogravedotbelow;pur/oacutedotbelowpur/oacutedotbelowògbéil/egravedotbelow
Awúsá.
Speakers-of-the-truth do not live in the
land of /Egravedotbelowy/ogravedotbelow (Àwórì); speakers-of-lies do
not live in Hausaland. (Certain peoples are
characterized by certain ethnic qualities.)
3680. Àṣáòkú,arańtaẹtù;àwòdìáwoìgbín
k/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow.
The kite does not die, and the partridge is
anxious; the eagle watches the snail from the
corner of its eye. (If one’s nemesis thrives,
one is anxious, especially when one has no
means of defense or retaliation.)
3681. Aṣọèṣínòyẹni,bíitiaṣọ/egravedotbeloww/ogravedotbelownk/oacutedotbelow.
Last year’s clothing is not proper for people,
but that does not apply to prison uniforms.
(Adverse circumstances may force people
14. Black clothing is invulnerable to stain, but the
partridge has a reputation for being a ready victim.
to live by conditions they would normally
shun.)
3682. Aṣọtuntunníńṣeolúwa-ar/egravedotbelowtòde-tòde.
A new dress impels its owner to roam out-
doors. (One is ever eager to show oﬀ one’s
new acquisitions.)
3683. Aṣọ-/oacutedotbelowl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowkòníèékánná;èèyàn-án
l/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowkòníìbàl/egravedotbelow.
Cloths have arms but no nails; humans have
arms but no reaching-the-ground. (Every
creature has some failing.)
15
3684. A-ti-kékeré-ṣẹrúòmọyìọmọlúwàbí.
One-who-has-been-a-slave-since-childhood
does not appreciate being a freeborn. (A
stranger to freedom does not appreciate it.)
3685. À-t/ogravedotbelow-ìṣíw/oacutedotbelowlàḿmòkóbó.
Urinating-without-ceasing is what betrays
the eunuch. (One’s secret ﬂaws have ways of
making themselves public.)
3686. AwoEégúnlobìnrínlèṣe,awoG/egravedotbelowl/egravedotbelowd/eacutedotbelow
lobìnrínlèwò;bóbìnrínbáfojúkanOrò,Orò
ágbée.
Only the mystery of Eégunis accessible to
women; it is only the mystery ofG/egravedotbelowl/egravedotbelowd/eacutedotbelowthat
women may watch; if a woman catches a
glimpse of Orò, Orò will make an end of
her. (Only certain rites are allowed to certain
people; the rest are proscribed.)
3687. Àw/ogravedotbelownlẹwò,ẹòlèrí eégún.
The netting is all you can see; you cannot see
the masquerader himself. (Some mysteries
are available only to the initiate.)
16
15. The Yoruba say of a cloth wider than usual that
it has arms, ól/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow,and of a wider-than-usual wrapper
that it has the quality of reaching to the ﬂoor,óníìbàl/egravedotbelow
(or ìbal/egravedotbelow).
16. The masquerader’s visor is made of netting that
Onhumanvulnerability 363


--- PAGE 377 ---
3688. A-w/oacutedotbelown-bí-ọgb/oacutedotbelown,aṣòroódàbíàgbà.
Scarce-as-wisdom, diﬃcult-to-become-
as-an-elder. (Wisdom is not common;
achieving the traits of a sage is not easy.)
3689. Àyèìl/egravedotbelowk/egravedotbelowòsínídìíadìẹ.
T h e r ei sn or o o mf o rb e a d so nt h ew a i s to fa
chicken. (Not every person can wear ﬁnery
to good eﬀect.)
3690. Ayélèpafìtílà/egravedotbelowyẹ.
The world is capable of snuﬃng one’s lamp
of glory. (People are capable of damaging
one’s good reputation.)
B
3691. Baálédim/eacutedotbelowta,itanadì/eacutedotbelowdàròyé.
Husbands number three; a chicken’s thigh
becomes a bone of contention. (Too many
claims on meager resources result in dissen-
sion.)
3692. Bíabámáagbàwìnlàńṣeojúàánú;bí
abáyótánàdiọmọọba.
When one wants to make a purchase on
credit, one wears a friendly look; after one
has satisﬁed oneself, one becomes a prince.
(Pleasantness lasts no longer than one’s need
for favors.)
3693. Bíakòbáforísọ,akìímọìr/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowb/egravedotbelow.
If one has not butted one’s head against a
beam, one does not learn to stoop. (Nothing
teaches caution like a mishap.)
3694. Bíakòbápaìjíhanìjí,/egravedotbelowrùkìíbaìjí.
Unless one kills a brown monkey and shows
it to a brown monkey, the brown monkey
does not learn fear. (People seldom learn
caution until danger has brushed by them.)
permits the wearer to see but remain unidentiﬁable by
spectators.
3695. Bíakòbáṣubú,akìímọẹrù-údì.
If one has not fallen, one does not learn how
best to pack one’s load. (One learns only
after one has erred.)
3696. Bíàwòdìòkú,adìẹòlèsinmi.
If the kite does not die, the chickens cannot
relax. (As long as danger persists, one must
be vigilant.)
3697. BíBásèòsè,kíniBáláólàá?
If Help-Cook does not cook, what will Help-
Lick lick? (If nothing is available, one cannot
expect anything.)
3698. Bíebíbáńpaejò,ahunkìíyan;àtahun
àtejò,ẹranjíjẹ.
If a snake is hungry, a tortoise should not
go strutting by; both snake and tortoise are
edible meat. (One should always be vigilant
and stay away from dangerous situations.)
3699. Bíeṣúbájẹokotáneṣúálọ,aku
alátanpopo.
Having devoured the farm, the locusts will
depart, leaving the cricket behind. (When
one has surmounted one’s greatest obstacle,
the little ones will remain to claim one’s
attention.)
3700. Bíetíkògb/oacutedotbelowyìnkìn,inúkìíbàj/eacutedotbelow.
If the ears do not hear bad news, the mind
does not become unhappy. (Depression
does not occur for no reason; it follows bad
tidings.)
3701. Bíìgbáòsokúdu-kùdu,kílọmọẹrankó
ójẹ?
If the bitter tomato does not fruit abun-
dantly, what will young animals eat? (If the
provider does not provide, the dependents
suﬀer.)
3702. Bíikúbátil/egravedotbelowkùn,ebiníńṣíi.
If death locks a door, hunger will open it.
364 human nature


--- PAGE 378 ---
(The disconsolate mourner will sooner or
later yield to hunger.)
3703. Bíilékòbákanilé,wọnkìíjóàjóràn.
If houses do not abut, they do not catch ﬁre
from one another. (Unless one is associated
with a person in trouble, one does not share
in it.)
3704. Bíiléńjó,bíolèńjà,ẹniebińpayómáa
wí.
If the house is on ﬁre, if a burglar is at work,
the hungry person will say his or her piece.
(One’s private woes take precedence over
public disasters.)
3705. Bíìrònúbáp/ogravedotbelow,bíikúòt/egravedotbelowle,àrùnńk/oacutedotbelow?
If brooding is excessive, and if death does
not result, what about disease? (Excessive
brooding is not healthy.)
3706. Bíiṣúbátánlóko,obìnrinadiàwòdì;a
níríràlòúntúnńràjẹkiriòo.
When there are no more yams on the farm,
o n e ’ sw o m a nb e c o m e sah a w k ;s h es a y s
she is now reduced to going around to buy
food.
17 (In lean times, one’s dependents
often fail to hide their disappointment in
one’s capacity as a provider.)
3707. Bíiwínbíiwínníńṣeọl/Oacutedotbelowya;bíiwèrè
bíiwèrèníńṣeelÈṣù;àjótàpáàjópòyìníńṣe
oníṢàngó.
Like imbecility, like imbecility is the action
of the Ọya worshiper; like madness, like
madness is the action of the Èṣù wor-
shiper; dancing-with-kicking, dancing-
and-spinning is the hallmark of the Ṣango
worshiper. (Each occupation has its peculiar
habits.)
18
17. The proverb plays on the verbrà,which can
mean either ‘‘buy’’ or ‘‘hover,’’ the latter being applied
to the hawk’s predatory tactic.
18. The saying could be part of an incantation to
invoke madness in a person.
3708. Bíìyàńlábágbéniṣánl/egravedotbelow,ké-kè-kéa
máagoríẹni.
When a great misfortune ﬂoors us, small
ones climb on us. (People who would other-
wise not dare to will take advantage of a
p e r s o nw h oi sd o w n . )
3709. Bíkòsít/ogravedotbelowm/ogravedotbelow,kílàńwánífùr/ogravedotbelowonífùr/ogravedotbelow.
Were it not on account of children, what
business would one have with another per-
son’s genitals? (Necessity imposes obliga-
tions.)
3710. Bíóbádiibiyíyan,ògòǹgòasúnkì.
When it comes to frying, the palm weevil
will contract. (If the disaster is big enough,
the strongest person feels the eﬀect.)
3711. Bíobáf/eacutedotbelowb/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowkìnní-ít/eacutedotbelow,jírelé-er/egravedotbelow
láf/egravedotbelow/egravedotbelowm/oacutedotbelowjúm/oacutedotbelow;woẹnítót/eacutedotbelowsùn;woaṣọtóﬁ
ḿbora.
If you wish to deﬂate a dandy, go to his
home in the early dawn; look at the mat he
sleeps on, and look at the sheet he covers
himself with. (The dandy abroad is often
ﬁlthy at home.)
3712. BíótiwùkáṣeÌbàdàntó,apákanìlú
làńrí.
However long one lives in Ibadan, one sees
only one part of the city. (No one can know
all about the aﬀairs of a city or person.)
3713. Bíòjòòr/ogravedotbelow,bíàgbàdoògbó,kíniọmọ
aráyéójẹ?
If rain does not fall, and corn does not
mature, what will humans eat? (If the
powers people rely on do not fulﬁll their
obligations, the masses face peril.)
3714. Bíòrubíòruníńṣealáṣọdúdú.
Eager anticipation of nightfall is the mind-
set of the person wearing black-colored
garments. (One always seeks operating con-
ditions conducive to one’s circumstances.)
Onhumanvulnerability 365


--- PAGE 379 ---
3715. Bíọmọdébálówó,ìgbéraganíńdàlójú
àgbà.
If a youth is wealthy, his actions seem like
pride in the eyes of the elders. (Older people
are not beyond being jealous of youthful
success.)
3716. Bí/ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowbáf/egravedotbelowhìnlél/egravedotbelow,nǹkanlóńṣeé.
If a toad lies on its back, something is the
matter with it. (If a person does the unex-
pected, there must be a reason.)
3717. Bíp/eacutedotbelowp/eacutedotbelowyẹ/eacutedotbelowbájẹòkúta,ominiyóﬁṣu.
If a duck eats stones, it evacuates them in
the form of water. (No matter what the cir-
cumstances, some people cannot change
their nature or habits.)
E
3718. Ebiòm/ogravedotbelowpéoókanòsínílé;bíojúbá
m/oacutedotbelow,ebiamáapani.
Hunger does not care that there is not one
single cowrie shell in the home; when morn-
ing breaks, hunger assails one. (Hunger does
not leave one alone simply because one is
poor.)
3719. Eégúnd/eacutedotbelowbi,kòṣéégbálójú.
The masquerader judges one guilty, and
yet one dares not slap him. (Against some
people one has no recourse.)
19
3720. Èèm/ogravedotbelowníÌm/ogravedotbelow:Oním/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowsòpá,ayaar/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelow
dégbò.
Unspeakable abomination: the ruler of Imọ
contracts hydroceles, and his wife develops a
sore. (Even those people to whom one would
look up are blighted.)
19. It is because they are believed to be the embodi-
ments of the spirits of departed ancestors that theeégún
are sacrosanct.
3721. Èèyànbíàparòlayéńf/eacutedotbelow.
Humankind favors only partridgelike
people. (People warm only to those less
fortunate than themselves.)
20
3722. Èèyàngígùnòṣé-ébọòrìṣàméjì.
A tall person is not enough sacriﬁce for
two gods. (The mightiest person is still one
person. Compare 3750.)
3723. Èèyànkanníńrọkangaram/oacutedotbelownil/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow.
It is a person who fashions a billhook and
thrusts it into one’s hand. (Impositions
do not materialize by themselves; there is
always human agency behind them.)
3724. Èèyànníńk/oacutedotbelownikágùn;èèyànníńk/oacutedotbelowni
kákúrú.
People teach one to be tall [or long]; people
teach one to be short. (One soon learns from
experience how to cope with the devious
ways of humans.)
3725. Egbinrin/ogravedotbelowt/egravedotbelow:àńpàkan,/ogravedotbelowkanńhù.
Plots like wild vegetables: one eliminates
one, and another sprouts. (Some prob-
lems are so resistant that they are virtually
impossible to resolve.)
3726. Ejiw/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelow-w/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowníńléọmọwọlé;àgbàrá
òjòńláníńmi/ogravedotbelowg/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowtìtìl/eacutedotbelows/egravedotbelow.
It is a light rain that chases a child indoors;
it is a raging torrent that shakes the raﬃa
palm to its roots. (Every person, however
lowly or mighty, has his or her nemesis.)
3727. Ejòòkóọmọ/egravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowhìnj/egravedotbelowyọọ-y/ogravedotbelow/ogravedotbelow-yọọ
kánúigbó.
A snake does not wander in the bush with
all its young in train. (Each person pursues
h i so rh e rd e s t i n ys i n g l y . )
20. The partridge’s inelegant plumage suggests
poverty.
366 human nature


--- PAGE 380 ---
3728. Èkéníńroj/oacutedotbelow;ìkàníńdáa.
The person stating a case is devious; the
person judging it is evil. (One’s adversary
and the person one looks to for justice are in
league together.)
3729. Èlùb/oacutedotbelowṣègbodòrí;ẹrúṣọmọrínílé-e
bàbá/egravedotbelow.
Y a mﬂ o u rw a so n c ef r e s hy a m ;as l a v ew a s
once a child in his father’s house. (No one is
immune to a change in fortune.)
3730. Erínkúmàǹgúdúﬁjẹ;ẹf/ogravedotbelown-/oacutedotbelownkú
màǹgúdúﬁjẹ;màǹgúdúkúkòr/eacutedotbelownij/egravedotbelowun.
The elephant dies andmàǹgúdúdevours it;
the buﬀalo dies and màǹgúdúdevours it;
màǹgúdúdies but ﬁnds no one to devour it.
(The person or thing that serves the needs
of all others usually has no one or nothing
to serve his, her, or its own needs.)
21
3731. Èṣùìbátilà,akówó-ẹbọniòj/eacutedotbelow.
Èṣù would have prospered, but the people
who remove the money from sacriﬁces have
thwarted him. (Hard though one may work,
others may block the way of one’s success.)
22
3732. Etíkìítóbikógb/oacutedotbelow/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowméjel/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowkanṣoṣo.
Ears are never so large that they can hear
[decipher] seven messages all at once. (There
is an existential limit to human capabilities.)
3733. EtílobìnrínﬁńgbóhùnOrò.
Only with her ears does a woman hear the
voice of Orò. (The sight of Orò is forbidden
to a certain class of people.)
21. Màǹgúdúis apparently a word designating only
the person or thing that serves all others.
22. Èṣù is a god who receives sacriﬁce either in his
own right or as an intermediary between people and
their gods. The sacriﬁce, often left at crossroads, usually
includes some palm oil and some money. People whose
need is greater than their fear of the god scoop up the
money when they come upon such sacriﬁces.
E/dotbelow
3734. /Egravedotbelowbìtìòpeèrà;aráiléẹniníńpani.
A trap does not kill an ant; people of one’s
household engineer one’s death. (The enemy
within is the one to fear. Compare 3747.)
3735. /EgravedotbelowbùnỌl/oacutedotbelowrunòkanọgb/oacutedotbelown.
God’s gift has nothing to do with wisdom.
(Natural gifts are nothing to take credit for.)
3736. /Egravedotbelowhìnkùlél/ogravedotbelowtáwà;ilélaṣenińgbé.
One’s back yard is where one’s enemy is to
be found; it is in one’s home that the per-
son who means one harm lives. (One’s most
dangerous enemies are those closest to one.)
3737. Ẹj/oacutedotbelowbáọ,bí/ogravedotbelowrànìkúnl/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowbáarọ.
Trouble has found you, just as the compul-
sion to kneel has found the cripple. (You
have just as much chance of escaping trouble
as the cripple has of avoiding crawling.)
3738. Ẹj/oacutedotbelowníḿbámo-kó-mo-ròwa.
‘‘I will tell all I know’’ results from a dispute.
(If there were no dispute, one would not be
required to explain; when one lands in an
unfortunate situation, inconveniences are
piled on.)
3739. Ẹl/eacutedotbelowd/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowpàf/ogravedotbelowtán,óńwáẹnireretíòunó
farayí.
The pig, after wallowing in the mud, goes
looking for a decent person to rub bodies
with. (Evil people are always on the prowl
for decent people to corrupt. Compare
3355.)
3740. Ẹniàbáf/egravedotbelowhìntìíj/eacutedotbelowẹl/eacutedotbelowgùn-ún;ẹniàbá
ﬁnúhàn-ánj/eacutedotbelowaláròkiri.
The person one would lean on turns out to
be thorny; the person one would conﬁde in
turns out to be a blabbermouth. (There are
few people one can really trust.)
Onhumanvulnerability 367


--- PAGE 381 ---
3741. Ẹniagbójúolókùnlékìíṣẹniẹgba.
T h ep e r s o nf o rw h o mo n eh a sr e a d i e da
r o p ei sn o to n ef o rw h o maw h i pi sa p p r o -
priate. (The person one has been spoiling to
destroy turns out to be beyond one’s reach.)
3742. Ẹniàńpètepèròkásọw/oacutedotbelow-ọr/egravedotbelowdil/egravedotbelow,
pípeleníńpelesíi.
The person we keep plotting to bring to de-
struction nevertheless continues to grow in
prosperity. (The machinations of enemies
have no eﬀect on the fortunes of a certain
person.)
3743. Ẹniarílam/ogravedotbelow;ẹniam/ogravedotbelowríagbàgbé.
We know only those whom we see; those we
saw in the past we forget. (Only those who
are present command people’s attention.)
3744. Ẹniaríṣígun:ónífèrèlòunófọn.
The person on whose arrival one advances
against the enemy: he says all he will do is
blow the bugle. (The person one reposed all
one’s hopes in turns out to be a disappoint-
ment.)
3745. Ẹníbáríibiṣuadaw/oacutedotbelowbol/egravedotbelow.
Ap e r s o nw h oﬁ n d sap l a c et or e l i e v eh i m s e l f
or herself will rest his or her palms on the
ground. (Once one’s pressing needs are met,
one begins to seek luxuries.)
23
3746. Ẹníbáruàjèjéọdẹkìílà.
Whoever serves as funerary carrier for a
hunter’s paraphernalia never prospers.
(The person whose lot it is to perform the
meanest duties seldom prospers.)
24
23. The proverb is based on the practice of walking
into the bush to relieve oneself. An area frequented by
many people for that purpose will yield few clear spots
t oc r o u c h .Ap e r s o nw h oi sf o r t u n a t et oﬁ n ds u c ha
spot also seeks enough space as well to rest the arms for
support.
24. Part of the funerary observance for a hunter’s
death is to appoint a person who will carry the dead
3747. Ẹniẹniníńṣeni;/egravedotbelowbìtìòpeèrà.
One’s own relatives constitute one’s bane;
the ant does not fall victim to a snare.
(Those closest to one are best placed to
cause one injury. Compare 3734.)
3748. Ẹníﬁ/egravedotbelowk/egravedotbelowṣ/eacutedotbelowkanorí,ìbaríobìaﬁbọ/oacutedotbelow.
He who hits his head with his ﬁst: could he
ﬁnd kola nuts, he would sacriﬁce them to his
head. (Whoever is in desperate straits would
clutch at any remedy to extricate himself.)
25
3749. Ẹnígéw/oacutedotbelowgés/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowbùgétán.
A person whose arms have been amputated
and whose legs have been amputated has
lost just about everything amputable. (A
person who has lost everything has nothing
else to lose.)
3750. Ẹnigígùnkìíkúl/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowmejì.
A tall person does not die twice. (However
great a person can be, he or she remains yet
o n l yo n ep e r s o n ;h o w e v e rg r e a tap e r s o ni s ,
he or she shares the same destiny with all
human beings. Compare 3722.)
3751. Ẹniìjàòbáníńpeara/egravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowkùnrin.
I ti st h ep e r s o nn o tf a c e dw i t haﬁ g h tw h o
boasts about his manliness. (One can always
boast when one is certain there will be no
need for proof.)
3752. Ẹnim/oacutedotbelowtò-ópa-áre/ogravedotbelowrunìyà;ẹni
rélùwéè-épa-áre/ogravedotbelowrun/egravedotbelowsín.
Whoever is killed by a motor vehicle dies a
miserable death; whoever is killed by a train
hunter’s hunting paraphernalia (charms and so forth)
in a ritual procession for burial in the bush. The task is
not attractive, for the charms are invested with danger-
ous powers. The assumption is that whoever has had to
perform the duty is thereafter blighted.
25. Striking one’s head with one’s ﬁst is a sign of
desperation; kola nuts are sacriﬁced in propitiation to
the force guiding one’s destiny, which is believed to
reside in the head.
368 human nature


--- PAGE 382 ---
dies a disgraceful death. (It is better to be
killed by a motor vehicle than by a train, but
neither way of death is becoming.)
3753. Ẹniọkábáṣán:bíkòkú,adiẹl/eacutedotbelowgùn
ejò.
W h e nap e r s o ni sb i t t e nb yac o b r aa n d
he does not die, he becomes a devotee of
the snake’s cult. (Whoever survives a great
calamity has no further reason to fear its
like.)
3754. Ẹnírafìlàfúnakàn-ánfowóṣòfùn;níbo
niyódesí?
Whoever buys a cap for a crab wastes
money; where will it place the cap? (One
should not waste one’s resources on foolish
ventures.)
3755. Ẹnitíàbáﬁnúhànníńṣeelénìníẹni.
The person in whom one would conﬁde is
the author of one’s ruin. (There is hardly
anyone a person can conﬁdently trust.)
3756. Ẹnitíabáníníńgbani.
The champion one has is the one who comes
to one’s aid. (A champion should not default
j u s tw h e nh i so rh e ra i di sn e e d e d . )
3757. Ẹnitíak/oacutedotbelowníkàtógbà,ótinítir/egravedotbelownínú
t/eacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelow.
Ap e r s o nw h oi sr e c e p t i v et ot h ea d v i c et o
do evil was predisposed to evil. (Only those
willing to be corrupted can be corrupted.)
3758. Ẹnitíasọòkòlùúníkíásọìdàrọ.
T h ep e r s o na tw h o mo n et h r o w ss t o n e s
urges one to throw iron dross. (The tar-
get of one’s punishment, rather than being
impressed, urges one to do one’s worst.)
3759. Ẹnitíebińpaògb/oacutedotbelowìwàásù.
A starving person hears no preaching.
(Expect nothing from a starving person.
Compare 4918.)
3760. Ẹnitíikúńpaòtóǹkan;gbogboayé
lebińpa.
The number of people subject to [immedi-
a t e ]d e a t hi st i n y ;e v e r y b o d yi ss u b j e c tt o
hunger. (Hunger is a greater and more gen-
eral aﬄiction than death.)
26
3761. Ẹnitíòmúnǹkanwásáyéòlèmú
nǹkanlọs/oacutedotbelowrun.
People who brought nothing into this world
cannot expect to depart from it with some-
thing. (We came into this world naked, and
we shall depart naked.)
3762. Ẹnitíòríehínﬁjẹẹjatútùòlèjẹ
gúgúrú.
Whoever lacks teeth to eat fresh ﬁsh cannot
e a tp o p c o r n .( Ap e r s o nw h of a i l sa ta ne a s y
task will not succeed at a diﬃcult venture.)
3763. Ẹnitíòjò-ópa,tíṢàngóòpa,kómáa
dúp/eacutedotbelow.
The person who is caught in the rain but
is not struck by Ṣango, god of lightning,
should be thankful. (If one suﬀers a small
misfortune, one should remember that it
could have been much worse.)
3764. Ẹnitóbáogunníbodè-ébáiṣ/eacutedotbelow.
Whoever walks in on a battle at the town
gate walks in on a tough assignment. (If one
walks in on trouble, one’s task is cut out.)
3765. Ẹnitógbaọmọẹniòníòunòníígba
aya.
The person who makes oﬀ with one’s daugh-
ter will think nothing of making oﬀ with
one’s wife. (One should expect no quarter
from an adversary who has proved himself
or herself ruthless and unscrupulous.)
26. The force of the proverb derives from the com-
mon verb used in describing the eﬀects (actions) of
both death and hunger:pa(literally ‘‘to kill’’).
Onhumanvulnerability 369


--- PAGE 383 ---
3766. Ẹnitókànlóm/ogravedotbelow.
It is the person a calamity has befallen who
knows how it feels. (No amount of sympathy
can give one ﬁrsthand experience of other
people’s woes.)
3767. Ẹnitóláyàníńṣòwò/ogravedotbelowt/egravedotbelow.
Only a person who is bold makes conspiracy
his trade. (Those who conspire must have
the spine to take on the consequences.)
3768. Ẹnitómọìhínòmọ/ogravedotbelowhún;alágb/egravedotbelowdẹò
roko.
The person who is familiar with this place is
not familiar with the other place; the black-
smith does not till a farm. (No one person
can know it all, or do it all.)
3769. Ẹnitóm/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowkòkòó;ẹnitókòókòm/ogravedotbelow
/oacutedotbelow.
Those who know him do not meet him;
those who meet him do not know him.
(People often fail to appreciate the qualities
of those they encounter.)
3770. Ẹnitómọ/ogravedotbelowràntándiOlódùmarè.
The person who knows everything has be-
come God Almighty. (No human being can
know everything.)
3771. Ẹnitósọpélátiìgbàtíòun-úntidáyé
ìyàòjẹòunrí,ohuntíìyàńjẹl/eacutedotbelownunikòìt/iacuteigrave
kúnná.
The person who says since he came to this
world he or she has never been in the teeth
of suﬀering: it is simply because suﬀering
has not yet chewed up what it already has
in its teeth. (Everybody comes to know
suﬀering in time.)
3772. ẸnitótàkìtìlÉkòó,tóbal/egravedotbelownÍbàdàn:
w/oacutedotbelownníAb/eacutedotbelowkùútańk/oacutedotbelow?Óníkáfòó.
The person who somersaulted from Lagos
and landed in Ibadan is asked, ‘‘What about
Ab/eacutedotbelowòkúta?’’
27 He responds, ‘‘Let us skip
that.’’ (When earthshaking problems arise,
it is no time to dwell on triﬂes. Compare
3934.)
3773. Ẹnitótẹjúm/oacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowmọohuntíòunńwa.
The person who ﬁxes his eyes on the ground
knows what he is looking for. (No one does
anything without a good reason, even if it is
not readily apparent to others.)
3774. Ẹnìkankìígb/oacutedotbelowntán.
Nobody is all wise. (Everybody can learn
something from others.)
3775. Ẹnualáìsànlóﬁńpeikú.
The sick person summons death with his or
her own mouth. (The person who despairs
often ensures his or her own hopelessness.)
28
3776. Ẹnuehoroògbaìjánu.
The rabbit’s mouth is not suited for a bridle.
(However accomplished one might be, there
are certain tasks one will be incapable of
doing. Also, some treatments are not proper
for some people.)
29
3777. Ẹnuẹyẹòlèyánòkúta.
A bird’s beak cannot snap up a rock. (There
are certain tasks that are beyond a person’s
capabilities.)
3778. Ẹnukògb/oacutedotbelow‘‘Mojẹrí.’’
The mouth does not say, ‘‘I ate once before.’’
(Hunger is not something one assuages once
and for all.)
27. Èkó is the Yoruba name for Lagos; Ab/eacutedotbelowòkúta is a
city midway between Ibadan and Lagos.
28. A Yoruba form of lamentation that a despair-
ing sick person might resort to isMokúo! (‘‘Oh, I am
dead!’’). The Yoruba believe that such talk invites its
own fulﬁllment.
29. Swift though the rabbit is, it cannot emulate a
horse.
370 human nature


--- PAGE 384 ---
3779. /Egravedotbelowpaòbáoróm/oacutedotbelow.
The antidote can no longer catch up with
t h ep o i s o n .( M a t t e r sh a v eg o n ep a s tt h e
possibility of redress.)
3780. /Egravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowp/egravedotbelowṣ/egravedotbelow-p/egravedotbelowṣ/egravedotbelow,kòm/ogravedotbelowbíarańkanìgbín.
The charm to ensure ease does not care how
much the snail hurts.
30 (People seldom stop
to consider what eﬀects their selﬁsh actions
have on others.)
3781. /Egravedotbelowrúgbaẹdùn,ominúńkọigi.
The axe is slipped onto the haft; the tree be-
come anxious. (When danger threatens, the
vulnerable become apprehensive.)
3782. Ẹrùkìípaòṣùká;ẹl/eacutedotbelowrùlẹrùńpa.
The load does not weigh down the carrying
pad; it is the owner [carrier] of the load that
t h el o a dw e i g h sd o w n .( M u c ha so n em a y
give aid to a person in trouble, one cannot
assume the trouble.)
3783. Ẹs/egravedotbelowńtẹl/egravedotbelow,inúḿbíaráyé.
The feet tread the ground, and people are
angry. (Some] people will begrudge others
simply for living. Compare 4035.)
3784. Ẹṣíndáraókuaré;èèyándáraóku
ìwà;ajáòyìnbódáraókuàtidẹ.
The horse looks great but lacks speed; the
man is handsome but lacks character; the
European dog is good-looking but can-
not hunt. (Looks are nothing compared to
substance or utility.)
3785. Ẹṣinẹnikìígalójú/ogravedotbelowtáẹni.
One’s horse is never tall in the eyes of one’s
30. /Egravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowp/egravedotbelowṣ/egravedotbelow-p/egravedotbelowṣ/egravedotbelow,meaning ‘‘exceeding softness’’
or ‘‘exceeding ease,’’ is a charm for which the juice
obtained by cracking a snail shell is an essential ingre-
dient.
enemy. (Whatever one does, one cannot
impress an enemy. Compare the next entry.)
3786. Ẹṣin/ogravedotbelowtáẹnikìígalójúẹni;àníbíi
k/eacutedotbelowt/eacutedotbelowk/eacutedotbelowt/eacutedotbelowlórí.
One’s enemy’s horse is never tall in one’s
sight; one says it is just like an ass. (One
always minimizes an enemy’s accomplish-
ments. Compare the preceding entry.)
3787. /Egravedotbelowtùòsíìb/oacutedotbelownd/ogravedotbelowpá;babaọm/oacutedotbelowkúọm/oacutedotbelow
dẹyọ.
Without gunpowder the gun becomes a
stick; the father dies, and his children be-
come disconnected individuals. (When the
main support is removed, the greatest ediﬁce
collapses.)
3788. /Egravedotbelowwàìkákùréònàtán;awoẹniòlèṣe
aworeretán.
Ìkákùrébean does not stretch out com-
pletely;
31 one’s charm cannot be absolutely
infallible. (There is no absolute perfection
anywhere.)
3789. Ẹyẹńwúbà-ǹ-kùba-n-ku,ìy/eacutedotbelowlàṣírí/egravedotbelow.
The bird swells to a huge dimension, but
the secret is in its feathers. (A person’s im-
pressive appearance is not always backed by
substance.)
G
3790. Gagalo-óṣubú,ọw/oacutedotbelowtẹapákó.
The stilt walker falls; planks become avail-
able. (When a person loses control, his or
her belongings become fair game.)
31. Ìkákùrebeans have curly pods.
Onhumanvulnerability 371


--- PAGE 385 ---
Gb
3791. ‘‘Gbàkúntìrẹ’’òbíọmọaráyénínú.
‘‘Take this and add it to yours’’ does not
oﬀend humankind. (People are ever recep-
tive to aggrandizement.)
3792. ‘‘Gbàmu’’òtánibà.
‘‘Take this and drink it’’ does not end a fever.
(Seemingly simple problems are seldom
easily resolved.)
32
3793. ‘‘Gbàpam/oacutedotbelow’’fúnolèníḿmúolèjà.
‘‘Take this for safekeeping’’ addressed to a
thief encourages thievery. (The person who
places temptations in another’s path is partly
responsible for whatever goes amiss.)
3794. ‘‘Gbàrànmí’’diẹl/eacutedotbelowrù;ajínif/eacutedotbelowdiọkọ
ẹni.
‘‘Help me with this load’’ becomes the owner
of the load; the cuckolder becomes the hus-
band. (Temporary expedients sometimes
become permanent conditions. Compare the
following entry.)
3795. ‘‘Gbàt/oacutedotbelowwò-ó’’gbéipọnmì;‘‘Gbàràn
míl/eacutedotbelowrù-ú’’diẹl/eacutedotbelowrù;‘‘Bámigúnèlùb/oacutedotbelow’’ﬁ/egravedotbelowgb/eacutedotbelow
gúnèèkàn.
‘‘Taste this’’ swallows the spoon; ‘‘Help me
with this load’’ becomes the owner of the
load; ‘‘Help me pound these dried yams’’
impales herself on a wooden peg. (One
should not be more zealous as a helper than
the person one is helping. Compare the
preceding entry.)
3796. Gb/eacutedotbelownà-gb/eacutedotbelownàágbẹtán;ókugb/eacutedotbelownu-
gb/eacutedotbelownu.
32. The proverb possibly results from the traditional
experience that fevers were not to be taken lightly. It is
also quite likely to derive from the belief that no illness
is purely physiological and that the treatment cannot
exclude psychic ministering.
The carpenter has done his job; now comes
the braggart’s turn. (People of little accom-
plishment are often more vociferous in their
own praise than are great achievers.)
33
H
3797. ‘‘Háóf/ogravedotbelowdúù’’lòyìnbóﬁńj/egravedotbelowbàlÓrígo.
‘‘How for do?’’ [What else can one do?] is
the white man’s rationalization for eating
cassava meal at Orígo. (When in dire straits,
one will do things one would normally not
stoop to.)
34
I
3798. Ìbànúj/eacutedotbelowsọoríàgbàkodò.
Sadness bows the head of the most venerable
elder. (No one outgrows sadness.)
3799. Ibiènìlàḿpaọmọalákàràsí.
The child of the bean-fritters seller usually
gets killed in disputes over how much of the
food will be added to the purchase as gra-
tuity.
35 (Disastrous quarrels often arise over
matters that are really not worth ﬁghting
about.)
3800. Ibiiṣ/eacutedotbelowlatiḿmọ/ogravedotbelowlẹ.
I ti sa th i so rh e rt r a d eo ro c c u p a t i o nt h a t
33. The Yoruba word that designates a carpenter
exempliﬁes one of the language’s methods for word
formation, the reduplication of the activity: in this case
gb/eacutedotbelowọna,contracted to gb/eacutedotbelownà,is the profession, and one
engaged in it isgb/eacutedotbelownà-gb/eacutedotbelownà.Gb/eacutedotbelowẹnumeans ‘‘hone the
mouth.’’
34. Orígo is a very small village on the railway line
in the Yoruba area;/egravedotbelowbài sc o n s i d e r e dap o o rp e r s o n ’ s
meal even for the Yoruba.
35. The underlying idea seems to be that although
the àkàràseller herself would have freely granted the
bonus, the child she leaves in temporary charge would
not feel as free to do so, causing the expectant customer
to ﬂy into a rage.
372 human nature


--- PAGE 386 ---
one knows the shirker. (To really know the
hard worker or the shirker, one must see
h i mo rh e ra tw o r k . )
3801. Igígbunnígbóàńs/ogravedotbelow;/ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowlọp/ogravedotbelowèèyànló
gbunláàrinìlú.
W ec o m p l a i nt h a tat r e eg r o w sc r o o k e d
in the forest, yet a great many people are
crooked in the town. (When one has skele-
tons in one’s own closet, one should not ﬁnd
fault with others.)
3802. Ìgbàgbéòlóògùn.
Forgetting knows no antidote. (Anyone is
likely to forget something sometime.)
3803. Ìgbòówáiléẹyẹk/eacutedotbelowyẹtú.
Àgbìgbòtakes delight in raiding the nests of
other birds. (Said of a person who enjoys
introducing disharmony into other people’s
aﬀairs.)
3804. Ijóḿbẹnínúarọ,ẹs/egravedotbelowniòsí.
There is a lot of dance in the cripple; what
he or she lacks are legs. (If one had the
wherewithal, one would perform wonders.)
3805. Ikánńjẹorù;kèrègbèparam/oacutedotbelow.
Termites are consuming the small earthen
pot; gourds had better beware. (If an evil
fate befalls those who are more formidable
than you are, look out.)
3806. Ikùnbabaòrìṣà.
The stomach [is the] father of all gods. (One
can less aﬀord to neglect one’s stomach than
one’s gods. Compare 3911.)
3807. Ikúnníbíòun-únbáp/eacutedotbelownílé,/ogravedotbelowràniléá
báòun;bíòun-únbásìp/eacutedotbelowlóde,/ogravedotbelowrànòdea
báòun.
T h es q u i r r e ls a y si fi ts t a y st o ol o n ga th o m e ,
it is beset by the problems of home; if it
stays long outside instead, it is plagued by
problems of the outside. (No matter where
one turns, there is trouble aplenty.)
3808. Il/egravedotbelowkìígba/ogravedotbelowg/egravedotbelowd/egravedotbelowkósoìdìméjì.
The soil is never so nourishing for the
banana plant that it brings forth two bunches
at once. (Nature places limits on everyone
and everything.)
3809. Il/egravedotbelowtíkòtiojúẹniṣú,akìímọòkùnkùn-
unr/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowrìn.
One never knows how to negotiate the dark-
ness of a night that did not fall in one’s
presence. (One cannot know all the intrica-
cies of a matter that developed outside one’s
knowledge.)
3810. Ìléríiléòmọtiàńjagun;kùf/egravedotbelow-kùf/egravedotbelowò
mọìjà;ọj/oacutedotbelowtáarógunlàḿmojo.
Boasting within the house is no proof of
bravery in battle; rearing in anticipation is
no proof of prowess in a ﬁght; the day that
war breaks out is when one knows who is a
coward. (Valor is a matter not of speech but
of deed.)
3811. Ìlúkìíkérékómánìíààtàn.
A town is never so small that it does not
h a v ead u n gh i l l .( E v e r y b o d yh a sh i so rh e r
ﬂaws, or skeletons in the closet.)
3812. Ìlúòṣíniléìjàpá;bíabámúahunlọ
sílùúọr/ogravedotbelowyópadàwásílù-úòṣì-ir/egravedotbelow.
The town of misery is the domicile of the
tortoise; if one takes the tortoise to a town
of prosperity, it will return to its town of
misery.
36 (Nothing will cure the ill-fated
person of his or her misery.)
3813. Ìnùkínùníḿmúìwákúwàáwá;ẹṣín
sọnùàńwáanínúigbáIfá.
Inexplicable loss occasions senseless search-
ing; a horse is lost and one searches for it in
an Ifá divining bowl. (Baﬄing occurrences
lead one to strange behavior.)
36. The proverb is based on the character ofahun
(àjàpá), the Yoruba trickster.
Onhumanvulnerability 373


--- PAGE 387 ---
3814. Inúnibíniòkanàì-m/ogravedotbelowwà-rere-éhù.
Malice toward others does not result from
not knowing how to be good. (Evil behavior
is a matter of will, not of nature.)
3815. Ir/oacutedotbelowníńj/eacutedotbelow‘‘Mokútán.’’
The exclamation ‘‘I am dead!’’ is a lie. (A
person who can still lament has not reached
the height of suﬀering.)
3816. Ìṣ/eacutedotbelowníḿmúahunjẹeèrí;eèríkìíṣe
oúnjẹahun.
It is destitution that brought the tortoise
to eating corn bran; bran is no food for the
tortoise. (Misfortune reduces one to doing
things one would rather not do.)
3817. Iṣ/eacutedotbelowtán,òwópin,òwúòkúnk/eacutedotbelowk/eacutedotbelow;ara
gbogbólebíìtì/ogravedotbelowg/egravedotbelowd/egravedotbelow.
The work is done, the trading is over, the
cotton does not ﬁll the barrow; the body
remains as ﬁrm as a banana trunk. (One has
done what one is called upon to do, but the
desired goal is not yet achieved, and one
would rather continue to work if one only
could.)
3818. Ìṣeǹṣetóṣedéìhínkìítánl/oacutedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow-ọ
panṣágà.
The sort of behavior that brought her to her
present condition never leaves the prosti-
tute. (One cannot change one’s nature.)
3819. Ìyàm/eacutedotbelowtaa-fàdá-pa-ikún:ikúnlọ,àdá
nù,aládàáníòunógbaàdáòun.
Three misfortunes that befell the person
who would kill a squirrel with a cutlass: the
squirrel escaped, the cutlass was lost, and the
owner of the cutlass demanded its return.
(Said when problems climb on problems.)
3820. Ìyàm/eacutedotbelowta/ogravedotbelowgànj/oacutedotbelow:biafẹs/egravedotbelowkóimí,àfọw/oacutedotbelow
bàá,àﬁrunmú.
Three outrages of a dark night: if one steps
into excrement, one feels it with one’s hand,
and then one takes a sniﬀ at it. (One who
is not careful about what he or she does or
the company he or she keeps will endure
unpleasant consequences.)
3821. Ìyànníḿmúnijẹèsoigi-kígi.
It is famine that brings one to eating the
fruits of all sorts of trees. (Hard times force
one to unbecoming behavior.)
3822. Ìyàwótíagbélójúijó,onílùniyóbàá
lọ.
The wife one met at a dance will eventually
elope with a drummer. (People cannot shed
their innate habits.)
K
3823. Káríowóraelééy/oacutedotbelowòdàbí-ikóyẹni.
Having the means to buy the clothelééy/oacutedotbelow
is nothing like having it look good on one.
(Having money is nothing like knowing how
t ou s ei tw e l l . )
3824. Kìíṣeẹj/oacutedotbelowajá:ẹnitósoóniòsóore;ẹni
tósósóore:okùnniòyi;okùn-únyi:orúkọ
ajálóroajátóﬁńjá.
The dog is not to blame: it was the person
who tied it up that did a poor job; the per-
son who tied it up did a good job: it was
the rope that was brittle; the rope was not
brittle: the dog was simply acting accord-
ing to its name when it broke loose.
37 (In
spite of any preemptive eﬀorts, a person will
eventually show his or her true colors.)
3825. Kíniaﬁńpaláraìkatíàńwípéótó
màyànkàn-mayankan?
What wound would one sustain on one’s
ﬁnger that one would say was huge and gap-
37. The pun is based on the fact that the wordajá
(dog) is construed to mean ‘‘one who breaks loose’’
(a-já).
374 human nature


--- PAGE 388 ---
ing? (There is a limit to which anyone or
anything can be at risk.)
3826. KíniaótiṣeẸrútíkòní hùwàẹrú?
What could one do to Ẹrú [Slave] to keep
him or her from behaving like a slave?
(Nothing one does will ever keep a person
from acting according to his or her nature.)
3827. Kíniòkóbóńwòtíkògbénǹkanmì?
What is the eunuch considering that keeps
him from swallowing poison? (A worthless
person has little cause to cling tenaciously to
life.)
3828. Kíọmọdétógbọn,ìwà- a/egravedotbelowábàj/eacutedotbelow.
Before a child learns wisdom, he or she will
have earned a bad reputation. (One seldom
learns wisdom before one has made some
blunders.)
3829. Kiníkan-ánbaàjàòj/eacutedotbelow:apá/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowju
itan/egravedotbelowlọ.
Àjàò [a nocturnal bird] has one blemish:
its wing is heftier than its thigh. (Said of an
essentially good person who, however, has
an unfortunate serious ﬂaw.)
3830. ‘‘Kiníyìí,ngkòlèjẹẹ’’:kíỌl/oacutedotbelowrunmá
dààsíagbadaẹni.
This thing is something I cannot eat: may
God not pour it into my vat. (May God
keep away from me the problems I cannot
handle.)
3831. ‘‘Kòm/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowtàkòm/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowrà’’tíńgunẹṣinlórí
àpáta.
He-knows-not-how-to-sell-and-he-knows-
not-how-to-buy who rides a horse on the
rock. (Said of people who misuse valuable
things which other people must pay for and
care for—vandals, in one word.)
3832. ‘‘Kòpaẹtukòj/eacutedotbelowkíẹtuj/egravedotbelow,’’tíńfaṣọ
funfunṣọdẹ.
He-will-not-kill-antelopes-and-he-will-not-
let-antelopes-forage who hunts in white
attire. (Said of people who will neither do
something nor get out of the way of others
willing to do it: dogs in the manger. See
3837.)
3833. Kòrunẹni,kòrunẹni,ówańdòyìka
ẹni.
It does not destroy one, it does not destroy
one, yet it persists in circling one. (Said of
needling problems that persist despite one’s
eﬀorts to get rid of them.)
3834. Kòsíbíatilèṣeebòlòtíkòníírùngb/eacutedotbelow.
There is nothing one can do to the vegetable
ebòlòthat will make it not smell of the wild.
(One cannot cure people of their innate
habits. Compare the next two entries.)
3835. Kòsíbíatilèṣeẹl/eacutedotbelowd/egravedotbelowtíkòníípàf/ogravedotbelow.
There is nothing one can do to the pig to
keep it from wallowing in the mud. (People
cannot be cured of their natures. Compare
the preceding entry and the one following.)
3836. KòsíbíatilèṣeIfákómáhùwàèkùr/oacutedotbelow.
There is nothing one can do to Ifá that will
keep him from behavior suggestive of palm
kernels.
38 (There is no curing people of
their natures. Compare the preceding two
entries.)
3837. Kòṣe,kòjólúrèṣe.
He or she will not act, and he or she will not
permit others to act. (Compare 3832.)
3838. Kówó,kówólojúaṣeni.
That things would collapse, that things
would collapse is the expectation of the ill-
wisher. (One’s enemies always wish for one
to fail.)
38. Èkùr/oacutedotbelow(palm kernels) are used in consulting Ifá,
the Yoruba oracle divinity.
Onhumanvulnerability 375


--- PAGE 389 ---
3839. Kòkòròjewé-jewé,kòkòròjobì-jobì:kò-
kòròtíńjewéaraewéníńgbé;kòkòròtíńjobì
araobìníńwà.
Leaf-eating insect, kola-nut-eating insect:
the insect that eats leaves lives on leaves; the
insect that feeds on kola nuts sticks to the
kola nut. (One should remain where one is
supposed to be, or where one’s living is.)
3840. Kòtòayé,kòtòobìnrin,àtikòtòikú,
/ogravedotbelowkanòyàt/ogravedotbelow.
The pit dug by the world, the one dug by a
woman, and the one dug by death: they are
all the same. (The world, women, and death
are equal in their portent.)
3841. Kúkúrúyẹijó.
Shortness is an asset in dancing. (Being
short is not all bad.)
3842. Kùkùtéàgbọnòlèsọrú.
The stump of a coconut palm cannot sprout
leaves. (A person down and out cannot
excel.)
L
3843. Làmílóye,alájeÌm/ogravedotbelowbà;óníilélójóni,
tàbíolèlójà?
Làmílóye, the trial-by-ordeal oﬃcer of
Ìm/ogravedotbelowbà town, asked, did the house burn
down or was it burgled? (Trust a dunce to
ask stupid questions.)
39
3844. Lílọ-/oacutedotbelowyáfúnoníbodètíw/oacutedotbelownkónÍfálọ.
It is quitting time for the gatekeeper whose
divining tray has been stolen. (When one’s
39. The name Làmílóye means ‘‘Explain to me’’ or
‘‘Make me understand.’’Alájeis the oﬃcial who pre-
sides at ordeals by boiling oil. The proverb suggests
that the two events he names are so far apart as not to
qualify as possible alternative explanations for a crime.
But note the tone play in the shift fromilélójó to olèló
jà.
surest weapon has been neutralized, one had
better make one’s escape.)
3845. ‘‘Lọfúnminíléyìí’’k/oacutedotbelowni‘‘Lọfúnmi
níbòmíràn.’’
‘‘Get out of my sight in this house’’ is not
‘‘Get out of my sight elsewhere.’’ (If one is
shut out of one opportunity, one can usually
ﬁnd another elsewhere.
40 The following
entry is a variant.)
3846. ‘‘Lọkúrònílémi’’kìíṣe‘‘Kúròláyé.’’
‘‘Get away from my home’’ is not the same as
‘‘Get out of this life.’’ (Divorce is not a death
sentence. Compare the preceding entry.)
3847. Lójúàwòdìòkè,bí-ikádìẹlọsóríàpáta.
In the eyes of a kite aloft, the wish is that the
chicken would venture onto a rock. (One
always wishes that one’s intended victims
would render themselves more vulnerable.)
M
3848. Márìíigboloògùn-unwèrè;bóbárígbó
áków/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelow.
Not seeing a bush is the only remedy for
a madman; if he sees a bush, he will head
for it. (The best remedy for a weak-willed
person is not to bring temptation his or her
way.)
3849. MélòólaókàléhínAdépèlé?Tinúọrún,
tòde/ogravedotbelowjọ;òjìlénírínwóèrìgìlóforímul/egravedotbelowláìyọ.
How many will one count among Adépèlé’s
teeth? The inner row numbers 100, the outer
row 160, and 440 molars are embedded in
the gums without showing. (Instances or
examples [of defects] are far too numerous
to enumerate.)
41
40. This is a woman’s usual response to being
discarded by her husband.
41. The name Adépèlé suggests surfeit.
376 human nature


--- PAGE 390 ---
3850. ‘‘Mòḿb/ogravedotbelow!’’‘‘Máab/ogravedotbelow!’’Àwọnméjèèjì
l/egravedotbelowrùḿbà.
‘‘Here I come!’’ ‘‘Come on already!’’ Both of
them are afraid. (Both the person bluﬃng
and the person calling the bluﬀ are secretly
apprehensive.)
3851. ‘‘Moròkèọgbàmotètèb/ogravedotbelow’’:alèﬁwé
tẹnitíòlọ?‘‘Àkèekèétamíkòtùmí’’:alèﬁ
wéẹnitísèbébùjẹ?
‘‘I went to my nearby farm and returned
early’’: can one compare such a person to
a person who went nowhere? ‘‘A scorpion
stung me and the pain is unrelenting’’: can
o n ec o m p a r es u c hap e r s o nt oap e r s o nb i t -
ten by a viper? (Misfortunes vary in their
severity.)
3852. ‘‘Moyólánàá’’òkantebi.
‘‘I ate my ﬁll yesterday’’ does not relieve
hunger. (Each day brings its own cares.)
N
3853. ‘‘Ngóògúnyán,ngóòbùn/oacutedotbelowjẹ’’;ibi/egravedotbelowsun
latiḿm/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelow.
‘‘I will prepare pounded yam and share it
with you’’; one will see the signs of its like-
lihood in connection with roasted yams.
(People’s behavior in circumstances of no
consequence is a good indication of how
they will behave in circumstances that mat-
ter.)
3854. Níọj/oacutedotbelowtí/ogravedotbelowbùn-únbáw/egravedotbelowlarańyúnun.
It is on the day that the ﬁlthy person takes a
bath that his or her whole body itches. (Evil
people never feel comfortable with virtuous
things.)
3855. Níọj/oacutedotbelow-ọṣíṣunifùr/ogravedotbelowńlà.
It is on the day one must defecate that the
anus must open. (Some obligations permit
no options.)
O
3856. Ódiọj/oacutedotbelowtíaláróbákúkátómọoyeaṣọ
tógbàrẹ.
It is on the day of the dyer’s death that one
k n o w sh o wm a n yp i e c e so fc l o t hs h eh a d
taken in to dye. (When one dies, one’s every
secret becomes public knowledge.)
3857. Ówunikájẹranp/eacutedotbelowl/eacutedotbelownu,olóǹfàniòj/eacutedotbelow.
One would like to chew a piece of meat for a
long time, but a downward pulling force will
not allow. (Contingencies often limit how
long one can relish a boon.)
3858. Óyéọmọtíńsunkún,ósìyéìyá/egravedotbelowtí
ḿb/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelow.
The crying child knows why it is crying,
and the mother consoling it knows why she
is doing so. (Each person is privy to the
motivation for his or her actions.)
3859. Obìnrinkìíròhìnàjòtán.
A woman is never done telling about the trip
she took. (Some people never cease talking
about an experience.)
3860. ObìnrinkìítóbikÓròmágbèee.
A woman is never so large that Orò cannot
carry her oﬀ. (There are certain oﬀenses a
woman cannot get away with.)
3861. Obìnrinòṣééﬁnúhàn.
A woman is not suitable to expose one’s
secrets to. (Women cannot be relied on.)
3862. Obìnrin-íntẹìlú,ótú.
A woman founds a town, and it scatters. (A
woman is not a ﬁt mainstay of a commu-
nity.)
3863. Obìnrintíaﬁijóf/eacutedotbelow,ìranniyówòlọ.
The woman one marries on account of her
dancing will leave one by losing herself
Onhumanvulnerability 377


--- PAGE 391 ---
watching [dancers]. (People’s habits seldom
leave them.)
3864. Obìnríntorí/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowrodò.
Women go to the stream only in search of
gossip. (Women will do anything for the
opportunity to gossip.)
3865. Òbòòjọba,ìlúòdàrú.
[If] the vagina does not become king, the
town does not descend into chaos. (Aﬀairs
in the hands of women inevitably become
chaotic.)
3866. Òbúkọ-/oacutedotbelowníàìsànàgb/egravedotbelowolówóòunyìí
ḿbaòunl/eacutedotbelowrù;bíàìsànnáà-ábáp/ogravedotbelowsi,baba-
láwoaníkíw/oacutedotbelownlọmúòbúkọwálátiﬁṣe
ètùtùfúnun;bóbásàn,àwọnọm ọ/egravedotbelowaníwọn
ómùúòbúkọﬁwewuàmódi.
The he-goat says the illness of his owner,
the farmer, frightens him: if the illness wors-
ens, the diviners will ask that a he-goat be
brought and oﬀered as a propitiatory sac-
riﬁce on the farmer’s behalf; if the illness
lessens, the children will vow to sacriﬁce a
he-goat as a thank oﬀering. (One is in a pre-
dicament whose every possible outcome is
disastrous.)
3867. Odò-ógbéLáwálélọ,/egravedotbelowḿbèrè-eLáb/oacutedotbelow-
lùú.
The river carried oﬀ Láwálé, and you ask
about Láb/oacutedotbelowlùú’s fate. (When the person at
the least risk comes to grief, it is pointless
to ask what fate befell the person most at
risk.)
42
3868. Ògúnnágbòǹgbòtíńdát/oacutedotbelowl/eacutedotbelownuìgbín!
Mighty faggot that dries up the dribble in
the snail’s mouth! (An exclamation on being
42. The name Láwálé (Ọláwálé) means ‘‘The illus-
trious one comes home,’’ whereas Láb/oacutedotbelowlùú (Ọláb/oacutedotbelowlùú)
means ‘‘The illustrious one has plunged into it.’’ Names
are believed to inﬂuence their bearers’ fates.
confronted with an overwhelming problem
or stupefying situation.)
3869. Ògbójúòtẹara/egravedotbelownÍfá;/ogravedotbelowm/ogravedotbelowrànòfara/egravedotbelow
joyè;/ogravedotbelowbẹtómúògb/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowkùara/egravedotbelow.
The intrepid person does not consult the Ifá
oracle on his own behalf; the sagacious per-
son does not enthrone himself; the sharpest
knife does not carve its own hilt. (No matter
how powerful and accomplished one might
be, one will need other people for some
things.)
3870. Ohunm/eacutedotbelowtaníńﬁarawọnr/eacutedotbelowrìn-ín:aṣọ
tóyańﬁab/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowrìn-ín;àbíkútíyókùúńﬁ
oníṣègùnr/eacutedotbelowrìn-ín;obìnrintíyókọọkọńﬁ
oníp/egravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowrìn-ín.
There are three things that laugh at their
mates: a torn piece of cloth laughs at the
needle; an ábíkúbound to die laughs at a
medicine man; a woman intent on leaving
her husband laughs at a conciliator. (Some
problems mock any person who attempts to
solve them.)
3871. Ohuntíabáńwáníńgb/oacutedotbelownjunilọ.
Whatever one is searching for always seems
wiser than the searcher. (Nothing is ever
more diﬃcult to ﬁnd than whatever one is
searching for.)
3872. Ohuntíaf/oacutedotbelowjúfojú/egravedotbelowríkótóf/oacutedotbelowlórímọ;
kòtúnríòmírànm/oacutedotbelow.
Whatever the blind person sees before
going blind is all he or she will ever see; he
or she will never see another thing. (One
should seize all opportunities before it is too
late.)
3873. Ohuntíótánniníìdùnníńtánnilówó.
Whatever exceeds the limits of one’s ca-
pacity to endure is the same thing that will
exhaust one’s supply of money. (Serious
problems wreak havoc on one’s resources.)
378 human nature


--- PAGE 392 ---
3874. OhuntíojúríníMákúnòṣéédéléwí.
What one’s eyes saw at Mákún is not some-
thing one can relate on returning home.43
(Some experiences are too frightful to speak
about.)
3875. Ohuntónùním/oacutedotbelowṣáláṣírékọjá-asálú-
bàtà.
What has gone missing in a mosque is far
more than some slippers.
44 (A problem is
weightier than people suppose.)
3876. Òjòńláníńtẹríikinbal/egravedotbelow.
It is a heavy rain that beats the lemon grass
to the earth. (It is a mighty misfortune
that can prostrate even the most resilient
person.)
3877. Òjóńr/ogravedotbelowsíkòtò,gegeleḿbínú.
The rain ﬁlls up the gully, and the hill be-
comes envious. (When fortune smiles on
some, others become envious.)
3878. Òjòòdá,ìrìòda;ejiw/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowgbaọj/oacutedotbelowaláṣọ.
The rain does not stop, and the drizzle does
not stop; the gentle precipitation takes the
day away from the cloth seller. (A succession
of inconsiderable but persistent problems
keeps one from attending to important
matters.)
3879. Òjòtór/ogravedotbelowlómúp/egravedotbelowt/egravedotbelow-p/eacutedotbelowt/egravedotbelowwá.
The rain that fell is what brought about
much mud. (Some unfortunate incident has
resulted in an unpleasant situation.)
3880. Òjò-ópaalágundi,iyándomi;ìyàwó
ńretíagundi,ọk/oacutedotbelowsùnsóko.
The agundipurveyor is caught in the rain,
43. This is a reference to the Mákún war between
the /Egravedotbelowgbá and the Ìj/egravedotbelowbú in the early years of the twenti-
eth century.
44. A reference to the fact that worshipers are re-
quired to remove their shoes before entering a mosque.
and the pounded yam becomes like water;
the wife awaits agundi,but the husband
spends the night on the farm. (Adverse cir-
cumstances will cause the best-laid schemes
to go awry.)
3881. Òjò-ópawèrèpèódẹniàńkọlù.
Rain beats the cow-itch and renders it some-
thing one can walk into.
45 (Misfortune ren-
ders one vulnerable to abuse from people
who otherwise would not dare displease
one.)
3882. Òjò-ór/ogravedotbelowlánàáaríẹs/egravedotbelow-ẹkòrikò;il/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelow
mọaf/eacutedotbeloworimáwonù;taniòm/ogravedotbelowpékòrikòàná
lógbéelọtéfé-téfé?
Y e s t e r d a yi tr a i n e da n dw es a wt h et r a c k so f
a hyena; in the morning we look in vain for
orimáwo;who cannot tell that it was yester-
d a y ’ sh y e n at h a tm a d eo ﬀw i t hi t ?( W h e na
crime is committed just after a suspicious
person makes his appearance, one can be
certain that the suspicious stranger is the
culprit. Compare 4685.)
3883. Ojúaboyúnòtófùr/ogravedotbelow;ojùòṣìkàòtó/ogravedotbelowla.
The eyes of a pregnant woman cannot see
her genitals; the eyes of the wicked cannot
see the future. (The wicked do not know
when they will reap what they have sown.)
3884. Ojúelégbòlegbò-ótińk/egravedotbelow.
It is to the knowledge of the person with a
sore that the sore festers. (Some reverses one
can do nothing to prevent. Compare 3890.)
3885. Ojúlayéńjẹ;bíayís/egravedotbelowpadàwọna
p/egravedotbelowgàn.
Humans serve only the eyes; when one is
absent, they ridicule one. (It is human na-
ture to love you in your presence and smear
you in your absence.)
45. When its hairs are wet, the stinging eﬀect of
cow-itch is practically nil.
Onhumanvulnerability 379


--- PAGE 393 ---
3886. Ojúm/oacutedotbelownaògb/oacutedotbelowporo-poroodó;/ogravedotbelowgànj/oacutedotbelow
gànaògb/oacutedotbeloww/ogravedotbelowṣ/ogravedotbelow-w/ogravedotbelowṣ/ogravedotbelow-ọk/ogravedotbelowǹk/ogravedotbelowṣ/ogravedotbelow.
The day dawns and we fail to hear the sound
of the mortar; noontime came and we heard
no sound of sifting. (One sees and hears no
sign of life where one had expected it.)
3887. Ojúolóbìnikòkòrótińw/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowlọ.
It is in the presence of the kola-nut seller
that worms enter the kola nut. (Some de-
velopments one can in no way prevent.
Compare 3890.)
3888. Ojúolójúlàńrí;ẹniẹl/eacutedotbelowniníńrítẹni.
One can see only other people’s eyes; only
other people can see one’s eyes. (You can
always see other people’s ﬂaws, but only
other people see your ﬂaws. Compare 378.)
3889. Ojú/ogravedotbelowrunòhukoóko,il/egravedotbelowpaòj/eacutedotbelowkókù-ú
bẹ/ogravedotbelownàwò.
The sky does not grow grass; the soil of the
graveyard does not aﬀord the dead an op-
portunity to read trails. (Some phenomena
oﬀer people no helpful clues to understand
them.)
3890. Ojú-ubabaàtọmọnilàpálàpátińmú
ọmọlórí.
It is with the knowledge of both father and
child that ringworm attacks the child’s head.
(There are some vicissitudes nothing one
can do will avert. Compare 3887.)
3891. Ojúgun-úndéojúeékúnpar/eacutedotbelow;/ogravedotbelownádé
oríàpatapòrúrù.
The shin arrives at the knee and disappears;
the path arrives at the rock and becomes
confused. (The problem one faces is most
intractable.)
3892. Ojúgun-únmúodòfọhùn.
The shin forces the stream to speak out. (A
matter one cannot ignore forces one to take
action.)
3893. Òkèìhínòj/eacutedotbelowkárít/ogravedotbelowún.
The nearer hill prevents one from seeing the
farther one. (Urgent obligations keep one
from attending to less urgent ones.)
3894. Ókétéf/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowjẹyán,iléògbodó.
The giant bush rat wishes to eat pounded
yams, but its home is not large enough for
the mortar. (One’s capacity does not match
the feats one would wish to perform.)
3895. Òkúàfínbaàkàlàl/eacutedotbelowrù.
The albino’s corpse strikes terror into the
vulture. (Response to an aﬀair that stupeﬁes
even the most unﬂappable person.)
3896. Òkúajákìígbó;òkúàgbòkìíkàn.
A dead dog does not bark; a dead ram does
not butt. (Once a person is dead, he or she
can do nothing.)
3897. Olóríloríńsán;kìísánakànlókèodò.
Only a person who has a head suﬀers from
headaches, not a crab on the bank of the
river. (If one does not have the amenities,
one will not suﬀer the inconveniences that
go with them.)
3898. Òmùw/egravedotbelowlodòńgbélọ.
It is the expert swimmer that is carried oﬀ
by the river. (Whatever one is addicted to
doing is likely to be one’s death.)
3899. Oníkálukú,a-bèèm/ogravedotbelow-nílé.
Everybody [is] someone who has something
unmentionable at home. (Everyone is hiding
some secret.)
3900. Oníkálukúa-bi-ti/egravedotbelow-lára.
E v e r y b o d y[ i s ]s o m e o n ew i t hh i so rh e ro w n
ﬂaw. (No one is without some ﬂaw.)
3901. Oník/oacutedotbelowòsápam/oacutedotbelow.
A person with a cough does not hide.
380 human nature


--- PAGE 394 ---
(People too much in the public eye cannot
be incognito.)
3902. OníṢàngóòmọẹniọba;òjòòmẹni
/ogravedotbeloww/ogravedotbelow;òjòìbámẹni/ogravedotbeloww/ogravedotbelowkòpaoníṢàngó
àtọl/Oacutedotbelowya.
The Ṣango worshiper does not countenance
the king’s man; the rain does not know who
deserves deference; had the rain any idea
who deserved respect, it would not have
beaten the Ṣango worshiper or the Ọya wor-
shiper. (Nobody gets any special treatment.
Compare 3966.)
3903. Ooru-úgbaaṣọl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowonílé;óﬁa b/egravedotbelowb/egravedotbelowlé
àlejòl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow.
Heat takes the garment oﬀ the host and
hands a fan to the guest. (Excessive heat
forces people out of ceremonious pretenses.)
3904. Oówońlásọ/ogravedotbelowm/ogravedotbelowrànl/eacutedotbelownu.
An almighty boil has attacked the mouth
of the sage. (An unheard-of situation has
preempted action by even the most capable.)
3905. Òpòfùú,ìyà/Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow;/ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowòtajàláwìn;
àwìnòtajàl/oacutedotbelowp/ogravedotbelow.
Unrequited eﬀort, the misfortune one ﬁnds
in /Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow town: the person who sells her wares
cheap does not sell on credit; the person
who sells on credit does not sell cheap. (Two
people must deal with each other but cannot
see eye to eye.)
3906. Òpótíàbáf/egravedotbelowhìntì-íﬁgbogboara
ṣ/egravedotbelowgún;ẹnitíàbáﬁnúhàn-ánj/eacutedotbelowaláròkiriẹni.
The post one would lean on is completely
covered with spikes; the person one would
conﬁde in turns out to be a talkative back-
biter. (One has no one to look to for help or
counsel.)
3907. Oríàgbò-ósunw/ogravedotbelown;àgbòniyóbaorí
ara/egravedotbelowj/eacutedotbelow.
The ram has a good head; it is the ram itself
that will ruin its head.
46 (People are often
responsible for their own misfortune.)
3908. OríOlúkànḿbíkìígẹṣin;ìpínàjàpákì
íṣ/ogravedotbelowṣ/oacutedotbelow;asòl/egravedotbelowk/egravedotbelowmáhunl/oacutedotbelowrùn,ahun-únwọgbó.
Olúkànḿbí’s destiny does not include riding
a horse; the tortoise’s fate is never to know
splendor; people adorn the tortoise’s neck
with beads, and it heads for the bush. (If one
gives something of value to people incapable
of recognizing value, they will instantly
ruin it.)
47
3909. Oríp/ogravedotbelowníMògún;ìpínàìṣ/egravedotbelowlóp/ogravedotbelowníb/egravedotbelow.
There are heads aplenty in the grove where
Ògún receives sacriﬁce; most numerous are
those of innocent people. (Even innocence
does not always guarantee safety or justice.)
3910. Orinkantíaditíbágb/oacutedotbelowkótóditíní
ńtẹnum/oacutedotbelowláé-láé.
The one song the deaf person heard before
going deaf is the one he will sing repeatedly
forever. (It is diﬃcult to move people ﬁxated
on one thing to something else.)
3911. Òrìṣàbí/ogravedotbelowfunòsí;ojoojúm/oacutedotbelowníńgbẹbọ.
There is no god like the gullet; it received
sacriﬁces daily. (No one can be anything
without food. Compare 3806.)
3912. Òtò/mgravepòrò-ójókòógaga-gúgú;aláraló
m/ogravedotbelowpékòle.
Òtò/mgravepòrò sits upright and in splendor;
only the owner of the body knows it is un-
well. (A person’s outward appearance is not
always a good indication of his or her true
condition.)
46. Oríẹ/eacutedotbelowbàj/eacutedotbelow(‘‘Your head is ruined’’),Oríẹò
sunw/ogravedotbelown,and Oríẹòdára (‘‘Your head is no good’’)
are all insults. The proverb refers to the ram’s habit of
butting against hard objects, such as other rams’ heads.
47. Olúkànḿbí was apparently a real person, one
who did not appreciate good things.
Onhumanvulnerability 381


--- PAGE 395 ---
3913. Òtòṣì-írìntolètolè.
The poor person walks with the mien of a
thief. (A poor person is ever under suspicion
of being susceptible to stealing.)
3914. Owótíàp/oacutedotbelownﬁraiy/ogravedotbelow,ótó-óraẹṣin.
The money the bachelor paid for salt is
enough to buy a horse. (A novice in a ven-
ture is bound to commit huge blunders.)
3915. OwótópaAjéníyàlópaÀpatì;owótó
paAgbájélópaKútere.
The trade that killed Ajéníyà is the same one
that killed Àpatì; the trade that killed Agbájé
is the same that killed Kútere. (No one can
escape the inﬂuence of money.)
48
Ọ
3916. /Ogravedotbelowbẹkìímútítíkógb/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowkùara/egravedotbelow.
Ak n i f ei sn e v e rs os h a r pt h a ti tc a r v e si t s
own handle. (Everybody needs other people
sometime.)
3917. Ọdúnm/eacutedotbelowfà-ajàbú,bíọg/oacutedotbelowrùn-ún
ọdúnni.
Six years of wading in the river is like a hun-
dred years. (Hardship that actually lasts
a brief time seems to the suﬀerer to last
forever.)
3918. /Oacutedotbelowf/iacuteigravesìníńr/eacutedotbelowhìnak/ogravedotbelowwé.
The oﬃce will be the death of the clerk.
(Each occupation has its peculiar hazard.
Compare 4542, 4544, and 5190.)
3919. ‘‘/Ogravedotbelowgáḿb/ogravedotbelow,/ogravedotbelowgáḿb/ogravedotbelow!’’niyópaọmọṣ/eacutedotbelow.
‘‘Here comes the boss, here comes the boss!’’
48. The ﬁrst name in each of the two halves of
the proverb includes the wordajé,which could mean
‘‘money’’ or ‘‘riches,’’ indicating that the bearer was
obsessed with the pursuit of wealth. The proverb sug-
gests, therefore, that it is not only people so blatantly
obsessed who are thus aﬀected by money.
will be the death of the apprentice. (Fear of
discovery, not diligent working, will be the
nemesis of the shirker.)
3920. /Ogravedotbelowg/egravedotbelowd/eacutedotbelowgbéodòsọṣìn-ṣín;ẹjagbéinú
omidára.
The banana plant grows by the river and
prospers; the ﬁsh live in the water and look
beautiful. (One prospers only to the extent
that one’s living situation is hospitable.)
3921. Ọkọkíkúlòṣìobìnrin.
The husband’s death is the bane of a woman.
(Nothing is worse for a woman than to be
widowed.)
3922. Ọl/oacutedotbelowrunìbádákan-in-kan-intóbitó
eṣinṣin,àtapaniìbátaèèyàn.
Had God made the black ant as large as a ﬂy,
it would have stung humans to death. (It is
by the grace of God that the wicked lack the
power to do as they otherwise would. See
the following variant.)
3923. Ọl/oacutedotbelowrunòdákan-in-kan-inkól/eacutedotbelows/egravedotbelowńlá
bíẹṣin;àtapaniìbámáataèèyàn;ẹnitíyóﬁ
èèyànṣ/egravedotbelowsín,Ọl/oacutedotbelowrunkìíj/eacutedotbelowkóníláárí.
God did not create the black ant to have
limbs as big as horses’; otherwise, it would
have kicked humans to death; the person
who would ridicule people has been denied
prosperity by God. (By the grace of God
one’s adversaries are powerless to injure one.
Compare the preceding entry.)
3924. Ọmọẹkùnlajańpa.
It is the young of a leopard that a dog kills.
(It is only while one is still vulnerable that
one’s enemies can get the better of one.)
3925. Ọmọológòdò-óníòúnkúlónìí,/ogravedotbelowla
babaòníńk/oacutedotbelow?
Ac h i l da ﬄ i c t e dw i t hy a w ss a y st o d a yi s
his death; what about tomorrow, father of
today? (A doomed person may think his
382 human nature


--- PAGE 396 ---
current woes are unsurpassable, but he has
not seen what is in store for him.)
3926. Ọmọtíòl/eacutedotbelowwà,/ogravedotbelowd/egravedotbelowd/egravedotbelowìyá/egravedotbelowníńp/eacutedotbelowsí.
A woman without beauty lasts long on her
mother’s porch. (Plain women are not soon
married.)
3927. Ọm/oacutedotbelowkúl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowadití;/ogravedotbelowr/oacutedotbelowdikáti-kàti.
A child dies in the care of a deaf person;
matters become a muddle. (Coming to an
understanding with a person beyond com-
munication is a formidable task.)
3928. /Ogravedotbelownà/ogravedotbelowfunògbakòkòòdù;/ogravedotbelownà/ogravedotbelowfunìbá
gbakòkòòdù,òmìránìbátigbé/ogravedotbelowkanmì,ara
ọl/oacutedotbelowtíadá.
The throat cannot accommodate a large pot;
were the throat able to accommodate such
a pot, the giant would have swallowed one,
causing the wine seller to wallow in her loss.
(Only the limits Nature places on the greedy
person limit the damage he can do to others’
property.)
3929. /Ogravedotbelow/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowg/ogravedotbelowjìm/ogravedotbelowẹkùn,tíńkọọdẹlóminú.
A frightfully huge leopard: it paralyzes the
hunter with fear and anxiety. (A huge prob-
lem stumps even the most resourceful of
people.)
3930. /Ogravedotbelowpáìbú/mgravebúṣ/eacutedotbelowàgbòníwo.
A horizontal stick knocks oﬀ the ram’s
horns. (An unexpected problem has got the
better of a person.)
3931. /Ogravedotbelowpálábá,imúẹ-/eacutedotbelowṣeríbáyìí?Ònísùù-u
/egravedotbelowlòunńwò.
Broken bottle, why is your nose the way it
is? It responds that it is itself contemplating
the matter. (Said when one cannot explain a
situation that people assume one would be
able to explain.)
3932. Ọp/eacutedotbelowlọp/eacutedotbelowàtàrítíòj/eacutedotbelowkíoòrùnópa
àgb/ogravedotbelownìsàl/egravedotbelow.
Much gratitude is due the skull that kept the
sun from beating down on the chin below.
(Even as one laments one’s fate when con-
fronted by adversity, one should be grateful
for little mercies. The following is a vari-
ant.)
3933. Ọp/eacutedotbelowlọp/eacutedotbelowèjìkátíòj/eacutedotbelowkí/egravedotbelowwùób/oacutedotbelow.
Much gratitude is due the shoulders that
kept the garment from falling oﬀ. (Said
when one has experienced extreme adversity
and has come through by the grace of God.
See the previous entry.)
3934. /Ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowníbíabás/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowdébiìrù,káfòó.
T h et o a ds a y sw h e nc o n v e r s a t i o nt u r n st o
t h em a t t e ro ft a i l s ,l e t ’ ss k i pi t .( Ap e r s o n
with a blemish is always uncomfortable
when such blemishes become the subject of
conversation. Compare 3772.)
3935. /Ogravedotbelowrànburúkútòunt/egravedotbelowrín.
A terrible disaster is always confronted with
laughter. (The laughter that greets a disaster
is not one of merriment.)
3936. /Ogravedotbelowrankanẹnìkank/eacutedotbelownìkanmáy/ogravedotbelow;bóṣe
ogúnọdún,tiolúwar/egravedotbelowḿb/ogravedotbelowwábáa.
When trouble befalls someone, let at an-
other person not rejoice; it may take twenty
years, but that other person will experience
h i so rh e ro w nt r o u b l e .( I td o e sn o tp a yt o
rejoice at other people’s misfortune, for we
are all subject to misfortune.)
3937. /Ogravedotbelowrànkìíbánijubíatimọlọ.
No problem aﬀects one beyond one’s ca-
pacity to be aﬀected. (One is liable only to
the extent that one is vulnerable.)
3938. /Ogravedotbelowrànòbáojúgun,óníòunòl/eacutedotbelowran.
The shin has not yet got into trouble, and
therefore it says it has no ﬂesh. (Until one
Onhumanvulnerability 383


--- PAGE 397 ---
gets into trouble, one always thinks one is
invulnerable.)
3939. /Ogravedotbelowràntíńdunnilàròkànẹni.
Whatever problem troubles one is what one
talks to other people about. (One’s pressing
problems always preoccupy one’s conscious-
ness.)
3940. /Ogravedotbelowràntíolóko-óﬁńṣeẹkúnsunni
àpárò-óﬁńṣe/egravedotbelowrínrín.
The matter that causes the owner of the farm
to burst into tears is the same that causes
the partridge to burst into laughter. (Some
people’s disasters are other people’s good
fortune.)
3941. /Ogravedotbelowràn-anhùn-hùnòtánnínúẹl/eacutedotbelowd/egravedotbelow.
The compulsion to grunt is never ended
where the pig is concerned. (Said of people
who are irrevocably wedded to some ten-
dency.)
3942. /Ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowburúju/ogravedotbelowtá,Olùwalólèyọni.
Friends are more terrible than enemies; only
God can protect one. (Friends can be more
dangerous than enemies.)
3943. /Ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowàtọj/oacutedotbelowm/oacutedotbelowj/oacutedotbelowòlèṣínilétíbí/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowtitun.
Stale news cannot pique one’s attention as
new news can. (People are ever more inter-
ested in something new than in familiar
things.)
3944. /Ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowtíakúwárápábásọ,ará/ogravedotbelowrunlósọ
/oacutedotbelow.
W h a t e v e ra ne p i l e p t i cs a y si ss a i db ys o m e -
one bound for heaven. (An observation that
what a certain person is saying is not worth
listening to.)
3945. /Ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowp/ogravedotbelownínúìwé-ek/oacutedotbelowb/ogravedotbelow,epo-ot/oacutedotbelowr/oacutedotbelowla
ﬁńkàá.
The one-penny newspaper is chock-full of
words, so much so that one needs three-
pence oil to read it all. (There is a great deal
to be said on the matter under discussion,
and there may not be enough time to say it
all.)
3946. /Ogravedotbelowrunàkùr/ogravedotbelowlàparòńkúsí.
The partridge meets its death on the dry-
season-marsh farm. (Danger often ﬁnds one
while one fulﬁlls unavoidable obligations.)
3947. /Ogravedotbelowṣ/oacutedotbelowiléòjọobìnrinlójú.
Preening that is conﬁned to the home does
not appeal to a woman. (Women always
wish to go outside the home in order to
advertise their beauty.)
3948. /Ogravedotbelowtá/ogravedotbelowrunògbaẹbọ.
An implacable enemy does not respond to
sacriﬁces. (There is nothing one can do to
win over a sworn enemy.)
3949. /Ogravedotbelowt/egravedotbelowníńdààmúỌl/oacutedotbelowrun-ún-tó-ó-wò;
Ọl/oacutedotbelowrunúntóówòkìíṣeajákájá.
It is the season that has taken its toll on
Ọl/oacutedotbelowrunúntóówò; Ọl/oacutedotbelowrunúntóówò is not
really a worthless dog. (Adverse circum-
stances sometimes make people do unbe-
coming things they would not normally do.)
3950. Ọtíòyàfúnomi.
Wine does not diﬀer from water.
49 (Matters
that will have horrendous eﬀects on people
seldom appear diﬀerent from innocuous
matters.)
3951. /Ogravedotbelowt/ogravedotbelow/ogravedotbelowt/ogravedotbelowlàńw/ogravedotbelowgb/eacutedotbelowìṣ/eacutedotbelow.
People enter the jungle of misery in diﬀerent
ways. (People take diﬀerent paths toward
ruination.)
3952. /Ogravedotbelowwáònípàlàkà.
The palm-leaf midrib does not have nodes
from which branches may emerge. (Said of
49. Read Ọtíòyàt/ogravedotbelowsómi.
384 human nature


--- PAGE 398 ---
people who cannot conceivably be of any
use to others.)
3953. /Ogravedotbelowwàràòjòníḿbaoníléọgbàl/eacutedotbelowrù.
A torrential deluge is what strikes terror into
the heart of a person who lives in a house
made of thatch. (People who are vulnerable
to any sort of danger have reason to tremble
if it should threaten.)
3954. Ọw/oacutedotbelowad/eacutedotbelowt/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowkóòjì/ogravedotbeloww/ogravedotbeloww/ogravedotbelow,kòtúngba
èkùr/oacutedotbelow.
The leper’s hands scoop up forty grains of
boiled dry corn; there is no room left for
palm kernels. (People with disadvantages are
limited in their capabilities.)
3955. Ọw/oacutedotbelowah/oacutedotbelownkìítóimú.
The reach of the tongue is never as far as the
nose. (There is a limit to what a person can
accomplish.)
3956. /Ogravedotbeloww/oacutedotbelownowólàńroowóníní;/ogravedotbeloww/oacutedotbelownomilà
ńdeìsun;/ogravedotbeloww/oacutedotbelownoúnjẹlàńpéjẹyànmù.
It is when money is scarce that one is pre-
occupied with the thought of money; it is
when water is scarce that one keeps watch by
the spring; it is when food is scarce that one
joins a crowd to scramble for food. (Scarcity
r e d u c e sp e o p l et ou n s e e m l yb e h a v i o r . )
3957. Ọy/eacutedotbelowńf/eacutedotbelowoòfunfun,ìrìńs/egravedotbelowoòj/ogravedotbelowl/ogravedotbelow,
oníṣègùnniyóﬁowóẹpoorimu.
The harmattan rages, and your skin does
not go white; the drizzle falls, and your skin
does not soften; your money will end up
paying for the medicine man’s meal. (A per-
son aﬀected by natural phenomena in a way
diﬀerent from others will enrich doctors.)
3958. Ọy/eacutedotbelowòsánàrá,kùru-kùruòtanm/ogravedotbelownà-
m/oacutedotbelowná;akọàparò,aboàparòòlágbelórí
sán-sán-sán.
The harmattan does not come with thunder;
haze does not come with lightning; neither
the male nor the female partridge has a
prominent comb on its head. (Everybody
has some deﬁciency.)
P
3959. Pàkìtì-íkọìrìnàjò,gbágùúdákọiléàna
kòlọ;às/egravedotbelowhìnwáàs/egravedotbelowhìnb/ogravedotbelowgbágùúdáﬁléàna
ṣèsimi.
A coarse mat does not go on a journey; cas-
sava refuses to go to the in-law’s home; in
the end, though, cassave makes the in-law’s
home its ﬁnal resting place. (One is some-
times forced to take up what one had earlier
refused.)
50
3960. Pátákòẹf/ogravedotbelown,kakaníńtiajál/eacutedotbelownu.
The hoof of the buﬀalo is a tough thing in
a horse’s mouth. (Said of problems that are
diﬃcult to tackle.)
3961. Pípátóríigúnpá,kìíṣetiẹrùrírù.
The baldness that aﬄicts the vulture did not
result from its carrying heavy loads. (One
cannot presume to know the reasons for
other people’s conditions.)
R
3962. R/eacutedotbelowdẹ-r/egravedotbelowdẹláraalám/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowditóníomiẹjá
korò.
M a t t e r sh a v eg o n er a t h e rb a d l yf o rt h es i c k
person who says ﬁsh broth is bitter. (When
ap e r s o ns e e so n l yp u t r e f a c t i o ni np r i c e l e s s
things, he or she is really far gone.)
3963. Rírònitèèyàn,ṣíṣenitỌl/oacutedotbelowrun.
It is people’s province to propose; it is God’s
50. One would take one’s most presentable pos-
sessions along on a journey: in this case, a ﬁne mat.
C a s s a v ai sap o o rp e r s o n ’ sf o o d ,c o m p a r e dw i t hy a m s ,
for example, so one would not oﬀer cassava to one’s
in-laws if one could aﬀord better.
Onhumanvulnerability 385


--- PAGE 399 ---
ﬁat to dispose. (Man proposes, but God
disposes.)51
3964. Rógódóìdíigbáòj/eacutedotbelowkójókòó-ore.
The protrusion at the base of the calabash
keeps it from sitting straight. (An obstacle
prevents one from acting as one might
wish.)
Ṣ
3965. Ṣakatáníńdáw/ogravedotbelown-w/ogravedotbelownniBèse.
The bog represents a troublesome obstacle
for the people of Bèse. (A stubborn and in-
evitable problem is an impediment one must
learn to live with.)
3966. Ṣẹgẹòmọẹniọba,òjòòmẹni/ogravedotbeloww/ogravedotbelow.
The tall prickly grass does not care who is
a royal personage; rain does not care who
is a venerable person. (Natural phenomena
do not distinguish among human ranks.
Compare 3902.)
3967. Ṣíṣánlódá/egravedotbelowkọlára.
Being eaten without any condiments is the
misfortune of the corn meal. (It is a misfor-
tune to have to do without what is needed
for comfortable living.)
3968. Ṣó-ń-ṣóméjìkìíforíkanorí.
Two pinnacles can never touch heads.
(Two irreconcilables can never be brought
together.)
T
3969. TanítóỌl/oacutedotbelowrun?Ẹdátóm/ogravedotbelowlaòsí.
Who is as great as God? No human being
51. This is very likely a borrowing from the Euro-
pean proverb treasury.
k n o w st o m o r r o w .( N oo n ei sa sg r e a to r
knowledgeable as God.)
3970. Tìmùtìmù-úkó/egravedotbelowgbindàsínú.
The footstool-cushion ﬁlls itself with rub-
bish. (Said of people who must put up with
a lot of rubbish or annoyance.)
3971. Túlàsìkaya-n-doro,tínáﬁḿb/oacutedotbelowbàtà
l/eacutedotbelows/egravedotbelowadìẹ.
Irresistible compulsion, with which ﬁre
strips the scaly skin oﬀ a chicken’s legs.
(When the problem is unmanageable, even
the toughest person hasn’t a prayer.)
3972. Túlàsì-íníòunóbàáọgbé,oníkò
sáàyè;góńgóimúẹńk/oacutedotbelow?
An unpreventable disaster says it will lodge
with you, and you say you have no room
for it; what about the tip of your nose?
(Everybody can make room for disaster.)
W
3973. ‘‘Wájẹún’’kúròníteégún.
‘‘Come and eat’’ is out of the question for
a masquerader.
52 (Because of their natural
limitations some people cannot hope to
enjoy certain privileges.)
3974. W/oacutedotbelownní,‘‘Ad/eacutedotbelowt/egravedotbelow,oògbènìàkàrà.’’Óní
wọnògbàdúràpékítọw/oacutedotbelowòunbaòundélé
ná.
They said, ‘‘Leper, won’t you stop and re-
ceive your extra [gratuity of] fried bean
fritters?’’ He responded by asking if they
should not rather pray that what he already
has in his hands will go home safely with
him. (Covetousness can turn out to be a
drain on one’s resources.)
52. The eégúnmasquerader cannot eat because he is
completely covered and must not reveal his identity (his
face) to the public.
386 human nature


--- PAGE 400 ---
3975. W/oacutedotbelownní,‘‘Amúkùnún,/egravedotbelowru/eacutedotbelowmàw/oacutedotbelow/ogravedotbelow.’’Ó
ní‘‘Ìsàl/egravedotbelowlótiw/oacutedotbelowwá.’’
People said, ‘‘Cripple, your load is crooked.’’
He responded that the crookedness was
from the ground up. (In considering a prob-
lem, one must look at the root causes, not
only the manifestations.)
3976. W/oacutedotbelownníkáfarópalé,afarópalé,ìtal/egravedotbelow-
/eacutedotbelowtúnńjẹni;w/oacutedotbelownníkáfìt/ogravedotbelowpajàafìt/ogravedotbelowpajà,
jẹs/egravedotbelowjẹs/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowtúnńjẹèèyàn.
One is told to scrub one’s ﬂoor with indigo
dye; one scrubs the ﬂoor with indigo dye,
yet mud-ﬂoor worms persist in biting one.
One is told to wash the market stall with
urine, and one washes the stall with urine,
yet foot-eating worms continue to eat one.
(All one’s eﬀorts to master a problem have
proved futile.)
3977. W/oacutedotbelownníkíniw/oacutedotbelownsọnù,w/oacutedotbelownníẹran;
w/oacutedotbelownníkíniw/oacutedotbelownńjẹ,w/oacutedotbelownníeegun.
When asked what they lost, they said meat;
when asked what they were eating, they said
bones. (In the face of misfortune, one makes
do with what one has.)
Y
3978. Yọyọlẹnuayéńdà.
The world runs endlessly at the mouth.
(People can be relied upon to spread tales
irresponsibly about others.)
Onhumanvulnerability 387


--- PAGE 401 ---
On mortality
A
3979. Akìíp/eacutedotbelowláyékámáﬁil/egravedotbelowbora.
One does not live so long on this earth that
one does not eventually cover oneself with
earth. (Everybody dies in the end.)
3980. Akìísunkúna-nìkàn-para-/egravedotbelow.
One does not weep for a person who took
his or her own life. (Do not pity anyone who
invites disaster on his or her own head.)
3981. Àgbàkìíṣubúy/egravedotbelowg/egravedotbelowkódatiikùn-unr/egravedotbelow
síl/egravedotbelow;ohunabájẹníḿbániílọ.
An elderly person does not stumble and spill
what is in his stomach; what one has eaten
goes with one. (All that one will take to
heaven is what one has eaten on this earth.
1
See 4834.)
3982. ÀìdéikúlàḿbọÒgún;àìdéikúlàḿbọ
òrìṣà;bíkúbádéikúògb/eacutedotbelowbọ.
It is when death has not called that one sac-
riﬁces to Ògún; it is when death has not
called that one sacriﬁces to gods; when
death comes calling, death does not heed
sacriﬁces. (There is no medicine or sacriﬁce
to stop death when its time comes. See also
3492.)
3983. Àìsànkanòlèkóọgb/ogravedotbelownikúlọ.
One illness cannot bear thirty deaths away.
1. Just as no one can take away what one has eaten,
so one cannot take earthly possessions to heaven. In
other words, one should enjoy this life while one has
the chance.
(One person’s illness or death will not in-
demnify others against death.)
3984. Ajákúófeegunsíléayé;adìẹfunfun-
únkúótuìhùùhùgbugbu;ìgbínkúógbàgbé
ìkaraun.
The dog dies and leaves bones on earth; the
white chicken dies and loses its down; the
snail dies and forgets about its shell. (One
cannot take anything with one to heaven.)
3985. Ajogún-Ifáníkíòunmákù-ú;ẹnitók/oacutedotbelow
t/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowdà?
He who inherited the Ifá priesthood prays
that he not die; where is his predecessor as
priest? (Everyone dies, willy-nilly.)
3986. Akọajál/oacutedotbelowlá;àgùàlàniyìoṣù.
The male dog is glorious; the planet Venus is
the glory of the moon. (One can tell who is
illustrious from mere appearance.)
3987. Aláwoákú;oníṣègùnár/ogravedotbelowrun;adáhunṣe
òníígbél/egravedotbelow.
The diviner will die; the medicine man
will go to heaven; the sorcerer will not re-
main forever on earth. (Death is the lot of
everyone. Compare 3992.)
3988. Àtàríwo/ogravedotbelowrunmọmọbíẹnipékòní
ib/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowrè;oyeojútówoayéniyówo/ogravedotbelowrun.
The skull stares at the sky as though it would
not wind up there; every eye that looks upon
the earth will also see heaven. (One cannot
avoid one’s destiny.)


--- PAGE 402 ---
3989. Àt/egravedotbelowmákùúòsínÍfá.
Consulting-without-ever-dying is not a fea-
ture of Ifá oracle. (Even the priest of Ifá is
not immune from dying.)
3990. Àtiwáyéòdàbíàtir/ogravedotbelowrun.
Coming-to-earth is nothing like going-to-
heaven. (Life is a pleasurable experience
until one thinks of dying.)
3991. Àwáyé-àìkúòsí;/egravedotbelowrùlásánlaﬁńdába
ara-awa.
There is no living without dying; we only
scare ourselves [with death]. (Death is inevi-
table, and there is no point in dreading it.)
B
3992. Babaaláwoáku;oníṣègùnár/ogravedotbelowrun;
adáunṣeòníígbél/egravedotbelow.
The diviner will die; the medicine man will
go to heaven; the sorcerer will not remain
forever on earth. (Death comes to all in the
end. This is the same as 3987.)
3993. Bíabádàgbà,tíagbó,bóp/eacutedotbelowtítíojúá
káj/oacutedotbelow.
If one lives long and grows old, in time one’s
eyes will encompass all. (Age is experience.)
3994. Bíabáforísọl/egravedotbelowtíakòkú,ohuntíaó
ṣe-ékù.
If one dives headﬁrst onto the ground and
does not die, one must still have things to
accomplish in life. (Providence has plans for
one who fails in a suicide attempt.)
3995. Bíikúbádé,kòsíl/oacutedotbelowyàtólèṣojúẹni.
When death comes, no lawyer can repre-
sent us. (We cannot hide from death behind
well-wishers.)
Ẹ
3996. Ẹbọ-/oacutedotbelowle,kòjuòkúlọ.
The sacriﬁce is formidable; it is not worse
than death. (No suﬀering extends beyond
death.)
2
3997. Ẹníf/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowríòkúkósùn;àtúnrarídojúàlá.
Whoever wants to see the dead should go
to sleep; such encounters happen only in
the realm of dreams. (Once people die, they
cannot be seen again in this life.)
3998. Ẹnitókúàtiẹnitósọnù:w/oacutedotbelownlèpàdé.
The dead person and the lost person: both
could meet. (A person lost to his commu-
nity is no diﬀerent from a dead person.)
3999. Ẹnitóósùn-únsànjuẹnitókúlọ.
The sleeping person is better oﬀ than the
dead person. (Conditions that superﬁcially
seem the same may in fact be very diﬀerent;
sleep is preferable to death.)
4000. Ẹrúkúìyáògb/oacutedotbelow;ọm/oacutedotbelowkúariwóta.
A slave dies, and the mother does not learn
of the death; a freeborn dies, and lamenta-
tions erupt. (People are not all equal, nor are
they valued equally.)
4001. Ẹṣíntatataókú;èèyánrìnrìnrìnó
sọnù.
A horse kicks and kicks and kicks and dies;
a person walks and walks and walks and gets
lost. (The fate of humans, as of animals, is to
keep striving until death.)
2. The proverb could also be construed to mean
that no protective sacriﬁce can be more eﬃcacious than
the protection the dead can oﬀer—this in keeping with
the Yoruba belief that departed ancestors vigilantly
protect those they have left behind.
Onmortality 389


--- PAGE 403 ---
Gb
4002. Gbèsènikú;kòs/eacutedotbelownitíkòníípa.
D e a t hi sad e b t ;t h e r ei sn oo n ei tw i l ln o t
kill. (Death is a debt everyone owes and
everyone must repay.)
I
4003. Ìbíòjuìbí;bíatibíẹrulatibíọmọ.
No birth is worthier than another; just as the
slave was born, so was the scion born. (All
humans start out equal.)
4004. Ìgbàmélòólàáﬁńkú?Àﬁàìráyè
ṣàìsàn.
How long does it take to die? The problem
is not having the time to be sick. (The good
thing about sudden disasters is that they are
not preceded by protracted anxieties.)
4005. Igba/ogravedotbelowk/eacutedotbelowlàńra/egravedotbelowmí.
The price one pays for life breath is 4 million
cowries. (Life is priceless.)
3
4006. Ikánńjẹléàgbàńs/ogravedotbelow;àgbànáàoúnjẹ
ikán.
Termites eat up the house, and the old per-
son complains; but the old man or woman
himself or herself is food for termites. (If a
certain fate awaits one, one should not make
futile eﬀorts to protect others from it.)
4007. Ikúlorúkọàj/eacutedotbelowp/egravedotbelowkun.
Death is the name one bears at the last.
(Death is everybody’s ultimate fate.)
3. Before the arrival of the British, 4 million cowries
represented wealth of almost unimaginable magnitude.
W h e nar a t eo fc o n v e r s i o nt oB r i t i s hc u r r e n c yw a si m -
posed, that amount became a paltry £50 sterling, or
about $150.
4008. Ikúńpaaláwọẹkùn,káláwọagílíńtíó
múra.
Death kills the person clothed in leopard
skin; the person clothed in lizard skin had
better prepare himself or herself. (When the
mighty fall, lesser people should take heed.)
4009. Ikútíńpaojúgbàẹnińpòwefúnni.
The death that kills one’s age mate is send-
ing one a message in proverbs. (One should
learn from others’ fate. Compare the follow-
ing entry.)
4010. Ikútópaòwèńpòwefúnẹdun.
The death that killed the black monkey
sends a proverbial message to the colobus
monkey. (What happened to a person in a
position similar to yours may well happen to
you. Compare the preceding entry.)
4011. Ikútóbil/oacutedotbelowba;àràtówuikúnikúńda.
Death is a mighty king indeed; whatever
it chooses to do, that it does. (There is no
force that can stop death.)
4012. Iléayé,à-fọw/oacutedotbelow-bà-ﬁ-síl/egravedotbelow.
This world [is] something to be handled
momentarily and then let go of. (All life is
ephemeral.)
4013. Il/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowm/oacutedotbelow,il/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowṣú,ọl/oacutedotbelowj/oacutedotbelowńkàá.
The day dawns, the day ends, and the owner
of days keeps count. (Time passes relent-
lessly on.)
4014. Ìrùẹṣinkìíp/eacutedotbelowdiìrùèèyàn;b/eacutedotbelowṣínbákú
afìrùsíl/egravedotbelowlọ.
A horse’s tail soon becomes a person’s tail;
when a horse dies, it leaves its tail behind.
(Other people eventually inherit one’s prop-
erty.)
4
4. Horses’ tails are used as whisks, especially as part
of the ceremonial paraphernalia of kings.
390 human nature


--- PAGE 404 ---
4015. Irundúdúníńṣíwájúewú.
Black hair is the forerunner of white hair.
(Old age comes inexorably after youth.)
M
4016. Máf/ogravedotbelowruny/ogravedotbelowmí;gbogbowalajọńlọ.
Do not taunt me with heading for heaven;
we will all end up there eventually. (The
living should remember that they will follow
the dead to heaven in the end.)
O
4017. Ogbóòlóògùn.
Aging has no antidote. (We all grow old,
willy-nilly.)
4018. Òjòjòkanòlèjutẹnitókú.
No illness can be more grave than that of the
person who died. (Some problems have no
equal.)
4019. Ojúm/oacutedotbelowm/oacutedotbelowàńy/ogravedotbelow;ọj/oacutedotbelowikúńdínkù.
The day dawns and we rejoice; one’s dying
day approaches closer. (Every new day
brings death closer.)
4020. Òkúńsunkúnòkú;akáṣọléríńsunkún
ara-awọn.
The dead are weeping for the dead; carriers
of cloth bundles are weeping for themselves
[and for one another].
5 (The survivor weep-
ing for the dead soon dies himself or herself;
death takes everybody in the end.)
4021. Olèké-kè-kéniw/oacutedotbelownńpèkúnl/egravedotbelow;taníj/eacutedotbelow
wípékíọmọAríọríówásígba-n-gbakówá
wítir/egravedotbelow?
Only small-time thieves are called to ac-
5. A woman mourner would roll up her headgear
and place it atop her head.
count on their knees; who dares summon
the son of Aríọrí to come out in the open
and render an account? (Small-time crimi-
nals alone are brought to book; the really
big criminals go scot-free.)
6
4022. Òníorífíf/oacutedotbelow;/ogravedotbelowla,/egravedotbelowd/ogravedotbelowrírìn;ìgbàwoni
Mákùúònííkú?
Today a headache, tomorrow a liver ailment;
how will Mákùú escape death? (A person
dogged by ailments will surely die, despite
a l le ﬀ o r t st op r e v e n tt h a tf a t e . )
7
4023. Òní,/Ogravedotbelowy/egravedotbelowkúbàrà;/ogravedotbelowla,/Ogravedotbelowy/egravedotbelowkúbàrà;nínú
èteàtèrònikúḿbáni.
Today, a death-dodging strategy; tomorrow,
a death-dodging strategy; death comes even
as one ﬁnds ever more ways of dodging it.
8
(Death comes to all, willy-nilly.)
4024. Òwúlàbágbìn,aògbinidẹ;òwúlàbá
gbìn,aògbìnl /egravedotbelowk/egravedotbelow;àtidẹàtìl/egravedotbelowk/egravedotbelow,/ogravedotbelowkankìíbáni
déhòròòkú;ọj/oacutedotbelowabákúaṣọníḿbanilọ.
Cotton is what one should plant, not brass;
cotton is what one should plant, not beads;
as for brass and beads, neither goes with one
to the grave; on the day one dies, only cloth
accompanies one. (When we die, our jewelry
is of no use to us.)
Ọ
4025. Ọj/oacutedotbelowabákúlàńdère,èèyànòsunw/ogravedotbelown
láàyè.
It is on the day one dies that one becomes
an idol; no one is appreciated when alive.
6. Aríọrí is obviously a historical ﬁgure and a
formidable criminal.
7. The name Mákùú means ‘‘Do not die.’’
8. The term /Ogravedotbelowy/egravedotbelowkú,which heads a subchapter of
the Ifá divination corpus, means, roughly, ‘‘a means of
deﬂecting death.’’ The endingbàràexpresses a mode of
dodging.
Onmortality 391


--- PAGE 405 ---
(People are often more glorious in death
than in life.)
4026. /Ogravedotbelowrunòdùn;ẹnitókúòpadàwáyé.
Heaven may turn out not to be a pleasant
place, but the dead cannot come back to
earth. (Once one is dead, one is done.)
P
4027. Pá-ń-sáil/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowláriwonínú;àjà-il/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowba
àgbàl/eacutedotbelowrù.
A tomb is attended by crying; a grave strikes
terror into elderly people. (People are always
sobered by reminders of their mortality.)
T
4028. Tikútikúlàńroàgbà;àgbàníńpète
àìkú.
People always look at aged people with
death in their eyes; the aged are the ones
who strive to stay alive. (Each person is the
most reliable guardian of his or her own
well-being.)
392 human nature


--- PAGE 406 ---
On inscrutability
A
4029. Akìík/oacutedotbelowniníkàbíaòbáníkánínú;ta
níńk/oacutedotbelownikáṣerere?
Nobody teaches one to be wicked if one does
not have wickedness in one; whoever teaches
one to be good? (Goodness and wickedness
are not learned but are part of one’s nature.)
4030. Akìím/ogravedotbelowrànm/ogravedotbelowrànkámọoyúnìgbín
nínuìkaraun.
One is never so knowledgeable that one can
detect the pregnancy of a snail in its shell.
(Certain things are beyond the ken of even
the wisest of people.)
4031. Akíìyàwókòdáhùn;afunnít/oacutedotbelowr/oacutedotbelowó
naw/oacutedotbelow.
One greets the new bride, but she does not
respond; one oﬀers her three pence, and she
extends her hand. (Minor inconveniences,
or observance of form, will not rob one of
one’s judgment.)
1
4032. Amọaláré,amọeléki;aláṣìsọlókù.
The entertainer we know; the praise singer
we know; the misspeaker is all that is left.
(There is no doubt about the intentions of
the entertainer and the praise singer, but
there may be doubt about the intentions of a
person whose utterances are oﬀensive.)
1 .N e wb r i d e sa r ee x p e c t e dt od e m o n s t r a t ee x t r e m e
diﬃdence on arrival at their new homes, but that does
not prevent them from receiving gifts oﬀered as part of
the marriage festivities.
4033. Aníkár/oacutedotbelowjúj/egravedotbelowkọ/ogravedotbelowbùn,óńdá/egravedotbelowkọ/egravedotbelow
kéré.
One resolves to make an eﬀort to buy and
eat corn meal prepared by a ﬁlthy person,
and the person skimps on the measure. (The
person does not realize that her customers
will be only too happy not to patronize
her.)
2
4034. Àńjọ-/oacutedotbelowrìn,akòmọoríolówó.
Though we might travel as a group, we do
n o tk n o ww h oi sd e s t i n e dt op r o s p e r .( N o
one can tell who among a company is most
l i k e l yt os u c c e e d . )
4035. Àńrìnníl/egravedotbelowinúḿb/eacutedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowṣin;àńfòlókèinú
ḿb/eacutedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowyẹ;àńwọàkísàinúḿbáláṣọ;àńj/egravedotbelowf/oacutedotbelow
/ogravedotbelowsùninúḿb/eacutedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowran.
One walks on the ground, and the horse
rider is angry; one ﬂies in the air, and the
bird keeper is angry; one wears rags, and
the dealer in cloth is angry; one feeds on
vegetables, and the meat seller is angry.
(Whatever one does, one will incur some
people’s displeasure. Compare 3783.)
4036. Aòmọẹs/egravedotbelowòṣìkàl/oacutedotbelownà.
One cannot tell who is wicked by his or
her footprint. (By their deeds they shall be
known.)
2. The use of the feminine gender here is deliberate
because the trade in question is exclusive to women.


--- PAGE 407 ---
4037. Aṣeélébù,oṣeìkòkò;afúnunládìẹ
sìn,ópaiṣusíná.
He is given planting-yam pieces, and he pre-
pares a cooking pot; he is given a chicken
to raise, and he begins to cook yams. (Some
people cannot be relied on.)
3
4038. Abínúẹnífooreṣeginígbó;óník/eacutedotbelowranko
mujẹ.
He who wants no good for one does a favor
for trees in the forest; he invites animals to
share the favor. (Expect no favors from an
enemy.)
4039. Àdánsọoríkodò,óńwòṣeẹyẹgbogbo.
The bat hangs its head and contemplates the
doings of birds. (The quiet person sees more
than the loudmouth.)
4
4040. Aﬁniṣekìíj/eacutedotbelowkáfòunṣe.
He-who-exploits-others never permits him-
self to be exploited. (The evil person is
always on his guard.)
4041. Ahunḿmí;igbá/egravedotbelowhìn-inr/egravedotbelowniòj/eacutedotbelowká
m/ogravedotbelow.
The tortoise breathes; only its shell con-
ceals the fact. (Whatever appearances might
be, no human is essentially diﬀerent from
another. Compare 3641.)
4042. Ahùwà-ìbàj/eacutedotbelowsẹbítòunlàńwí;aṣe-
burúkúokúarafífun.
The person of evil character thinks he is the
subject of discussion; the evildoer is plagued
by suspiciousness. (Evil acts breed uneasy
consciences.)
3. The indication is that the recipient of the yam
pieces and the chicken will put them to uses other
than the ones the giver intended; such actions are
inauspicious and suspicious.
4. The bat’s habit of hanging upside down is here
regarded as a contemplative pose.
4043. Aralam/ogravedotbelow,aòmọinú.
It is the body that one knows; one does not
know what lies inside. (No one can see into
the mind of another.)
4044. A-sáré-ṣá-ṣá-nínú-/egravedotbelowgúnòsálásán;bí
kòlénǹkan,nǹkanńlée.
One-who-runs-wildly-through-a-thorn-
bush does not run for no reason; if he or she
is not after something, something is after
h i mo rh e r .( Ap e r s o nw h ob e h a v e si na n
unusual manner must have some reason.)
4045. Aṣ/ogravedotbelowrànníńṣeaájò.
The guilty person is the one who commis-
erates. (The guilty person often tries to
conceal his or her culpability by being the
most solicitous.)
4046. A-ṣ/ogravedotbelowràn-ìbàj/eacutedotbelowṣebítòunlàńwí;a-ṣe-
búburúokúarafífun.
The-person-who-has-done-something-bad
thinks people are discussing him or her;
evildoer, we acknowledge your guilty con-
science. (A guilty conscience is an uneasy
conscience.)
4047. Awọf/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowboinú,kòj/eacutedotbelowkáríikùnaṣeni.
A thin skin covers the stomach and prevents
one from seeing inside the evildoer. (One
cannot tell friends from enemies simply by
looking at them.)
4048. Ayélòkun,èèyànl/ogravedotbelowsà;akìím/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbeloww/egravedotbelow
kákáyéjá.
The world is a sea, and the people in it are a
lagoon; no matter how well one knows how
to swim, one cannot swim the world. (The
world and the people in it are as dangerous
as the sea; no matter what one does, one
cannot be entirely safe from them.)
394 human nature


--- PAGE 408 ---
B
4049. BíabágúnyánfúnKònííf/eacutedotbelow,kònííf/eacutedotbelow;bí
abárokàfúnKònííf/eacutedotbelow,kònííf/eacutedotbelow.
If one makes pounded yams for Kònííf/eacutedotbelow
[meaning ‘‘He-will-not-like-it’’], he will
not like it; if one cooks yam-powder meal
for Kònííf/eacutedotbelow, he will not like it. (There is no
pleasing a grouch.)
4050. Bíakòbát/egravedotbelowléwèrè,akìímọilétíyó
w/ogravedotbelow.
Unless one follows an imbecile, one does not
know which house he will enter. (There is
no anticipating an unpredictable person.)
4051. Bíal/eacutedotbelowyóṣerí,ọw/oacutedotbelowẹl/eacutedotbelowdàálówà.
What the evening of life will be like is in the
hands of the Creator. (Only God knows how
one’s life will end.)
4052. Bíaráyébáṣìkàtán,wọnatúnbáni
dárò.
After people have acted wickedly, they then
sympathize with their victims. (People are
not to be trusted.)
4053. Bíinúkòbáníodì,odìanínú.
Even if one’s mind harbors no enmity, one’s
enemy keeps one in mind. (You may harbor
no ill will toward others, but others may
harbor ill will toward you.)
4054. Bíoníiyùn,níèjìgbà,tíonís/egravedotbelowgip/egravedotbelowlú,
ataw/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelownilójúabúni.
If you have iyùnbeads and have èjìgbà
beads, even iyùnbeads also, they are all like
small peppers to the detractor. (Nothing one
has or does impresses one’s detractor.)
D
4055. D/egravedotbelowǹg/eacutedotbelowtutùl/eacutedotbelowhìn,ógbónánínú.
Maize porridge is cool on top but steaming
hot inside. (A person who appears docile
may be a ﬁrebrand underneath.)
4056. Dùlúm/ogravedotbelow/egravedotbelowpàl/oacutedotbelowrùn-unsèsé:aj/egravedotbelowbi-
/ogravedotbelowràn-wòtiiri.Sèsébeans cause trouble for
peanuts: the-guilty-one-that-wears-an-
innocent-look. (The person who drags
others into trouble is often adept at escaping
the responsibility.)
E
4057. Èéfínnìwà;kòṣé-ébòm/oacutedotbelowra.
Character is smoke; one cannot conceal it
under one’s clothing. (Character will show.)
4058. Eégúnmọni,èèyànòm/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelow.
The masquerader knows one, but one does
not know him. (A masquerader may rec-
ognize you, but you cannot recognize him,
since he is under a shroud. The sage, or
better-placed people, have the advantage
over you.)
5
4059. Eèràòf/eacutedotbelowpòpóòròdénú;kí-ń-kín-nílayé
ńfẹnimọ.
The ant harbors no deep love for the corn-
stalk; people love others only minimally.
6
(Never take people’s professed love at face
value.)
4060. ÈèyànìbáṣebíỌl/oacutedotbelowrunkòbunni
lómimu.
Were man in the same position as God, he
would not provide humans with water to
drink. (Trust placed in human goodness is
trust misplaced.)
5. This is usually a comment one makes to a person
who recognizes one but whom one does not recognize;
it says, in eﬀect, ‘‘You have the advantage of me.’’
6. The ant’s fondness for dry cornstalk is here as-
sumed to be a profession of love, whereas it actually
damages the host.
Oninscrutability 395


--- PAGE 409 ---
4061. Èèyànńwojú;Ọl/oacutedotbelowrunńwọkàn.
Human beings keep their gaze on the face;
God looks into the heart. (Human beings
can see only what a face reveals; only God
know what is in the heart.)
4062. Èkéòpeara-ar/egravedotbelowlórúkọ;ìkàòpeara-a
r/egravedotbelowníkà.
The devious person does not call himself or
herself devious; the wicked person does not
call himself or herself wicked. (Evil people
do not admit being evil.)
4063. Èkútéiléòﬁbiàjàhanarawọn.
House mice do not point the way to the
rafters to one another. (Each person for
himself or herself.)
4064. Eléteòpáalójúẹni;/egravedotbelowhìnẹnilà
ńgbìm/ogravedotbelowrànìkà.
Plotters do not hatch their plots in one’s
presence; evil plots are hatched when the
victim is not about. (One is always in the
dark about one’s enemies’ machinations.)
Ẹ
4065. Ẹniàbáníkókínnil/eacutedotbelowhìn-ínf/egravedotbelowgún
s/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow;ẹniàbáníkóf/eacutedotbelownilójúfatas/eacutedotbelownu.
The person one would ask to scratch one’s
back ﬁlls his hand with thorns; the person
one would ask to blow into one’s eyes ﬁlls
his mouth with pepper. (Those in whom one
would wish to place one’s trust are not to be
trusted.)
4066. Ẹniaf/eacutedotbelowlam/ogravedotbelow;aòmọẹnióf/eacutedotbelowni.
We know only those we love; we know
not who loves us. (We know our disposi-
tion toward others, not their disposition
toward us.)
4067. Ẹnianíkáf/egravedotbelowhìntìkámudídùnọsàn,
kíkanníńkafúnnimu.
The person one hoped to lean upon to eat
the sweetest of oranges plucks only sour
oranges for one to eat. (It is courting dis-
appointment to place one’s hope in other
people.)
4068. Ẹníréjòńsá;ejòńsá.
The person who sees a snake ﬂees; the snake
also ﬂees. (Two adversaries confront each
other, but neither has the will to make a
move.)
4069. Ẹnitíabápèteàtiraẹṣinníńf/eacutedotbelowsọnidi
olókoẹṣin.
T h ep e r s o nw i t hw h o mo n ep l a n st ob u ya
horse is the same person scheming to trade
one for a horse. (Presumed friends may turn
out to be deadly enemies.)
4070. Ẹnitóríojúikúnm/ogravedotbelowpéyójẹoko.
Whoever looks at the face of the squirrel
will know that it will eat farm crops. (If one
studies people well, one can predict what
they are capable of.)
4071. Ẹnitobìnrinòkíl/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelow-ẹr/egravedotbelow.
It is the person a woman does not greet that
is her lover. (A woman’s behavior toward a
man often belies her true feelings for him.)
4072. Ẹnuèèyànlẹbọ.
People’s mouths are the things to oﬀer sacri-
ﬁces to. (One need fear nothing as much as
what people say.)
4073. Ẹnukòjẹunkanmọ,tíyósọ/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowkan
mọ.
The mouth is not limited to one type of
food or one type of speech. (One cannot be
certain of what the mouth will say; a tool
may be used for more than one task.)
4074. Ẹs/egravedotbelowgìrì-gìrìníléàńj/ogravedotbelowf/eacutedotbelow;/ogravedotbelowf/eacutedotbelowtán,ẹs/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowsì
dá.
Thundering footsteps in the home of free
396 human nature


--- PAGE 410 ---
gifts: the free gifts are all gone, and the foot-
steps cease. (People will congregate around a
person who has a lot to give but only as long
as he or she has something left to give.)
Gb
4075. Gbogboaláǹgbálódakùndél/egravedotbelow:aòmọ
èyítíinúńrun.
All lizards have their stomachs to the
ground: no one knows which among them
is suﬀering from stomachache.
7 (One cannot
tell from looks alone the worries anyone is
concealing behind a cheerful mien.)
4076. Gbogbolodì;bóolówóodì,gbogbolodì;
bóòlówóodì.
Everything can incite enmity: if you have
money, you incite enmity; all things can in-
cite enmity: if you lack money, you incite
enmity. (There is no pleasing people; what-
ever one is or does can earn one enemies.)
I
4077. Ibiajálatiḿmọoǹroròàp/oacutedotbelown.
It is from his treatment of his dog that one
can tell which unmarried man will be a ter-
ror to live with. (One can tell much about a
person’s character from how he or she acts
with regard to seemingly inconsequential
matters.)
4078. IbitíNg-ó-pa-á-gbéḿbẹ,ib/egravedotbelowniNg-ó-
gbà-ásìwà.
Where one ﬁnds I-will-kill-him-for-sure,
even there too will one ﬁnd I-will-save-him.
(Just as there are people who bear one ill
will, so there are those who have good will
toward one.)
7. One of the ways to relieve stomachache is to lie
on one’s stomach.
4079. Ibitóṣòrolójúeégun,àw/ogravedotbelown-/oacutedotbelownbòó.
The most problematic part of the masquer-
ader’s front [or face] is concealed behind a
net.
8 (The most embarrasing part of a matter
has so far remained unrevealed.)
4080. Ìkàòj/eacutedotbelowṣeọmọ/egravedotbelowb/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelow.
The wicked would not treat his or her own
child the same way [the way he or she treats
the children of others]. (The wicked always
protect their own interests.)
4081. Iléboilélójú;òrùléboàjàm/oacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelow;awọ
f/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowboinúkòj/eacutedotbelowkáríkùnaṣeni.
One house obscures another; the roof con-
c e a l st h ec e i l i n g ;at h i nl a y e ro fs k i nc o v e r s
the stomach, making it impossible to see
inside the evildoer. (One cannot discern
a person’s character by simply looking.
Compare 4097.)
4082. Inúìkòkòdúdúl/egravedotbelowkọfunfúntińjáde.
It is from the black pot that the white corn
meal comes. (An evil person may sire a good
person.)
4083. Ìṣ/ogravedotbelowrànniìṣeaájò.
The extent of one’s culpability is the ex-
tent of one’s commiseration. (The person
secretly responsible for a disaster is often the
one who shows the greatest sympathy and
concern.)
N
4084. Níọj/oacutedotbelowerélàńjiyànohun.
It is at play that one argues about weighty
issues. (Playful arguments sometimes hide
deadly serious disagreements.)
8. The ‘‘net’’ is the visor that permits the masquer-
ader to see yet not be recognized.
Oninscrutability 397


--- PAGE 411 ---
O
4085. Òbírípolayé;ìmùl/egravedotbelow/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowamáad/ogravedotbelowtá.
Life is something that goes in cycles; sworn
friends do become enemies. (There is no
condition that cannot change.)
4086. Odídẹr/eacutedotbelowkìíríojúatùkó.
The parrot never sees the face of the per-
son who plucks its tail feather. (One seldom
knows the identity of one’s enemies and
detractors.)
4087. OhuntíawálọsiÌparà,abanípárá.
What one sought all the way to Ìparà one
ﬁnds in the rafters; one’s problem is solved.
9
(One sometimes expends unnecessary eﬀort
in the quest for things that one could have
simply for the asking.)
4088. Ojúonílániláṣeńkó.
It is in the presence of the okro planter that
the fruits become ﬁbrous. (The negligent
person will watch as his or her aﬀairs go to
ruin.
10 Compare 4585 and 4586.)
4089. Ojúbánir/eacutedotbelowòdékùnẹni;aṣ/egravedotbelowhìndeniò
w/oacutedotbelowp/ogravedotbelow;ṣàṣàèèyànníńf/eacutedotbelownil/eacutedotbelowhìnbíaòsínílé;
tajátẹranníńf/eacutedotbelownilójúẹni.
Outward expression of love does not come
from within; people who will look after
others’ interests in their absence are few;
only a few people love one when one is
absent, though every dog and goat loves a
person in his presence. (One cannot trust
that those who love one in one’s presence
will love one when one is absent.)
9. The proverb is based on the pun available from
the repetition of the syllablespáráin the name of the
town, even though the accents diﬀer. Ìparà is a Yoruba
town.
10. Okro seeds if not harvested in time become
ﬁbrous and inedible.
4090. Omiinú-ukàn-ǹ-ga:kòṣéédúrómu,
kòṣééb/egravedotbelowr/egravedotbelowmu.
The water in a well: one cannot stand and
reach it to drink, neither can one stoop to
reach it. (Some problems are so diﬃcult as
almost to defy solution.)
4091. Oníkùnlóm/ogravedotbelowkà;oníbàǹt/eacutedotbelowlómoye
òun-úndìsíi.
The owner of the stomach alone knows what
wickedness lurks inside; the owner of the
loin money pouch alone knows how much
money she has tied up in it. (No one knows
what secret lies buried inside other people.
Compare the following variant.)
4092. Oníkùnlóm/ogravedotbelowkà;/ogravedotbelowjẹunlómọw/oacutedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowlá.
Only the owner of the stomach knows how
he will practice wickedness; only the person
eating knows how to lick his ﬁngers. (One
should not from a position of ignorance at-
tempt to second-guess a person who has all
the information and the initiative. Compare
the preceding entry.)
4093. Onítìjúẹnilobìnrinẹni.
The woman who is coy in one’s presence is
the one destined to be one’s wife. (People’s
interractions in public often give away their
private relationships.)
4094. Oríaṣ/eacutedotbelowgità-álèyíbìríkódiọl/oacutedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow.
The fortune of the seller of ﬁrewood might
suddenly change, and he or she might be-
come prosperous. (Fortune is likely to
change unexpectedly.)
4095. Oríòmọibùsùn;ì-bám /ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowatúnil/egravedotbelowib/egravedotbelow
ṣe.
The head does not know where it will even-
tually rest in sleep; had it known, it would
have tidied up the place. (If one knew where
one’s destiny would lead, one would do
whatever one could to cultivate the place.)
398 human nature


--- PAGE 412 ---
4096. Orúkọm/eacutedotbelowtalàńpèyàwó:Ọl/oacutedotbelowrùn-l/eacutedotbelowl/eacutedotbelow;
Ọlá-y/oacutedotbelowkọ-síl/egravedotbelow;Ọlá-b/oacutedotbelowkọ-lọ.
A new wife has three names: Ọl/oacutedotbelowrùnl/eacutedotbelowl/eacutedotbelow [She
of the slender neck]; Ọláy/oacutedotbelowkọsíl/egravedotbelow [She who
sneaks oﬀ, leaving the husband behind];
Ọláb/oacutedotbelowkọlọ [She who goes with her hus-
band]. (One cannot predict the actions of a
beautiful wife; she may sneak oﬀ with other
men, but, again, she may remain faithful to
her husband.)
4097. Òrùléboàjàm/oacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelow;aṣ/oacutedotbelowboẹsẹìdí;awọ
f/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowbonúkòj/eacutedotbelowkáríkùnaṣeni.
The roof covers the ceiling; the cloth covers
t h eb u t t o c k s ;at h i nl a y e ro fs k i nc o v e r st h e
stomach and prevents one from seeing in-
side a wicked person. (Nobody knows what
wickedness lurks inside others. Compare
4081.)
Ọ
4098. /Ogravedotbelowlàjàòp/ogravedotbelowbíamújàwú.
Quarrel settlers are not as plentiful as quar-
rel aggravators. (People are more likely to
add to your troubles than help you end
them.)
4099. Ọmọaráyéle;w/oacutedotbelownlèdiagbekíw/oacutedotbelowní
kámátẹl/egravedotbelowaró.
Human beings are hardhearted; they may
become touraco birds and decree that we
must not tread on indigo-covered earth.
11
(People can be wicked and inconsiderate.)
4100. /Ogravedotbelowp/egravedotbelowòyìnbóﬁdídùnṣẹwà,óf/egravedotbelowgúnbora,
oróinú/egravedotbelowegbèje.
The pineapple derives its beauty from sweet-
ness; the wickednesses [dangerous spines on
the leaves] it harbors number 1,400. (What
is beautiful may be deadly also.)
4101. /Ogravedotbelowṣ/ogravedotbelow/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowtómúajá:owó/egravedotbelowkọolúwa/egravedotbelowló
dínkù.
The dysentry that attacks a dog saves its
owner the cost of providing corn meal for it.
(Every misfortune has its positive aspect.)
P
4102. ‘‘P/egravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelow’’lákọ,ólábo.
‘‘Take it easy’’ can be either masculine or
feminine. (Even a greeting or word of cau-
tion can be said in either an aggressive or a
placatory manner.)
4103. P/ogravedotbelow/ogravedotbelowk/oacutedotbelownídìí,ófìhàjókòó.
The coconut shell has a bottom but rests on
its side. (Unconventional people will always
do things diﬀerently.)
1 1 .T h ev i v i d l yb l u et o u r a c oi sc o n s i d e r e dt oh a v e
sole proprietary ownership of indigo dye.
Oninscrutability 399


--- PAGE 413 ---
On inequality
A
4104. Agb/oacutedotbelowpéẹj/oacutedotbelowọmọdéjàrená;ókuẹniti
yóbàáawíi.
Let us grant that the youth has a just claim,
but who will press it for him? (The culture
favors age over youth, even when youth is in
the right.)
4105. Agb/oacutedotbelowtajá,agb/oacutedotbelowtẹran;èwonitàgùntàn
lóríàga?
A dog, yes, even a goat, yes; but who ever
heard of a sheep sitting on a chair? (One can
be ﬂexible and grant exceptions to certain
individuals from a prohibition, but there
is a point beyond which one refuses to go.
Compare 561.)
4106. Agb/oacutedotbelowtielélùb/oacutedotbelow;èwonitiọl/oacutedotbelowrùn-únlá?
The seller of yam ﬂour we know, but who
ever heard of the seller of dried okra?
(People will do well to know where they ﬁt
in the social hierarchy.)
1
4107. Àńjọ-/oacutedotbelowrìn,akòjọarawa.
Though we travel in the same group, we are
not therefore alike. (Everybody in a group is
unique.)
4108. ‘‘Àńjùw/oacutedotbelown’’òṣééwíl/eacutedotbelowj/oacutedotbelow;ìjàìlaraòtán
b/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow.
‘‘We are driven by envy of them’’ is not a
good case to make; a quarrel born of jeal-
1. The seller of yam ﬂour has some stature among
traders; the seller of dried okro has no such status and
should keep his or her peace in an assembly.
ousy does not end easily. (Jealousy is a
diﬃcult motive to acknowledge.)
4109. Ààfáàb/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowkìnní:bíỌl/oacutedotbelowrunòbáṣeni
lágbà,akìífìyànjúṣebíàgbà.
Wealthy, famous Muslim priest: if God has
not made one an elder, one does not become
one simply by striving. (The achievement of
status is a gift from God. Certain things are
out of human hands.)
4110. Ààfáà-ájóná,/egravedotbelowḿbèrèirùgb/ogravedotbelown;kílófa
sábàbí?
The Muslim priest is consumed in a ﬁre, and
you ask about his beard; what do you think
was the cause of the problem? (When the
m i g h t yf a l l ,i ti si d l et ow o n d e rw h a th a p -
pened to lesser beings. This is a variant of
4846.)
4111. Àákéwọigbo,agb/oacutedotbelowòkìkí.
The axe enters into a forest, and we hear
reports of its doings. (When an illustrious
person acts, his deeds are noised about.)
4112. Áásìkítíafúnẹyẹ/ogravedotbelowsìnaòfúnigún;
áásìkíẹrúòsíl/oacutedotbelowd/ogravedotbelowọmọ.
The regard that a domestic bird enjoys is de-
nied the vulture; the regard a slave receives
is not the same as a freeborn enjoys. (People
are not uniformly fortunate.)
4113. Àáyáníohuntíabám/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowṣe,bíẹní
ńṣeréni;ónibíòúnbáńlọlóko/egravedotbelowpà,/ogravedotbelowk/ogravedotbelow/ogravedotbelowkan
amáab/oacutedotbelowsíòunl/eacutedotbelownu.


--- PAGE 414 ---
The colobus monkey says that one’s spe-
cialty is like child’s play; it says that when it
walks through a peanut farm, peanuts con-
tinually pop into its mouth. (Some chores
are ridiculously easy, sometimes even suspi-
ciously easy, especially for the expert.)
4114. Àdálẹnutálákà;igból aóﬁṣán.
The poor person’s mouth is a machete; its
use is to clear the bush. (A poor person’s
voice carries no weight.)
4115. Àdàbàòj/egravedotbelowpà;kanna-kánnáòjẹsèsé.
The dove does not eat peanuts; the crow
does not eat yam beans. (To each its dis-
likes.)
4116. A-dÍfá-bí-ẹní-ḿmùj/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowdÍfákòrímu;
Amùṣùàayar/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowníòunófòjòw/egravedotbelow.
He-who-consults-Ifá-as-though-he-were-
drinking-blood consults Ifá but ﬁnds noth-
ing to drink; his spendthrift wife says she
will bathe in rainwater. (When even the
mighty suﬀer deprivation, humble people
aspire to plenty in vain.)
2
4117. Afínjúòdóko;òjòwúòdígbèsè;òmú-
muràniyób/oacutedotbelowkọ-ọr/egravedotbelowdálè.
The preener does not go to the farm; the
jealous woman does not get into debt; it is a
woman with forbearance that ﬁnds a concu-
bine for her husband. (Diﬀerent people have
diﬀerent habits and qualities.)
4118. Àgún-ì-jẹníńpaẹrú.
Pounding-[food]-without-partaking-of-it
is the death of the slave. (The slave’s labor
is not unheard of, but he derives no beneﬁt
from it.)
4119. Àgbàl/eacutedotbelowtù;àlàárìlọbaaṣọ.
The ẹtùcloth is the elder; the reddish dyed
2. There is obviously a drought—no time to bathe
in rainwater, if any could be found.
cloth is the king of cloths. (There is a hier-
archy even in the textile realm.)
4120. Agbáraodókòjọagbáraìkòkò;bía
gbéodókanáajó;bíasìgúnyánnínúìkòkò
alu.
The strength of the mortar is not similar
to the strength of the pot; if one places a
mortar on the ﬁre, it burns; if one pounds
yams in a pot, it breaks. (To each his or her
particular qualities.)
4121. Agbelólaró;àlùkòlólosùn.
To the Blue Touraco belongs indigo dye; to
the àlùkobelongs camwood stain. (Each
individual has his or her unique qualities.)
3
4122. Àgbòméjìkìímuminínú-ukotokan.
Two rams cannot drink [at the same time]
from the same water pot. (Two masters can-
not coexist in the same household. Compare
the following entry.)
4123. Àgbòméjìkìípàdélóríafárá.
Two rams will not meet on a narrow bridge.
(Two contrary and uncompromising forces
will never come to an accommodation.
Compare the preceding entry.)
4124. Àìgùnkòníàìdàgbà;gudugudukìí
ṣẹgb/eacutedotbelow-ẹdùndún.
Deﬁciency in height is not deﬁciency in
years; a gudugududrum is no peer of adùn-
dúndrum.
4 (A person’s worth is a matter of
substance, not of appearance.)
4125. Àìjẹunsùnàkàlàmàgbò,aòlèﬁwéti
àtíòro.
Àkàlàmàgbò’s lack of supper is not compa-
3. As the touraco’s blue color suggests the blue of
indigo dye, àlùkò’s purple suggests camwood stain.
4. The short gudugududrum is used especially on
state occasions, the longerdùndúnon more popular
occasions.
Oninequality 401


--- PAGE 415 ---
rable to that ofàtíòro.5 (A noble person’s
poverty is not the same as an ordinary per-
son’s. Compare this with the following ﬁve
entries.)
4126. Àìjẹunsùnẹkùn,aòlèﬁwétiajá.
The leopard’s lack of supper is not compa-
rable to that of the dog. (A powerful person’s
setback does not make him the equal of a
nobody. Compare the preceding and the
following four entries.)
4127. Àìl/oacutedotbelowràáàkàlàmàgbò,aòlèﬁwéti
àtíòro.
The ground hornbill’s lack of fat is not to be
compared with that of the allied hornbill.
(A renowned person’s inconvenience does
not make him the equal of a peon. Compare
the preceding two and the following three
entries.)
4128. Àìl/oacutedotbelowràáògòǹgò,aòlèﬁwétiag ílítí.
The ostrich’s lack of fat is not to be com-
pared with that of the lizard. (A rich person’s
lack of ready cash does not make him the
equal of a poverty-stricken person. Com-
pare the preceding three and following two
entries.)
4129. ÀìlówóOlówu,aòlèﬁwéti aṣ/eacutedotbelowgità.
Olówu’s poverty is not to be compared with
that of the wood seller.
6 (An august person’s
inconvenience is not the same as a poverty-
stricken person’s. Compare the preceding
four and the following entry.)
4130. Àìlówó/Ogravedotbelowrúnmìlà,aòlèﬁwétiẸl/eacutedotbelow-
gbára.
5. Àkàlàmàgbòis the ground hornbill, a much more
sprightly and resourceful bird than its cousinàtíòro
(atíálá), the allied hornbill, which is sluggish and slow.
6. Olówu is one of the traditional crowned rulers of
Yorubaland.
/Ogravedotbelowrúnmìlà’s poverty is not to be compared
with that of Ẹl/eacutedotbelowgbára. (An illustrious person,
however hard up, will still be better oﬀ than
the nonentity. Compare the preceding ﬁve
entries.)
7
4131. Àìm/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowjólàńtàkìtì;ijó-òmíjuàńtọb/oacutedotbelow.
It is deﬁciency as a dancer that induces one
to somersault; my dancing goes beyond
cartwheeling. (Overexertion betrays a lack
of competence.)
4132. Àì-mọ-orín-ín-rùnk/oacutedotbelowlàṣáﬁp/oacutedotbelownléhín;
Ọl/oacutedotbelowrunlóṣ/egravedotbelowdá-ar/egravedotbelowb/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelow.
It is not ignorance about how to clean the
teeth that causes the kite’s teeth [beak] to
be red; God it was that created it so.
8 (One
cannot help one’s nature.)
4133. Àì-rí-ońjẹ-jẹológbòk/oacutedotbelownikòﬁtóajá.
It is not the cat’s failure to ﬁnd food that
makes it smaller than a dog. (Great size is
not a measure of one’s striving.)
4134. Àjàlólẹrùir/oacutedotbelownipẹpẹńpa.
To the rafter belongs the load; the shelf is
a mere pretender. (Others may strive, but
only certain special people have the means
to carry out a task.)
4135. Àjànàkúkúròl/eacutedotbelowranàńfajádẹ.
The elephant is beyond the sort of animal
one hunts with a dog. (One should not
approach formidable tasks with levity.)
4136. Àjànàkúlónìgb/eacutedotbelow;ir/oacutedotbelownigbogboẹranko
ńpa.
To the elephant belongs the forest; all other
animals are mere pretenders. (There is no
disputing a person’s preeminence. See also
276.)
7. Note the similar import of entries 4125–4130.
8. The Yoruba refer to birds’ beaks as teeth.
402 human nature


--- PAGE 416 ---
4137. Àjẹkùlókoàgb/egravedotbelowlọbańjẹlóríìt/eacutedotbelow.
It is the leavings from the farmer’s farm
table that the king eats on his throne. (Each
profession ﬁlls a unique need. See 738.)
4138. Àjùlọòpins/oacutedotbelowd/ogravedotbelowẹnìkan.
Preeminence does not end with any one
person. (No one has a corner on excellence.)
4139. Ajunil/oacutedotbelowlèjuninù.
A person who is greater than one can do
away with one.
9 (People are at the mercy of
those greater than they are.)
4140. Akàn-ánníòúndúp/eacutedotbelowàìlórí;gbogboẹní
lóríloríńf/oacutedotbelow.
The crab says it gives thanks that it lacks a
head, for whoever has a head also suﬀers
headaches. (There is no adversity without its
positive aspect.)
4141. Akíkanjúwọgbó,oṣòwòigbaèèyàn.
An illustrious person enters the forest
and does enough trade for two hundred
people. (One illustrious person accomplishes
enough for many ordinary people.)
4142. Akíni-kúuṣ/eacutedotbelowńjiyányó;apòyì-kábàńyá
ìw/ogravedotbelowfà;olókońpaẹgbàa-gb/egravedotbelowẹdógúnkótójẹun.
The person who greets one while one is
working eats pounded yams to his ﬁll; the
person who perambulates around the hut
employs a pawn; the farmer himself must
earn 15,000 cowries before he can eat. (Idlers
and hangers-on have the easiest of times,
whereas a person working for his living must
eat of his sweat.)
9. The proverb plays on the wordjù:in combination
with lọ(literally ‘‘go’’; in this instance ‘‘pass’’) it would
by itself mean ‘‘surpass,’’ the combination meaning
‘‘surpass completely’’; in combination withnù(literally
‘‘oﬀ’’) it would by itself mean ‘‘throw,’’ the combination
meaning ‘‘lose.’’
4143. Àkókókunosùnókunorí;arèrékun
osùnókunàyà;olóbùrókunosùnókun/ogravedotbelowfun.
The woodpecker takes camwood and stains
its head; the custard-apple tree takes cam-
wood and stains its breast;olóbùrótakes
camwood and stains its throat. (Each has a
diﬀerent notion of self-adornment.)
4144. Àkùkọńláòj/eacutedotbelowkíkékeréókọ.
The big rooster prevents the small rooster
from crowing. (Those in authority prevent
their subordinates from asserting them-
selves.)
4145. Àkùk/oacutedotbelowtólógbeòníìreré;èyítóníìreré
òní/ogravedotbelowgàn.
The cock that has a comb lacks tail plumes;
the one that has tail plumes lacks spurs.
(Every person has his or her failings.)
4146. Alágìdíl/ogravedotbelowgáalákàrà.
The seller of corn-meal loaf is the master of
the seller of bean-fritter cakes.
10 (The person
who has what one cannot do without has
some control over one.)
4147. Aláǹgbájọ/ogravedotbelownì,agbárawọnlóyàt/ogravedotbelow.
The lizard resembles the crocodile; it is their
strength that is diﬀerent. (Look-alikes are
not necessarily equals.)
4148. Àlùkéḿbù,babaasa.
Stirrup, father of the saddle. (The stirrup is
more important than the saddle.)
4149. Àlùm/oacutedotbelownìméjìkìígbéọw/oacutedotbelowẹnìkan.
Two treasures will not reside with one per-
son. (A person cannot have everything.)
4150. Apáọmọdéòkáoyè-ebàrà.
A youth’s resources are not adequate for
the chieftaincy of the royal mausoleum. (A
10. Àkàràis a desirable accompaniment foràgìdí.
Oninequality 403


--- PAGE 417 ---
youth cannot take on the responsibilities of
an elder.)11
4151. Àparòòṣàìmọibitílékèé-lékèétińfọṣọ;
Ọl/oacutedotbelowrunniòṣeàparòláláṣọ-mím/oacutedotbelow.
The partridge is not ignorant of the place
where the egret washes its clothes; it is only
that God did not wish the partridge to have
clean clothes.
12 (Nothing one can do will
alter one’s nature.)
4152. Àp/oacutedotbelownsànjuòkóbó;bóp/eacutedotbelowtítíàp/oacutedotbelownyó
f/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowobìnrin.
A bachelor is better oﬀ than a eunuch;
sooner or later a bachelor will take a wife.
(Some ills are better than others.)
4153. AróḿbẹlÓṣogbo;àtàtàèèyànḿbẹ
nÍbàdàn.
There is indigo dye aplenty at Òṣogbo; there
are numerous illustrious people in Ibadan.
(Certain qualities are synonymous with
certain places.)
4154. Àrùnmìíràn-ánkùl/eacutedotbelowhìn-inwárápá;
wárápánìkank/oacutedotbelowníńgbéniṣánl/egravedotbelow.
There are other diseases besides epilepsy; it
is not only epilepsy that knocks people to
the ﬂoor. (Nothing and no one can claim to
be the ultimate in any regard.)
4155. Àrùnòtòṣìníńsànlóòj/oacutedotbelow;tolówóamáa
sàndí/egravedotbelow-dí/egravedotbelow.
It is a poor person’s disease that is cured in
a day; a rich person’s disease mends only
gradually. (Protracted illness is too great a
luxury for a poor person to aﬀord.)
11. Bàràis the royal mausoleum of /Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow kings, and
important coronation ceremonies take place there.
1 2 .T h i si sar e s p o n s et ot h ep r o v e r bIbitílékèélékèé
tińfọṣọ,Ọl/oacutedotbelowrunòﬁib/egravedotbelowhanọmọàparò(‘‘The place
where the egret washes its clothes, God has kept hidden
from the clan of partridges’’).
4156. Àrùntíńṣealáárùn-únòṣeẹl/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowta.
The disease that attacks the person with
ﬁve does not attack the person with three.
(Each person with his or her own prob-
lems.)
4157. Àrùntíńṣ/ogravedotbelowbọòṣegún:igúnpálórí;/ogravedotbelowb/oacutedotbelow
hùrù.
The disease that aﬄicts the monkey does not
aﬄict the vulture: the vulture is bald on its
head; the monkey grows a tail. (Diﬀerent
people, diﬀerent aches. See also the next
entry.)
4158. Àrùntíńṣ/ogravedotbelowbọòṣegún:igúnpálórí;/ogravedotbelowb/oacutedotbelow
pánídìí.
The disease that aﬄicts the monkey does not
aﬄict the vulture: the vulture is bald on its
head; the monkey is bald on its buttocks.
(Diﬀerent problems for diﬀerent people.
This is a variant of the preceding entry.)
4159. Àsísoríòníikùnbíàgbá;òtòṣìòlówóbí
ọl/oacutedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow.
A pistol does not have a bore like a cannon’s;
a poor person does not have the money of
a wealthy person. (There is no equality in
people’s fortunes.)
4160. Aṣọabilàgbogbolólórúkọ.
Every striped cloth has a name. (Every per-
son has a name; an oﬀender has a name to
be mentioned.)
4161. Àtikékeréàjànàkúleerin-íntip/ogravedotbelowju
ẹf/ogravedotbelownlọ.
It is from childhood that the elephant was
greater than the buﬀalo. (Regardless of age,
an elephant is greater than a buﬀalo.)
4162. Àtiogúnọdúntí/egravedotbelowk/oacutedotbelowtińloaṣọ,ìhòòhò
làkàrà-áwà.
In the twenty years that the corn meal has
been wearing clothes, the bean fritters have
404 human nature


--- PAGE 418 ---
always been naked.13 (One’s better standing
than one’s rival’s is not a recent develop-
ment.)
4163. Àwaarawalaríra-awa:ológìnnírí
ọmọẹkùn.
All of us assembled here are of a type; the
cat comes face to face with the oﬀspring of
the leopard. (When equals come together,
none has anything to fear from any other.)
4164. ÀwòròṣàṣàníńjẹajáÒgún.
Only the most powerful of priests eats dogs
sacriﬁced to Ògún. (Only a select few can
perform formidable tasks.)
B
4165. Bákan-náàlọmọńṣoríl/eacutedotbelowhìnìyá-ar/egravedotbelow.
Babies’ heads lie the same way on their
mothers’ backs. (Natural habits die hard.
Also, one baby is no diﬀerent from another
baby.)
4166. Bíabábiàgbàtókúrúm/oacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelow,yóòríwí.
If one asks the elder that is short and close
to the ground, he will have something to
say. (There is always an explanation for a
person’s condition, if we will only ask.)
4167. Bíalákẹdun-únbár/ogravedotbelow,tófọw/oacutedotbelowṣ/eacutedotbelow;agb/ogravedotbelown
laóﬁkóọmọòwèníb/egravedotbelow.
If the colobus monkey breaks its arm while
suspended from a tree, it is by the basket-
ful that black monkeys will be scooped oﬀ
the place. (When an expert comes to grief
doing something, novices will fail at it in
their hundreds.)
13. Corn meal is wrapped in leaves, whereas bean
fritters are not wrapped.
4168. Bíehoroòlèsárébíìgalà,bíikáﬁwéti
ìjàpák/oacutedotbelow.
If a rabbit cannot run as fast as the deer, that
does not make it comparable to a tortoise.
(One’s worth depends on the standard by
which one is judged.)
4169. Bíigúntiníìlasa,b/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowniàwòdísìní
bòbo.
As the vulture has okro leaves, so the hawk
has bòboleaves.
14 (Each person has his or
her assets.)
4170. Bíigbábáwọodòalété-ń-té.
If a calabash falls into the stream, it ﬂoats
on top. (Nothing can prevent the illustrious
person from shining.)
4171. Bíinútiḿbíàjànàkú,b/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowníḿbíeèrà.
Just as the elephant may be angered, so
an ant may be angered. (Even the least of
people has feelings.)
4172. Bíiyántińfúnlókoẹgàn,b/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelownáàní
ńfúnnítietílé.
As pounded yam is white on a farm deep
in the forest, so it is white on the farm near
the town. (A commodity does not change its
nature according to its location.)
4173. Bílékèélékèéòbárómiw/egravedotbelow,adẹgb/eacutedotbelow
àparò.
If the egret cannot ﬁnd water to bathe in, it
becomes like the partridge. (When a great
person loses his resources, he becomes like
ordinary people.)
4174. BíOlúgb/oacutedotbelowntigb/oacutedotbelown,b/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowniArẹsà-ágb/oacutedotbelown
pèlú.
As the Olúgb/oacutedotbelowni sc l e v e r ,s oa l s oi st h eArẹsà
14. The plant Solaniumduplosinuatumis known as
bòboàwòdì;àwòdì means ‘‘hawk.’’
Oninequality 405


--- PAGE 419 ---
clever.15 ( E a c hp e r s o ni sw i s ei nh i so rh e r
own way.)
4175. Bótiḿbẹláraad/eacutedotbelowbọ,b/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowníḿbẹlára
a-dá-má-rùú.
As it is with the person who oﬀers a sac-
riﬁce, so it is with the person who refuses
to make a sacriﬁce. (Each person makes
his or her own choice and also bears the
consequences.)
4176. BótiwàníLíkí,b/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowníḿbẹníGbà-ǹ-
ja.
As it is in Líkí, so it is in Gbàǹja. (Matters
are fundamentally the same everywhere.)
4177. Bótiwániyólọ;/ogravedotbelowgb/egravedotbelowrìòjẹiyánodù.
As he came, so will he depart; the uniniti-
ated person will not eat the pounded yams
of Ifá. (An outsider will not be included in
the beneﬁts of exclusive groups.)
4178. B/oacutedotbelowmọdébáníokuntó/ogravedotbelowbọ,kòlèní
gèlètèàyà-ar/egravedotbelow.
Even though a youth has as much strength
as a monkey, he cannot have a chest as huge
as the monkey’s. (A person who is a match
for another in one regard may be deﬁcient in
others.)
4179. B/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowkìnníbaọl/oacutedotbelowr/ogravedotbelownínúj/eacutedotbelow.
The person of exemplary character angers
the rich person. (People do not admire those
who steal the show from them.)
4180. B/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowkìnníìletòniakédeìlúńlá.
The celebrated dandy in the village is a street
crier in a large town. (When people are few,
anybody may be important. Compare 4184.)
15. The identity of Olúgbón is unclear. Arẹsà is the
title of the king of Ìrẹsà (two towns are so named in
Yorubaland).
D
4181. Dágunróyàt/ogravedotbelowsít/egravedotbelowt/egravedotbelow,kòṣééjẹ.
Star-burr is diﬀerent from spinach; it is in-
edible.16 (A thing may resemble another and
yet lack its good qualities.)
4182. Dúdúl/egravedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelown,pupalàbúrò.
Black is the elder; light brown is the younger.
(A dark complexion is more desirable than a
light one.)
E
4183. Erèéòtòṣìlọl/oacutedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowﬁńṣeèkurujẹ.
It is of the poor person’s beans that the rich
man makes bean meal to eat. (The rich will
take from the poor the little they have.)
4184. Erinibòmín-ìn,/egravedotbelowlíríibomín-ìn.
An elephant in one place; a tiny mouse in
another. (What people make much of in one
place is of no account in another. Compare
4180.)
4185. Erínńtúeruku;ẹf/ogravedotbelownńtúeruku;títú
erukuàjànàkúbotẹf/ogravedotbelownm/oacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelow.
The elephant raises a cloud of dust; the buf-
falo raises a cloud of dust; the elephant’s
ability to raise dust far surpasses the buf-
f a l o ’ s .( C e r t a i np e o p l eo rt h i n g sa r eb e y o n d
all competition.)
4186. Erin-ínwów/oacutedotbelownfìwo-or/egravedotbelowgb/eacutedotbelowike;ẹf/ogravedotbelown-
/oacutedotbelownwów/oacutedotbelownfìwo-or/egravedotbelowtẹpoolo;àgbá-ǹ-réréwó
w/oacutedotbelownfìwo-or/egravedotbelowkùnlósùnrúbú-rúbú.
An elephant dies, and its tusks are carved
into ivory; a buﬀalo dies, and its horns are
m a d ei n t oapoolo;
17 an antelope dies, and its
16. Star-burr is Acanthospermumhispidum (see
Abraham 123).
17. Supposedly a representative image of Poolo,
406 human nature


--- PAGE 420 ---
horns are anointed with camwood. (Some
people are more fortunate than others.)
4187. Eṣinṣínkọikúàpab/eacutedotbelowrí;yànmù-yánmú
kọikúàpalàd/ogravedotbelow.
The ﬂy is immune to death by beheading;
the mosquito is immune to death caused
by the splitting of the liver. (Some fates are
impossible for some people or things.)
4188. Èsúótińlògbàkéwúr/eacutedotbelowtódáyé.
The red-ﬂanked ducker was already enjoy-
ing life before the goat came into being. (A
person or thing was already long established
before the upstart came about.)
4189. Ewéńlákìírúw/eacutedotbeloww/eacutedotbelow.
Large leaves do not sprout small. (A person
destined to be great will not fail to be great.)
4190. Èwonikòtó‘‘Hìhì’’láraìnàkí?
What baboon is incapable of sounding
‘‘Hee hee’’? (Certain things are within the
capability of everyone.)
4191. Ewúr/eacutedotbelowiléòmọdẹ;ìbáṣàgb/ogravedotbelownrínagbọfà
l/eacutedotbelowhìnṣan-ṣan.
The domesticated goat has no regard for the
hunter; were it a deer it would sport arrows
prominently on its back. (As the domestic
goat’s protected status makes it misbehave
when a hunter is around, so a sheltered per-
s o ng e t sa w a yw i t hm u c ht h a tl e s sf o r t u n a t e
people dare not attempt.)
Ẹ
4192. /Egravedotbelowfúùfù-úgbéológììlọ;oníy/egravedotbelowfunniègbé
yán-yán.
The wind blows away the corn-gruel seller;
believed to be a cave-dwelling, witch-executing demon
(see Abraham 556).
the seller of corn powder is hopelessly
doomed. (When illustrious ones fall, lesser
people have no hope.)
4193. /Egravedotbelowgúnògúnọmọl/eacutedotbelows/egravedotbelowkáyọ/oacutedotbelowl/eacutedotbelows/egravedotbelowẹrú.
When a thorn lodges in the foot of a child,
one does not remove it from a slave’s foot.
(However privileged one might be, there are
certain things one must do oneself.)
4194. Ẹgbàafà-átóópèníigbáIfá.
Twelve thousand cowries are enough to
be called an Ifá divination calabash. (Two
things or people are of a kind.)
18
4195. Ẹgb/eacutedotbelowerinòw/oacutedotbelownlÁl/ogravedotbelow.
The equal of an elephant is not diﬃcult to
ﬁ n di nÁ l /ogravedotbelow .( T h e r ei sl i t t l ed i ﬃ c u l t yi nﬁ n d -
ing a substitute for a common thing or an
ordinary person.)
4196. Ẹgb/eacutedotbelowiṣuk/oacutedotbelowniyán.
The pounded yam is not the equal of the
yam. (A reﬁned product is superior to the
raw version.)
4197. Ẹgb/egravedotbelowrúnibalùw/egravedotbelowòlètósánmà.
A thousand bath enclosures are no equal for
the sky.
19 (Possession of a tiny amount of a
substance does not make one an equal of the
person who controls its supply.)
4198. Ẹgb/egravedotbelowrúnìràw/ogravedotbelowòlèm/oacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelowtóòṣùpá.
A thousand stars cannot give as much light
as the moon. (One cannot exceed one’s
possibilities.)
18. The proverb’s eﬀect derives from the similarity
in sounds of ẹgbàafàand igbáIfá. Besides, 12,000
cowries signiﬁes a considerable sum in pre–European
Yoruba currency, enough to purchase the expensive
divination calabash.
19. The proverb apparently compares the amount of
moisture available in the two.
Oninequality 407


--- PAGE 421 ---
4199. Ẹk/eacutedotbelowòtòṣìkìítóilélówùúr/ogravedotbelow.
The poor person’s forked pole never touches
the house in the morning. (A poor person’s
counsel is never welcome in the early stages
of deliberation.)
20
4200. Ẹl/eacutedotbelowṣin-ínṣeoògùnejòtán:ẹl/eacutedotbelowṣin-ínwà
lókè,ejò-ówàníl/egravedotbelow.
The horse rider has the surest antidote for
snakebite: the rider is up above; the snake is
on the ground. (A person beyond the reach
of his or her adversary need not fear the
adversary.)
4201. Ẹnialèmúlàńlèdím/oacutedotbelow.
It is against a person one can handle that
one is aggressive. (One usually picks a ﬁght
only when one is sure of victory.
21 Compare
1522.)
4202. ẸníAbáòt/oacutedotbelowbíẹníòré;ẹníabáòṣéé
ká;rírúnníńrúnwómú-wómu.
Abámat does not last as long asòrémat; the
former cannot be folded, as it disintegrates
completely in the attempt. (Some things are
better and more desirable than others.)
4203. Ẹníbápaàfèìmòjòkómú-ure/Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow;
ẹdálaráokońjẹ.
Whoever kills a spotted grass mouse should
take it to /Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow; the brown bush rat is good
enough food for a bush person. (Only cer-
tain people can appreciate, and therefore
deserve, the choicest prizes.)
4204. ẸníjẹOlúwo,káyìnín;ṣàṣàèèyànlólè
jẹBara.
Whoever takes the title Olùwodeserves
20. The idea is that people have brought forked
poles to contribute to the eﬀort of building a house;
what the poor person brought will have to wait until
what the rich brought has been used up.
21. Often addressed to a person to whom one would
say, ‘‘Why not pick on someone your own size?’’
commendation; few people can take the
Baratitle.22 (Whoever has performed an
extraordinary feat deserves people’s recogni-
tion and praise.)
4205. Ẹníjùlómáagbéramìnínúajáàti
/ogravedotbelowk/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelow.
The more formidable will triumph over the
other in a contest between the dog and the
squirrel. (The weakling will not triumph
over the powerful person.)
4206. Ẹnílágbárajuniníńﬁọw/oacutedotbelowẹnigbáni
l/eacutedotbelownu.
Only a stronger person can use one’s own
hand to slap one in the mouth. (Only those
who have authority over you can make you
act against your own interest, or injure you
and add insult to the injury.)
4207. Ẹníl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowrereòróbìrinﬁpalára.
The person who has worthy hands can
ﬁnd no woman to caress. (People with the
best endowments have nothing to show for
them.)
23
4208. Ẹnińláníńṣeohunńlá;Àjànàkúpa
erinbọIfá.
Only a mighty person can perform mighty
deeds; Àjànàkú killed an elephant as an
oﬀering to the Ifá oracle.
24 (Only the mighty
can perform mighty deeds. Compare the
following entry.)
22. Olúwo(Olúawo) is one of the the two highest
Ògbóni titles; Barai sah i g hI f át i t l e .
23. We are to understand the omitted words ‘‘let
alone those with no endowments to speak of.’’
2 4 .T h i si sa ne x a m p l eo fab i n a r yp r o v e r b ,c o m -
prising the proverb proper plus the explanation or an
illustration of its usage. As a whole the second part
becomes the analogy for the occasion or context. There
is also some play involved: Àjànàkú is a proper name
but also a designation (primarily honoriﬁc) for the
elephant.
408 human nature


--- PAGE 422 ---
4209. Ẹnińláníńṣeohunńlá,baál/egravedotbelow-ẹJìnìbà:
ógbéàkámì,ófọmọríodótayín.
Only the mighty can perform mighty deeds;
so it was for the chief of Jìnìbà: he swallowed
a whole granary and picked his teeth with a
pestle. (From an eccentric person one can
expect anything. This is a variant of the pre-
ceding proverb, with the exception that in
this case the application is ironic. The deed
referenced is not to be admired but perhaps
to be amazed by. Compare the preceding
entry.)
4210. Ẹnitíaòtólà ńgàn;agánránńganọdẹ.
People disparage only those worthier than
themselves; the parrot disparages the hunter.
(Disparagement is an indication of helpless
envy; the parrot’s only weapon against the
hunter is ineﬀectual disparagement.)
4211. Ẹnitíńkunosùnòdàbíẹnitíńkunata.
The person rubbing himself or herself with
camwood does not compare with the person
rubbing himself or herself with hot pepper.
(Things may look alike without being the
same.)
4212. Ẹnitógb/oacutedotbelowIfáòmọ/Ogravedotbelowfà;ẹnitómọ/Ogravedotbelowfàò
gb/oacutedotbelowFá,b/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowniIfátàl/Oacutedotbelowfà.
The person versed in Ifá does not know the
way to /Ogravedotbelowfà; the person who knows the way
to Ọfà is ignorant of Ifá; and yet knowledge
of Ifá is lucrative at Ọfà.
25 (The talent and
the opportunity are available, but they are
mismatched; nobody has everything.)
4213. Ẹnitóníàgbàdoòléhín;ẹnitóléhínò
lágbàdo.
The person who has corn has no teeth; the
p e r s o nw h oh a st e e t hh a sn oc o r n .( N e e d
25. The proverb obviously gains much from the
play on Ifá, the Yoruba divination system, and /Ogravedotbelowfà, a
northern Yoruba town.
and supply are often mismatched. Compare
the following three entries.)
4214. Ẹnitóníẹ/eacutedotbelowwàáòníwà;ẹnitíóníwàò
níẹ/eacutedotbelowwàá.26
The person who has good character does
not have 10 cowries; the person who has
10 cowries does not have good character.
(Character and means seldom go together.
Compare the preceding and the following
two entries.)
4215. Ẹnitóníèjìkáòl/eacutedotbelowwù;ẹnitól/eacutedotbelowwùò
léjìká.
The person who has a shoulder has no gar-
ment; the one who has a garment has no
shoulder. (Need and supply are often mis-
matched. Compare the preceding two and
the following entries.)
4216. Ẹnitóníoríònífìlà;ẹnitónífìlàòlórí.
The person who has a head has no hat; the
p e r s o nw h oh a sah a th a sn oh e a d .( N e e d
and fortune are often mismatched. Compare
the preceding three entries.)
4217. Ẹnitówàláyéníinúòun-únbàj/eacutedotbelow;ẹni
tótikúńk/oacutedotbelow?
The person who is alive says he or she is sad;
what about the person who is dead? (As long
as one has life, one should consider oneself
fortunate.)
4218. Ẹnitówáyéòtóasinniwáyé.
People who came to the world are far fewer
than people who came as companions.
(There are fewer people with a purpose than
people without a purpose.)
4219. Ẹnuàgbàlobìńgbó.
It is only in the mouth of the elder that the
26. Part of the charm of the proverb is its play on
ìwàand ẹ/eacutedotbelowwàá.
Oninequality 409


--- PAGE 423 ---
k o l an u ti sr i p e .( T h el a s ts a yi nam a t t e r
belongs to the elder who is present.)
4220. Ẹrankobí/ogravedotbelowbọòsílóko,àﬁìjímèrètí
ńpeara-ar/egravedotbelowníolóògùn.
There is no animal in the bush like the mon-
key, except for the brown (Pataguenon)
monkey calling itself a medicine man. (No-
body can vie with a certain person; those
who try deceive themselves.)
27
4221. Ẹrankotógb/oacutedotbelownbíajáòsí,èyítówèrèbí
ẹṣinòw/oacutedotbelowp/ogravedotbelow;ajábímọ-ọr/egravedotbelowsíl/egravedotbelowóńlọkiọmọ
èkùlùm/oacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelow;ẹṣínbímọtir/egravedotbelowsíl/egravedotbelowóńﬁ/egravedotbelowhìnpọn
ọmọẹlòmírànreoko.
Animals as wise as the dog are nonexis-
tent; those as stupid as the horse are rare;
the dog gives birth to its children but goes
and pounces on the children of the crested
duiker; the horse gives birth to its own
children but carries others’ children on its
back to the farm. (The wise put their own
interests before all else.)
4222. Ẹrùtíoníg/egravedotbelowg/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowrùtíóńṣomilójú,abuké
k/oacutedotbelowniyópàǹtète-er/egravedotbelow.
The load that draws tears from the eyes of
the carrier with a goiter is not one for the
humpback to carry nonchalantly, with arms
swinging freely. (A burden that prostrates a
formidable person is not one for a spineless
person to tackle lightly.)
4223. /Egravedotbelowrúk/oacutedotbelowlórí;kònímùndùn-múndùn.
The hoe shaft has a head but no marrow.
(One cannot get something from where
there is nothing, just as one cannot get
marrow from a skull.)
4224. Ẹyẹlékìíníàgògo,kìkìàrup/egravedotbelow.
Pigeons never grow to giant size; they are
all dwarﬁsh. (There is no rank distinction
27. Ìjímèrè,a small brown (Pataguenon) monkey, is
considered a clown among the species.
among a certain group of people.28 Compare
3302.)
G
4225. Gagalo-óṣís/egravedotbelowméjì,óbáaráiwájú.
The stilt walker takes only two steps, and
he catches up with those who had long gone
ahead. (The person referred to has extraor-
dinary capabilities, surpassing all others.)
4226. G/eacutedotbelowg/eacutedotbelowṣeg/eacutedotbelowg/eacutedotbelow;oníg/egravedotbelowg/egravedotbelowtóf/eacutedotbelowatiro.
Two well-matched things have come to-
gether: a person with a goiter has married
a cripple. (Two or more people are both, or
all, all of a kind.)
4227. Gèlèòdùnbíikám/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowwé;kám/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowwéò
dùnbíikóyẹni.
Head scarf is no good if one does not know
h o wt ot i ei t ;k n o w i n gh o wt ot i ei ti sn ou s e
if it does not look good on one. (Having an
asset is not as important as knowing how to
u s ei t ;k n o w i n gh o wt ou s ei ti sn o ta si m -
portant as knowing how to use it proﬁtably.
Compare the following two variants and
4988.)
4228. Gèlèòdùnbíikám/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowwé;kárówóra
ẹl/eacutedotbelowyàáòdàbíikóyẹni.
Head scarf is no good unless one knows
h o wt ot i ei t ;h a v i n gm o n e yt oa ﬀ o r dẸl/eacutedotbelowyàá
cloth is no good if it does not look good on
one. (This is a variant of the preceding and
following entries.)
4229. Gèlèòdùnbíikám/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowwé;oúnjẹòdùn
bíikám/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowjẹ.
Head scarf is no good if one does not know
how to tie it; food is no good if it is some-
2 8 .T h i sp r o v e r bi ss o m e t i m e su s e dt oo r d e rs o m e -
one to prostrate himself before the speaker as a mark of
respect.
410 human nature


--- PAGE 424 ---
thing one does not eat. (This is a variant of
the preceding two entries.)
Gb
4230. Gbajúm/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowjuowólọ;àyàníníjuoògùn
l/oacutedotbelowt/ogravedotbelow.
Popularity is better than money; bravery is
far better than magical charms. (Better fame
than riches; better fortitude than magic.)
4231. Gbogboọdúnnitọba;gbogbo/egravedotbelowsìnni
tìjòyè.
All festivals belongs to the king; all weekly
worship belong to the chief. (The more im-
portant one’s stature, the more important
one’s responsibility.)
4232. Gbọ-gbọ-gbọlọw/oacutedotbelowńyọjuorí.
Loftily, loftily, loftily the raised hand reaches
above the head. (The person blessed with
extraordinary qualities will always stand out
i nag r o u p . )
I
4233. Ibitíàjànàkútiﬁẹs/egravedotbelowtẹl/egravedotbelownigbogbo
erankótiḿmu.
Where the elephant once planted its foot,
there the rest of the animals come to drink.
(The feats of the mighty bestow some boon
on the humble. Compare the variant at
4244.)
4234. Ibitílékèélékèétińfọṣọ,Ọl/oacutedotbelowrunòﬁhan
ọmọàparò.
The place where the cattle egret wahes its
clothes has not been revealed by God to the
partridge.
29 (The secret of some people’s suc-
29. The egret is spotless white, whereas the par-
tridge seems always dirty.
cess is fortunately not common knowledge
to all.)
4235. Igigbogboníńsoowó,/ogravedotbelowt/ogravedotbelownitobì.
All trees grow money, but the kola-nut tree
surpasses all others.
30 (Among illustrious
people, some will still stand out.)
4236. Ìgúniyánòjọtièlùb/oacutedotbelow;mímúniyán
ḿmú,kíkilèlùb/oacutedotbelowńki.
The consistency of pounded yam is diﬀerent
from that of yam-ﬂower meal; pounded yam
is smooth, while yam-ﬂower meal is elastic.
(Each thing or person is good in a diﬀerent
way.)
4237. Ìgbàtíajátińṣeilé,/ogravedotbelowbọòìt/iacuteigravetiokob/ogravedotbelow.
The dog was master of the home long be-
fore the monkey came from the farm. (The
upstart or Johnny-just-come must not be
garrulous in the presence of well-established
old-timers.)
31
4238. Ìgbàtíìk/egravedotbelowt/eacutedotbelowòìt/iacuteigravedáyé,onígbótińjẹ
ìk/egravedotbelowt/eacutedotbelow.
Long before the thick sediment of the palm
oil came to earth, the lord of the forest had
been eating it.
32 (Said to claim that one does
not need another person’s favors but had
always gotten along very well without that
person’s help. Compare the following entry.)
4239. Ìgbàtíìṣínòìdódò,Oníbarà-átińjẹja.
Long before the minnows showed up in the
stream, the king of Ìbarà [a riverside quarter
30. Kola nuts are considered such a valuable com-
modity that no other tree can compare to the kola-nut
tree.
31. Dogs were pets long before anybody thought of
monkeys as such.
32. Ìk/egravedotbelowt/eacutedotbelow,the thick sediment left in the process of
making palm oil, is something of a delicacy; but before
people began to make palm oil out of the fruits of the
palm, the fruits had been rotting in the forest, making,
in eﬀect, ìk/egravedotbelowt/eacutedotbelowfor the spirits of the forest.
Oninequality 411


--- PAGE 425 ---
of Ab/eacutedotbelowòkúta] had been eating ﬁsh. (Said to
assert that one got along very well without
help from another and does not need that
person’s aid. Compare the preceding entry.)
4240. Ìgbínòdùn,kòṣééﬁwép/ogravedotbelownm/oacutedotbelow.
The snail is not delicious; it cannot be com-
pared to boiled cow hide. (Some foods are
more delicious than others.)
4241. Igbóbiribiri,òkùkùnbiribiri;òkùkùnni
óṣ/egravedotbelowt/eacutedotbelowigbó.
The forest is as dark as ever, and the night is
as dark as ever, but the darkness of the night
puts that of the forest to shame. (Greatness
is not without gradation.)
4242. Ìkaòd/oacutedotbelowgba.
The ﬁngers are not equal. (People are not
equally endowed.)
4243. IléIf/egravedotbelowlóladé;fìlànitibaál/egravedotbelowibòmíràn.
To Ilé If/egravedotbelow belongs the crown; hats are the lot
of the chiefs of other places. (The king of Ilé
If/egravedotbelow is preeminent over all other kings.)
4244. Il/egravedotbelowtíàjànàkúńt/egravedotbelow,níb/egravedotbelowlọmọẹrankóti
ńjẹun.
The ground the elephant treads is the same
place from which the clan of animals eat.
(Lesser people can beneﬁt from the actions
and leavings of great people. Compare the
variant 4233.)
4245. Ìrèkél/eacutedotbelowwàjueèsún;igikígikìíṣomisíni
l/eacutedotbelownu.
The sugarcane has more appeal than the ele-
phant grass; no other tree ﬁlls one’s mouth
with juice. (Some things are of surpassing
merit and are incomparable to others.)
4246. Ìrìnòpap/ogravedotbelow;ẹnitóru/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowdúnrúnèbù
àtẹnitógunẹṣin.
The paths being taken are not the same; one
person is carrying three hundred yam seed-
lings, and the other is mounted on a horse.
(The expectations and experiences of the
servant and the master are never the same.)
4247. Ir/oacutedotbelowniLébéńpa;kòmọerébíiẸy/eacutedotbelowba.
Lébé is merely deceiving himself; he cannot
match the agility of Ẹy/eacutedotbelowbà. (Said of a person
who is no match for an opponent but does
not know it.)
33
4248. Ìrònúòpap/ogravedotbelow;ebilójọńpani.
Diﬀerent people have diﬀerent minds, even
though all are hungry. (All people may be
hungry alike, but each person will have a
diﬀerent approach to solving the problem.)
4249. Ìrùẹṣinòṣedéédé;bákannáàk/oacutedotbelowla
móríwáyé.
Horses’ tails are not of equal length; we did
not all come to earth with identical heads.
(Diﬀerent people have diﬀerent destinies.)
4250. Ìṣetíigbàńṣe/ogravedotbelowpẹ,ìbáṣeàgbọnkòléwé
lórí.
What the climbing rope does to the palm
tree, had it done the same to the coconut
tree it would have no leaves left. (Some
people are better able to withstand vicissi-
tudes than others.)
4251. Ìṣòwò-ówàlóòrùn;náwónáwówà
níbòji.
The trader [who makes the money] is in the
sun; the person who spends the money is
in the shade. (Said of people who lift not a
ﬁnger to help the worker but yet get the best
of the beneﬁts of his or her eﬀorts.)
4252. Iwájúlojúgunńgbé.
The front part is where the shinbone lives.
(The person with leadership qualities will
always shine above the rest.)
33. Lébé and Ẹy/eacutedotbelowbà are both acrobatic masquer-
aders, but Lébé is by far the less agile of the two.
412 human nature


--- PAGE 426 ---
4253. Ìyààdáp/ogravedotbelowjutiàk/ogravedotbelow;nígbàtíàdáńṣiṣ/eacutedotbelow,
àk/oacutedotbelowsùnlọ.
The suﬀering the cutlass endures is greater
than that of the sheath; while the cutlass
works, the sheath sleeps. (Some people have
to bear burdens greater than others’ .)
4254. Ìyànitọmọríìṣasùn;ìyáńjẹdídùn,
ọmọńjẹooru.
The lot of the pot lid is a bad one: the
mother enjoys delicacies, while the child
only suﬀers from the heat. (Some people
have all the luck; others bear all the suﬀer-
ing.)
34
4255. Iyánnioúnjẹ,ọkàloògùn,àìkóriralà
ńj/egravedotbelowkọ,k/eacutedotbelownumádil/egravedotbelownit/egravedotbelowwà,k/eacutedotbelowmìíómábaà
bọnit/egravedotbelowbà.
It is pounded yam that is food; corn-ﬂour
meal is medicine; corn loaf one eats to prove
absence of ill will; black-eyed peas are for
snacking; and cassava meal is simply for
keeping life going. (People or friends, like
food, are not of equal value or appeal.)
J
4256. Jíjọlójọ/oacutedotbelow;òṣùpáòlèríbí/ogravedotbelowsán.
It is only resemblance; moonlight cannot
be like noontime. (Some phenomena are
without equal.)
K
4257. Kátóríerinódigbó;kátór/eacutedotbelowf/ogravedotbelownó
d/ogravedotbelowdàn;kátóríẹyẹbí/ogravedotbelowkínódikése.
Before one can see the elephant, one must
go to the bush; before one can see the buf-
falo, one must go to the wilderness; before
one can see another bird like the egret,
one must await the end of time. (Comment
34. The pot is the mother; the lid is the child.
that the likes of a given person are rare
indeed.)
4258. Kékeréàjànàkúkìíṣeẹgb/eacutedotbelowẹf/ogravedotbelown;gbogbo
wọnníńj/eacutedotbelowerin.
A young elephant is not in the same league
as the buﬀalo; all of them [elephants] merit
the designation ‘‘elephant.’’ (Regardless of
size or any other consideration, the person
referenced is far superior to all competi-
tors.)
4259. Kíeṣúyinẹyẹ;eṣufòl/oacutedotbelowj/oacutedotbelowkanṣoṣo,ìy/eacutedotbelow
/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowre.
The locust should praise the bird; the locust
ﬂew only one day and lost its wings. (One
should credit those who perform feats that
others cannot approach.)
4260. Kìíṣegbogboaṣọlàńsálóòrùn.
It is not all cloths that one dries in the sun.
(Some matters require more delicate han-
dling than others.)
4261. Kíniìy/eacutedotbelowetutu-újám/oacutedotbelownínúìy/eacutedotbelow/ogravedotbelowsìn?
What value has the wing of the tiny ﬂy-
ing ant compared to that of the vulturine
ﬁsh eagle? (One should not assign inordi-
nate value to worthless things, especially
in comparison with much more valuable
things.)
4262. Kìnìúnfìt/ogravedotbelowgbaijù;kìnìúngbaijù
láìlápó.
The lion claims the forest; the lion claims
t h ef o r e s tw i t h o u taq u i v e ro fa r r o w s .( T h e
mighty do not always need to put them-
selves out or acquire weapons in order to
secure advantages.)
4263. Kìnìúnkìíṣẹgb/eacutedotbelowẹrank/eacutedotbelowrannínúigbó.
The lion is more than the equal of any other
sort of animal in the bush. (There is a hier-
archy among animals and humans.)
Oninequality 413


--- PAGE 427 ---
4264. Kòsíẹyẹméjìtíńj/eacutedotbelowàkùkọ.
There are not two birds known as the cock.
(The likes of some persons are rare.)
4265. Kòsíìlùtólèborí-ib/egravedotbelow/mgraveb/eacutedotbelow.
There is no drum that can surpass the
b/egravedotbelow/mgraveb/eacutedotbelow.(The greatest entity will not lose its
preeminence to minor ones.)
4266. KòsíòrìṣàtójuOlódelọ.
Thre is no god greater than Olóde.35 (Certain
forces are more potent than others.)
4267. KòsíòrìṣàtólèṣebíÒgúnlágb/egravedotbelowdẹ.
T h e r ei sn oòrìṣàthat can do as Ògún, [god
of metals and the forge], can do at the
smithy. (No one else can attempt the feats
that the person referred to can accomplish.)
L
4268. Láká-ǹ-lákátòyìnbó;làkúrègbé
tòyìnbó.
Limping is the white man’s habit; rheuma-
tism is the white man’s ailment. (Diﬀerent
people have their peculiar traits.)
M
4269. Mímúaróòtótiabẹ,ìkàẹṣinòtó
tèèyàn;ẹṣínfọmọ/egravedotbelowsíl/egravedotbelowóńf/egravedotbelowhìngbéọmọ
ọl/oacutedotbelowmọkiri.
The keenness of a dye is not comparable
to that of a knife, and a horse’s cruelty is
nothing compared with a human’s; the horse
neglects its own children and carries other
people about on its back.
36 (There are sig-
35. Olóde, literally ‘‘the owner of the outdoors,’’ is
the euphemistic designation for Ṣ/ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelownn/oacutedotbelow, the god of
smallpox.
36. The play is on the adjectivemímú,here trans-
lated as ‘‘keenness,’’ which is the same Yoruba descrip-
niﬁcant diﬀerences among people and their
behavior. Compare the following proverb.)
4270. Mímúoòrùnòjọmímúabẹ.
The sun’s sharpness is not comparable to
a knife’s. (Even things or people described
with the same words are not necessarily
alike. Compare the preceding proverb.)
4271. Modáṣáṣáàgb/egravedotbelow,bí/ogravedotbelowbọìlúlórí.
The smartest of farmers seems like the idiot
of the city. (Farm-smartness does not trans-
late into city [or street] smarts.)
O
4272. Ódoríigbá;akìímúàwolọsódòlọ
pọnmi.
Problems converge on the calabash; no one
takes a china plate to the stream to draw
water. (People should not be approached
with matters that are inappropriate for
them.)
37
4273. Ówuìràw/ogravedotbelowkóm/oacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelowtóòṣùpá,Ọl/oacutedotbelowrun
niòj/eacutedotbelow.
The star would wish to be as bright as the
moon; it is God that would not permit. (God
determined individual possibilities, and it is
futile to attempt to transcend them.)
4274. Òbuòtóiy/ogravedotbelow.
Saltpeter does not equal salt. (An inferior
substitute is never like the real thing.)
38
4275. Ògìdánkìíṣẹgb/eacutedotbelowajá.
The leopard is not the equal of the dog.
tion (or adjective) for dye that is of the highest staining
quality and for a knife’s sharpness.
37. This is also an incantatory statement to ward
misfortune away from oneself.
38. Òbuwas the seasoning in use before salt was
introduced.
414 human nature


--- PAGE 428 ---
(Some powers surpass others. See the fol-
lowing two entries.)
4276. Ògìdánkìíṣẹgb/eacutedotbelow-ẹlágídò.
The leopard is not the equal of the monkey.
(Some powers are superior to others. See the
preceding and following entries.)
4277. Ògìdánlọl/oacutedotbelowlàijù.
The leopard is undisputed lord of the wild.
39
(A way of asserting a person’s preeminence,
or of conceding it. Compare the preceding
two entries.)
4278. Ògìdìgbóparíìlùgbogbo.
The ògìdìgbóis the ultimate among all
drums.
40 (An assertion or concession of a
person’s or thing’s preeminence.)
4279. Ogbetákùk/oacutedotbelowﬁńṣakọnik/ogravedotbelowl/ogravedotbelowk/ogravedotbelowl/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowﬁ
ńpanu.
The cock’s comb, which the cock ﬂaunts,
is the same thing the fox eats as a snack.
(One person’s prized possession is another
person’s trash.)
4280. Ohungbogboníńyẹarẹwà;bóyọkun
lémúadàbíòjé.
Everything looks good on a good-looking
person; if mucus ﬂows down his or her nos-
trils, it looks like molten lead [or silver].
41
(One is always inclined to be indulgent
toward the failings of those one likes.)
4281. Ohùnlàńta/ogravedotbelowfàfà;ìdíigilàḿbáa.
It is in the direction of the tree bear’s voice
that one shoots; it is at the bottom of a tree
that one ﬁnds it. (No matter how they might
39. Ọl/oacutedotbelowláliterally means ‘‘a wealthy person.’’
40. The ògìdìgbói sah o l l o wl o gb e a t e nw i t hs t i c k s ,
but only during an annual dance by theAláàﬁnof /Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow
and the Baṣ/ogravedotbelowrun, his chief minister.
41. Lead is sometimes used for such ornaments as
necklaces or bangles.
try, some people, because of their greatness,
cannot conceal the fact of their presence.)
4282. Ohuntíojúàgbà-árítóﬁjìn;bí
tọmọdébár íiáf/oacutedotbelow.
That which the elder’s eyes saw and became
sunken, if a youth’s eyes see it, they will go
blind. (What an elder can easily endure will
destroy a youth. Compare 4284, 4285, and
4286.)
4283. OhuntóńṣeLémbájéòṣeọmọ/egravedotbelow;Lém-
bájénwówó,ọmọ/egravedotbelowńw/oacutedotbelowmọ.
Lémbájé’s problem is diﬀerent from his
son’s; Lémbájé is striving for riches, but
his son is striving for children.
42 (Diﬀerent
people have diﬀerent priorities.)
4284. Ohuntóṣeàgùntàntóﬁkóòtútù;bóṣe
ewúr/eacutedotbelowáṣealáìsí.
The condition that gave a sheep a cold, if
it befell a goat, would result in its death.
(Some people are more resilient than others.
Compare the two proverbs that follow.)
4285. Ohuntóṣeàgbìgbòtóﬁd/eacutedotbelowkun/egravedotbelowrín,bó
ṣeigúnnugúnawankokosóríẹyin.
The aﬄiction that caused theàgbìgbòbird
to stop laughing would have paralyzed the
vulture while brooding on her eggs. (Some
people are more resilient than others. Com-
pare the preceding and following entries and
4282.)
4286. Ohuntóṣeigúntóﬁpálórílóṣeàkàlà
tóﬁdialákìísà.
The disaster that befell the vulture and made
it bald is the same that befell the ground
hornbill and reduced its covering to tatters.
(Some are better able to withstand adversity
than others. Compare the two preceding
entries and 4282.)
42. The name Lémbájé can be translated ‘‘Pursue
me until I come upon riches.’’
Oninequality 415


--- PAGE 429 ---
4287. Ohuntóṣeilátóṣekó,bóbáṣeikàná
w/egravedotbelowwùẹj/egravedotbelow;ohuntóṣeolówótóﬁńrojú,bóbá
ṣetálákàw/oacutedotbelownátigbàgbéẹ;ohuntóṣeigúntó
ﬁpálórí,bóbáṣeàgbòw/oacutedotbelownatiy/ogravedotbelowwo/egravedotbelow.
The disaster that befell okro and caused it
to become wooden, if it had befallenikàn,it
would have taken on a hue of blood; the woe
that befell the rich person and caused him or
her to scowl, if it had befallen a poor person,
he or she would have been long forgotten;
the problem that came upon the vulture and
made it bald, if it had come upon the ram,
he would long ago have lost his horns. (The
reverses that illustrious people can endure
and weather will easily destroy people of
little substance.)
4288. Ohùn-unkéjiróòdé/ogravedotbelowrun.
The voice of thekéjiróbird does not rise to
reach the sky. (A sentiment that a person’s
voice carries no weight.)
4289. Òjòńr/ogravedotbelow,ìw/ogravedotbelowfàńy/ogravedotbelow;ojúolówókanóju
ìbó.
It is raining, and the pawned laborer is re-
joicing, but the look on the creditor’s face is
as sour as can be. (Some people’s fortune is
other people’s misfortune. Compare the next
entry.)
4290. Òjòòwúr/ogravedotbelowtíḿbíolówónínú:olówó
gẹlẹtẹ,ìw/ogravedotbelowfàgẹlẹtẹ.
The morning rain angers the creditor: the
creditor lolls about, and his pawn lolls
about. (It is an annoying situation that pre-
vents one from enjoying what is due one.
Compare the preceding entry.)
4291. Òjòjòńṣeìw/ogravedotbelowfàw/oacutedotbelownníókóìṣe/egravedotbelowdé;bó
báṣeọmọ-ọwọn,wọ-namáanáwó,wọna
máanára.
An illness takes hold of the pawned ser-
vant, and they say he has resorted to his
habitual tricks; if it were their own son, they
would commit their money and their eﬀort
[to healing him]. (One is always indulgent
toward one’s own children while having no
patience with others’ children.)
4292. Ojúab/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowònípin;ibalùw/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowgbòròkò
gbaọk/ogravedotbelow.
The eye of a needle does not ooze matter;
the bath place is broad but not enough for
a boat. (Comparisons between two diﬀerent
things are valid only up to a point.)
4293. Ojúọkùnrinlobìnríntińníyì.
It is only in the eyes of a man that a woman
is desirable. (Diﬀerent people have their
proper attractions.)
43
4294. Òkèlèàk/oacutedotbelowbùtíńre/ogravedotbelowganganìdí.
The ﬁrst morsel of food sinks down to the
base of the backbone. (Said of a thing that
makes an incomparable impression, just as
the ﬁrst morsel makes a powerful impression
on a starving person.)
4295. Òkòńláṣealáǹgbápìnṣín;ẹnitójunilọ
níńṣekúpani.
A huge stone missile ﬂattens the lizard; a
person with more power will be the death of
you. (Those who are in positions of power
are likely to use their power to crush the less
powerful.)
4296. Òkunlọbaomi.
The ocean is the king of all waters. (A cer-
tain thing or person is without rivals.)
4297. Ológìnnítóf/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowṣebíẹkùn,ónajúni.
The cat that attempts to emulate the leopard
merely fools itself. (One should know one’s
limits.)
4298. Ológìnníòṣéébọìrókò;erinòṣéépa
fúnIléyá.
43. Yoruba culture does not acknowledge homo-
sexual attractions.
416 human nature


--- PAGE 430 ---
A cat is nothing to sacriﬁce to theírókòtree;
an elephant is not a thing to kill for the feast
of IdelFitr. (Provide for the occasion what
is proper for the occasion.)
4299. Ológbonibabaar/oacutedotbelowkin.
The court poet is the father of the court
rhapsodist.44 (Certain functions are more
important than others.)
4300. Olókol/egravedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelownalágbàro.
The owner of the farm is the master of the
hired tiller. (The employee is subservient to
the employer.)
4301. Olóríyanorí;alám/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowgbéam/ogravedotbelow.
He to whose lot the head fell chose the
head;
45 the one to whose lot the clay fell
picked up his clay. (Diﬀerent lots to diﬀerent
p e o p l e ;e a c hp e r s o nm u s tl i v ew i t hh i so r
hers.)
4302. Olówódénú/egravedotbelowgúnkòroko;ìw/ogravedotbelowfà-átinú
/egravedotbelowgúnb/egravedotbelowr/egravedotbelow.
The rich man gets to the thorn patch and
stops hoeing; the pawned servant starts his
hoeing from the thorn patch. (The rich can
aﬀord to leave the worst assignments for
those beholden to them.)
4303. Olówóf/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowsinodò;tálákàńgbọnorí.
The rich man wishes to sacriﬁce to the river,
and the poor man shakes his head in refusal.
(If one has no standing, one might as well
keep one’s opinion to oneself.)
4304. Olówóìlúkan,tálákàìlúmìíràn.
The rich man of one town is the pauper of
another. (Everything is relative.)
44. Both the ológboand the ar/oacutedotbelowkinare court poets
attached to the palace of /Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow and other locations.
45. Yet another allusion to the head as the repose of
one’s chosen fate, which is received from the Creator,
Olódùmarè. (See note 1 to 4613.)
4305. Olówólàgbà;olówós/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowẹnu/egravedotbelowńyọná.
The rich person is the eldest of all; the rich
person speaks, and ﬁre shoots out of his
mouth. (No one compares with a rich per-
son; nothing is beyond a rich person.)
4306. Olówól/ogravedotbelowgá-atálákà;Ọl/oacutedotbelowrunl/ogravedotbelowgá-a
gbogbo-owa.
The rich person is the master of the poor;
God is the master of all. (The rich may lord
it over the poor, but even they must answer
to God.)
4307. Olówóńs/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowẹnu/egravedotbelowńdùn;òtòṣìńs/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow
ẹnu/egravedotbelowńróṣáka-ṣàka.
The rich person speaks, and his mouth
sounds sweet; the lazy person speaks, and
his mouth sounds like unbearable noise.
(The sound of a rich man’s voice is music
to the ears; that of a poor person is merely
grating noise.)
4308. Ominiyópaná.
Water is the thing that will quench ﬁre.
(Each person has his particular nemesis.)
4309. Òníl/egravedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelown/ogravedotbelowla;ìrìw/ogravedotbeloww/ogravedotbelowl/egravedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelownòjò.
Today precedes tomorrow in age; the drizzle
precedes the rain in age. (There is order
in Nature, such that certain things always
precede others, never the reverse.)
4310. Oníyàwóńgbéyàwó,Abídogunńkó
eèp/egravedotbelow.
The groom is welcoming his new bride; Abí-
dogun is carrying sand. (Some suﬀer while
others enjoy life.)
4311. Oríajálẹkùnófàb/ogravedotbelowsí.
It is to the matter of the dog that the leopard
will ﬁnally turn. (The weakling may tease
the bully with impunity for a while, but the
bully will ﬁnd time for him in the end.)
4312. Oríẹṣinòṣeeﬁwét/ogravedotbelowk/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelow.
The horse’s head is not comparable to that
Oninequality 417


--- PAGE 431 ---
of the squirrel. (Some people are more
fortunate than others.)
4313. Oríl/egravedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelownara.
The head is an elder sibling to the body.
(Certain entities are unquestionably su-
perior to their associates.)
4314. ÒrìṣàbíÒgúnòsí;ojúlásánnigbogbo
wọnńyá.
A god to rival Ògún does not exist; all the
others are only being impudent. (A certain
person is without peer among humans, just
as Ògún is without equal among the gods.)
4315. Òrìṣàníńṣọlà;ọbaníńṣọlá.
It is for the gods to confer greatness; it is
for the king to enjoy greatness. (The king’s
greatness is at the behest of the gods.)
4316. Orómújuorólọ;ọkágbéparam/oacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelowmì.
Some venoms are more deadly than others;
the viper swallows the adder. (Some people
or things are more formidable than others.)
4317. Òrùléfarawéẹṣin;agùnún,kòlèrìn.
A roof looks like a horse; one mounts it, but
it cannot walk. (Things that may look simi-
lar will prove themselves quite diﬀerent.)
4318. Oyinòníﬁwénínúadùn.
There is nothing that compares with honey
in sweetness. (Some things are simply in-
comparable.)
Ọ
4319. Ọbakìíd/ogravedotbelowbál/egravedotbelowfólóríabúlé.
The king does not prostrate before the head
of a village. (The person of superior rank
does not pay obeisance to a person in an
inferior position.)
4320. Ọbaònífìlà,adélóní.
T h ek i n gh a sn oh a t ;h eh a so n l yc r o w n s .
(The king is not to be compared with ordi-
nary people.)
4321. /Ogravedotbelowbùn-únṣubúl/oacutedotbelowjàaf/egravedotbelowrínsi;bíafínjú
ṣubúàágb/oacutedotbelowariwo.
The ﬁlthy person falls in the market, and we
burst into laughter; if a fashionable person
falls, there will be loud exclamations. (Few
people care what misfortune befalls a lousy
person; everybody cares about the welfare of
a fashionable person.)
4322. /Ogravedotbelowgániìgbòtíńṣesójànínúẹyẹ.
The ìgbòbird is a boss, a soldier among
birds. (Said of a person whose notable deeds
have earned him or her renown among the
people.)
4323. /Ogravedotbelowgánńṣenǹkandí/egravedotbelow.
The great one is showing oﬀ. (Said of a per-
son doing impressive things to show his or
her prowess.)
4324. Ọg/oacutedotbelowrùn-úneṣinṣinòdámàlúùdúró.
One hundred ﬂies will not stop an elephant.
(A multitude of little people will not prevent
a great man from doing what he wishes.)
4325. /Ogravedotbelowjákanòdàbí/ogravedotbelowjáòróòro;òkèkan
òdàbíÒkèeGbadi;ÒkèeGbadiísunw/ogravedotbelown
sunw/ogravedotbelown,oﬁibiṣóńṣóṣeàrà;/ogravedotbelownàkanòdàbí
/ogravedotbelownà-asàréè.
No sash compares with the red sash; no hill
compares with Gbadi Hill; Gbadi Hill is
so beautiful that it adorns itself with a tall
peak; no path compares with the path to
the grave. (Some things are incomparable in
their quality. The following is a variant.)
4326. /Ogravedotbelowjákanòdàbí/ogravedotbelowjáòróòro;òkèkanò
dàbíÒkèeGbadi;ọmúkanòdùnbíọmúìyá
ẹni.
No sash compares with the red sash; no hill
c o m p a r e sw i t hG b a d iH i l l ;n ob r e a s tm i l ki s
as delicious as one’s mother’s breast milk.
418 human nature


--- PAGE 432 ---
(Certain things have no rivals in value. See
the previous entry.)
4327. Ọkáojú/ogravedotbelownàtíńléguurukó-kó-kó.
The pathway gaboon viper deﬁantly occu-
pies the whole path. (Said of a tough person
who deﬁes all would-be opponents.)
4328. /Ogravedotbelowkínọbaẹyẹ;/ogravedotbelowkínẹl/eacutedotbelowwààlà.
Egret, king of birds; egret whose beauty is in
whiteness. (Praise for people of exemplary
qualities.)
4329. /Ogravedotbelowl/egravedotbelowl/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowtiráṣọw/ogravedotbelow,tàkàràlóṣòro.
The steamed, seasoned bean mash is already
blessed with clothes to wear; it is the case
of the fried-bean fritters that constitutes
a problem.
46 (Some people are naturally
blessed, while others have to struggle for
every advantage.)
4330. Ọl/oacutedotbelowmkọṣíkàtàbabaàgbàdo.
The corncob with irregular rows of grains
on it is the father of all corn. (The uncon-
ventional person is a person to be reckoned
with among people.)
4331. Ọl/oacutedotbelowrunòpínind/oacutedotbelowgba;sajiméj/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowju
kòròfo.
God did not distribute things equally; the
seargeant major is more important than the
plain soldier. (God did not create people
equal in importance.)
4332. Ọl/ogravedotbelowt/ogravedotbelowkékerélàńfọw/oacutedotbelowt/egravedotbelowníkùn.
It is an insigniﬁcant wealthy person whose
stomach one pokes with one’s ﬁnger. (One
can take liberties with people of sudden
wealth.)
47
46. /Ogravedotbelowl/egravedotbelowl/egravedotbelowis wrapped in leaves (clothing) before
being steamed; àkàràare simply deep-fried and dis-
played unadorned for sale.
47. The gesture would be made to call attention to
his well-fed stomach.
4333. Ọmọòtòṣì-íṣubúl/oacutedotbelowjàaf/egravedotbelowrínsíi;ọmọ
olówóṣubúariwóta:‘‘Yéè!P/egravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelow!P/egravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelow!P/egravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelow!’’
The child of a poor man falls in the market,
and people burst into laughter; the child of
a rich man falls, and there is a huge outcry:
‘‘Great heavens! Easy does it! Easy does it!
Easy does it!’’ (If you are poor, you are on
your own; if you are rich, the whole world is
in your corner.)
4334. Ọmọọl/oacutedotbelowlálọláyẹ.
It is the oﬀspring of a famous person that
greatness beﬁts. (Parents’ greatness rubs oﬀ
on their children.)
4335. Ọmọọl/oacutedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowìṣíwájúníńtaìl/egravedotbelowk/egravedotbelowfúnọmọ
ọl/oacutedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowìkẹhìn.
The child of the ﬁrst rich person sells beads
to the child of the latest rich person. (Those
who precede one in greatness will always
take precedence.)
4336. Ọmọọl/oacutedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowníńjẹẹyinawó.
It is the child of a wealthy person that eats
guinea-fowl eggs. (Only the wealthy enjoy
rare things.)
4337. /Ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowògajuarawọnlọ,àﬁèyítóbá
gunebè.
No one toad is taller than another, except
one that climbs a heap. (Said of people who,
despite the aﬀectations of some of them, are
indistinguishable in stature and worth.)
4338. /Ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowòjẹgbèsèjuarawọnlọ;tìẹokòó,
tèmiokòó,tàwaokòó,t/egravedotbelowyinokòó,okokòó.
Toads are not in greater debt than one an-
other: yours 20 cowries, mine 20 cowries,
o u r s2 0c o w r i e s ,t h e i r s2 0c o w r i e s ,2 0c o w -
ries all around. (None of us is better oﬀ than
the others.)
4339. /Ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowòj/eacutedotbelowkík/ogravedotbelow-ǹ-k/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowdún;ẹnitójuni
òj/eacutedotbelowkás/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow.
The toad will not let the frog make a sound;
Oninequality 419


--- PAGE 433 ---
a mightier person prevents one from speak-
ing. (One often must hold one’s tongue for
fear of mightier people.)
4340. /Ogravedotbelowránsànju/ogravedotbelowràn;ad/eacutedotbelowt/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowríwèrè,ó
kánlùgb/eacutedotbelow,óní‘‘Ngònííj/eacutedotbelowkíkiníyìíbùmíjẹ
ojàre.’’
Some misfortunes are worse than others; the
leper sees the mad person and dashes into
the bush, saying, ‘‘I’ll be hanged if I will let
that creature take a bite out of me!’’ (Even
the aﬄicted know that some people have
even worse aﬄictions.)
4341. /Ogravedotbelowránsànju/ogravedotbelowràn;tiàp/oacutedotbelownsàndí/egravedotbelowjuti
òkóbó.
Some problems are better than others; a
bachelor’s plight is somewhat better than
a eunuch’s. (Misfortunes come in diﬀerent
degrees of seriousness.)
4342. /Ogravedotbeloww/oacutedotbelownrín,babaIfá.
The /Ogravedotbeloww/oacutedotbelownrín chapter is the father of Ifá.
(Said of a thing or person preeminent
among all others.)
P
4343. PàtàkìoròòjuiléÀjànà.
The greatest authority within the Orò cult is
not to be sought beyond the Àjànà’s home.
48
(Said of a person or thing that is not sur-
passed in importance. The following entry is
a variant.)
4344. Pàtàkì/ogravedotbelowj/egravedotbelowòjuiléAlápìínilọ.
The chief authority among the /ogravedotbelowj/egravedotbelowmas-
queraders is not to be sought beyond the
home of the Alápìíni.
49 (Nothing could
be of greater importance than the subject
of the discussion. Compare the foregoing
entry.)
4345. Pé-ń-pélàṣáwàtóﬁńṣeọkọadìẹ.
The kite is modest in size, and yet it is the
terror of chickens. (A person’s importance is
not a matter of his or her size.)
T
4346. Tijótay/ogravedotbelowníńṣeìdin;wùy/egravedotbelow-wùy/egravedotbelowníńṣe
ìgòǹgò;àńjó,àńy/ogravedotbelow,ọmọbọna-b/oacutedotbelownáńreoko
igi.
The maggot is addicted to dancing and re-
joicing; the worm is addicted to wriggling;
we dance, we rejoice, and the wood-boring
insect goes in search of wood. (The laboring
poor person must keep working even while
others are relaxing and rejoicing.)
48. Àjànàis the title of the head of the Orò cult.
49. Alápìíniis the chief of theegúngúncult.
420 human nature


--- PAGE 434 ---
Rights and
Responsibilities
five


--- PAGE 435 ---



--- PAGE 436 ---
On the right to life
A
4347. Akìísùnsíléẹnikáfọrùnṣ/eacutedotbelow.
One does not sleep in one’s own home and
break one’s neck. (A person does not get
into trouble while minding his or her own
business.)
4348. Àìkú/egravedotbelowkìrì,akìíﬁawọ-ọr/egravedotbelowsegb/egravedotbelowdu.
The skin of a live wild goat cannot be made
into a gb/egravedotbelowdudrum.
1 (As long as one is alive,
one will be able to protect one’s interests.
Compare 4409.)
B
4349. Bíakòbákúlógúnọdún,babaẹnìkan
olègbénisin.
If one does not die in twenty years, nobody’s
father can bury one. (If one does not die,
nobody can stop one from living.)
1. The large gb/egravedotbelowdudrum, made from the skin of a
wild goat, is used on state occasions or during cere-
monies of Ògbóni, the ancient Yoruba secret society.
4350. Bíẹtuòbákú,taniyóﬁawọ-ọr/egravedotbelowt/oacutedotbelow
ọsán?Bí/egravedotbelowkìrìòbákú,taniyóﬁawọ-ọr/egravedotbelowdá
bàtà?Bíolórìṣàòbákú,taniyógbaìbò-or/egravedotbelow
bò?
If the antelope does not die, who would
make bowstrings of its hide? If the wild
goat does not die, who would make shoes
from its skin? If the priest does not die, who
would usurp his casting of lots? (As long as
one lives, no one may alienate one’s rights.)
Ọ
4351. Ọmọkìípaọmọjayé.
A child does not kill another child as a
means to prosper. (There are certain things
that one simply may not do to other people,
however great one might be.)


--- PAGE 437 ---
On freedom to be oneself
A
4352. Akìíkíayabakódoyún;/egravedotbelowr/egravedotbelowk/eacutedotbelowk/oacutedotbelowlokó
wà.
One does not greet a queen and thereby
impregnate her; the cheek is not the place
where the penis is located. (Innocent actions
should not get one in trouble.)
4353. Akìítorí-igbígbópaajá;akìítoríi
kíkànpaàgbò;akìítorí-iwérewèrepa
òbúkọ.
One does not kill a dog for barking; one
does not kill a ram for butting; one does not
kill a he-goat because of randiness. (Do not
punish people for doing what they cannot
help doing.)
4354. Àgb/egravedotbelowtóníṣul/oacutedotbelowgbàtóńjẹ/egravedotbelowg/eacutedotbelow,ohuntóf/eacutedotbelow
lóńṣe.
A farmer who has yams in his barn but eats
cassava is doing as he pleases. (It is good
fortune to have the right to choose.)
1
4355. Aṣọtíabáláraeégún,tieégúnni.
Whatever costume one ﬁnds on the mas-
querader belongs to him. (No one can or
should begrudge a person what rightfully
belongs to him or her. Compare 797.)
B
4356. Bíabánieégún-unbabaẹniójòó,tíkò
jó,/ogravedotbelowrànk/oacutedotbelow.
1. Normally, one would prefer yams to cassava.
If one said that one’s father’s masquerader
would dance and he fails to, there is no
crime committed. (Inability to make good
on a promise is no crime.)
E
4357. Ekòlóḿmìgbàg/ogravedotbelow,inúḿbíadìẹsùú-sùú.
The worm crawls nonchalantly, and the
chicken is consumed with anger. (One’s ene-
mies are never pleased by one’s prosperity.)
Ẹ
4358. Ẹnukìíríríkíẹl/eacutedotbelownumálèﬁjẹun.
The mouth is never so ﬁlthy that its owner
cannot eat with it. (A person is always com-
fortable with his or her own bad habits and
shortcomings. See the following variant.)
4359. Ẹnukòsúnw/ogravedotbelown,ẹl/eacutedotbelownuúp/oacutedotbelown-ọnlá.
The mouth is not appealing; the owner licks
it. (One is not put oﬀ by one’s own blemish.
See the foregoing entry.)
G
4360. Gegelelóbígegele;kòtòlóbíkòtò;òjò-ó
r/ogravedotbelowsíkòtògegeleḿbínú.
The mound was sired by a mound; the pit
w a ss i r e db yap i t ;r a i nf a l l si n t oap i t ,a n d
the mound becomes angry. (Each person is


--- PAGE 438 ---
diﬀerent; one should not envy what others
have.)
I
4361. Ìbáàṣorípàlàbàkóṣorípàbó,tẹniní
ńj/eacutedotbelowtẹni.
Be his or her head oversized or deformed,
one’s own thing is one’s own. (One trea-
s u r e sw h a to n eh a s ,h o w e v e rd e f e c t i v ei t
might be.)
4362. Iléẹnilatińjẹòkétéonídodo.
It is within one’s home that one eats a ﬁeld
rat with a tumor. (One may do what one
pleases in the fastness of one’s home.)
K
4363. Kantíkantíòní/ogravedotbelowrànakèrègbèl/oacutedotbelowrùn.
Sugar ants have no feud with the gourd.
2
(One does a thing because one chooses to,
not because one must.)
4364. Kán-únniọmọHausa;asárániọmọ
òyìnbó;g/ogravedotbelow/mgraveb/oacutedotbelowlọmọOnírè.
Potash seasoning is the fetish of the Hausa;
snuﬀ is the fetish of the white man; facial
marks are the fetish of the Ìrè person. (Dif-
ferent peoples have their diﬀerent habits.)
4365. KíLámọnrínṣebíẹni,ìjàníńdà.
Demanding that such and such a person
emulate one exactly leads to a ﬁght. (One
should not expect others to be just like
oneself.)
4366. Kò-jí-kò-wíkòwípékíolóhunmálọ
ohun/egravedotbelow.
He-did-not-steal-and-he-will-not-tell can-
2. Sugar ants cluster at the mouth of the gourd
containing palm wine in order to get at the sugar.
not tell the person not to broadcast his or
her stolen thing. (One must not be impatient
with people agitated by some loss they have
sustained.)
O
4367. ‘‘Òbáàrí,oòg bọd/ogravedotbelowwí’’níńpaakọni.
‘‘Even though you see it you must not make
a sound’’ is what kills the intrepid man.
( V a i np e o p l eg ot ot h e i rd e a t he v e nw h e n
judiciously calling for help in the face of
danger would have saved them.)
4368. Odòkìíkọìw/egravedotbelow,kókọìtù,kótúnkọ
à-padà-relé.
A river does not prevent one from swim-
ming across it, prevent one from rowing
across it, and yet prevent one from returning
home. (If a goal proves unattainable, one
can always let go of it.)
4369. Ohuntówu/ogravedotbelowbùnlóńfowó/egravedotbelowrà;bíẹrú
bátagitánafowóbuiṣujẹ.
Whatever pleases the bumpkin is what he
spends his money on; when the slave sells
his load of ﬁrewood, he uses the money to
buy yams to eat. (What one spends one’s
money on is what one pleases to spend it on.
Compare the following variant.)
4370. Ohuntówu/ogravedotbelowbùnlóńfowó/egravedotbelowrà;ohun
tówuafínjúlóńfowó/egravedotbelowṣe.
The bumpkin spends his money on what-
ever he pleases; the fop likewise spends his
money on whatever he pleases. (One does
what one pleases with one’s possessions.
Compare the preceding proverb.)
4371. Okonitàgb/egravedotbelow;gègénitalák/ogravedotbelowwé.
To the farmer belongs the farm; to the book-
ish person belongs the pen. (Each person or
profession has its proper preserves.)
Onfreedomtobeoneself 425


--- PAGE 439 ---
4372. OnímàleÌbàdàn,bíoníṢàngóÌlọrin.
The Muslim from Ibadan is like a Ṣango
worshiper from Ìlorin. (Diﬀerent people
practice their religion diﬀerently.)
Ọ
4373. Ọbálèṣòﬁnolèkíadìẹmáj/egravedotbelowlóṣùpá?
Can the king interdict stealing and thus stop
a chicken from scratching for food in the
moonlight? (No law or authority has the
r i g h tt os t o pp e o p l ef r o mc o n d u c t i n gt h e i r
normal lives.)
4374. /Ogravedotbelowb/oacutedotbelowtàkìtì/ogravedotbelowbọòró,ìnàkíṣe‘‘Ha!’’ní
ig/ogravedotbelowigi;/ogravedotbelowb/oacutedotbelowní,‘‘Akìíbánijàtinǹkanẹni.’’
The monkey somersaulted and failed to
land erect, and the gorilla resting among the
roots of a large tree exclaimed, ‘‘Ha!’’ The
monkey responded, ‘‘Nobody has a right to
fault one over how one performs one’s sig-
nature stunt.’’ (One is free to do one’s thing
as one wishes.)
4375. Ọkábímọ-ọr/egravedotbelowómọrébété;òjòlábítir/egravedotbelow
ógùngbàlàjà.
The gaboon viper has its child, and it is of
moderate length; the python has its child,
and it is very long indeed. (Children take
after their parents.)
4376. Ọkálóbíparam/oacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelow;ìkàlóbíìkàsíl/egravedotbelow;
ẹnitóbínilàńjọ.
The gaboon viper sired the serpent; the
wicked person is born of a wicked person;
one takes after one’s parent. (Wickedness is
an inherited trait.)
4377. /Ogravedotbelowmùtíòṣewèrè,owó/egravedotbelowníńná.
The drunkard is not an imbecile; it is his
money he is spending. (The drunk has a
right to spend his money as he pleases. The
following entry is a variant.)
4378. /Ogravedotbelowmùtíòyanàpà;owó/egravedotbelowníńná.
The drunkard is no spendthrift; he is spend-
ing his own money. (One may do as one
pleases with one’s property. See the previous
entry.)
4379. /Ogravedotbelownàkanòwọọjà.
It is not one road only that leads to the
market. (There are many diﬀerent ways to
approach a problem.)
S
4380. Sèséòlèsobí/egravedotbelowwà.
The yam bean cannot produce fruits like the
black-eyed peas. (One can only act accord-
ing to one’s nature.)
Ṣ
4381. ṢàngóIṣaga,aṣọàgìdìníńﬁíbòdíjó.
The Ṣango of Iṣaga town chooses to wrap
his waist with canvas cloth for dancing. (The
unconventional person will always ﬁnds
ways to be diﬀerent.)
3
4382. ‘‘Ṣeébáyìí’’níńk/oacutedotbelowaya/egravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowbùn.
‘‘Do it this way’’ is the one who teaches ﬁlthy
habits to his wife. (Do not impose your own
instructions on people who know better
than you do what they are doing.)
4383. Ṣòkòtòòyìnbóòlókùn;apániw/oacutedotbelownﬁ
ńk/oacutedotbelow.
The white man’s trousers have no strings;
they are suspended from the shoulders.
(Diﬀerent people, diﬀerent fashions.)
3. Canvas is not the prescribed or usual fabric for
Ṣango worshipers. Iṣaga is an /Egravedotbelowgbá town.
426 rights and responsibilities


--- PAGE 440 ---
T
4384. Taníḿbáadéléb/ogravedotbelowṣeẹj/oacutedotbelowoyún?
Who would take a married woman to task
for being pregnant? (One should not fault
people for doing what is expected of them.)
4385. ‘‘Tèmíyémi,’’tíńﬁinúiṣu/egravedotbelowgbinọkà.
‘ ‘ Ik n o ww h a tIa md o i n g ’ ’p l a n t sc o r n
among his yams. (Said of a person who
thinks he knows it all but who will learn
only from the consequences of his folly.)
4386. Tèfètèfèéyọowóọjà.
Permanent loss patronized the merchant.
(All one’s labor has gone for nought.)
W
4387. WàràníḿmúọmọFúlànídàgbà;iyán
níḿmúọmọokosanra.
It is cottage cheese that nurtures the Fulbe
child to adulthood; it is pounded yams that
make the farm dweller fat. (Diﬀerent people
depend on diﬀerent things for nurturing.)
4388. W/ogravedotbelownṣàn-w/ogravedotbelownṣànòmúehíngbórín;bí
kòjùṣ/eacutedotbelowkí,aómáaﬁrúnàgbàdo.
Loud chewing does not increase the size of
o n e ’ st e e t h ;i fo n e ’ st e e t ha r es h o r t ,o n ec a n
at least chew corn with them. (One does not
need to prove that one is great; no matter
how lowly one might be, there is much one
can accomplish.)
Onfreedomtobeoneself 427


--- PAGE 441 ---
On the right to human dignity
A
4389. Akìíﬁàìl/eacutedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowndiẹrùasòpá.
One does not become aﬄicted with ele-
phantiasis of the scrotum despite having
no testicles. (One cannot be deprived of an
amenity and yet be subjected to the cares of
enjoying it. Compare 4521.)
4390. Akìíkóowóraẹṣin,kákówóra
yàgòl/oacutedotbelownà.
One does not spend one’s money purchas-
ing a horse and then spend more money
purchasing ‘‘Get out of the way.’’ (Once one
has done one’s part, one is entitled to expect
others to do theirs.)
4391. Àáyáòg/ogravedotbelowbíikáfàánírù.
The colobus monkey is not so stupid as to
permit its tail to be pulled. (Even the most
foolish people are wise to certain things.)
4392. Àgùàlàḿbáoṣùrìn,w/oacutedotbelownròpéajá-a
r/egravedotbelowni.
The planet Venus follows the moon across
the sky, and people think it is the moon’s
dog.
1 (Every man is a king in his home, even
though some might not think so.)
4393. Àjànàkúfojúìṣ/eacutedotbeloww/ogravedotbelowbọ,/ogravedotbelowbọòtọrọjẹ.
The elephant looks at the monkey with
the eyes of disdain, but the monkey does
not beg food to eat. (Each person has his
1. Another name for the planet isAjáoṣù, moon’s
dog.
or her worth; even the lowly monkey has
its dignity, since it is not beholden to the
elephant.)
4394. Ak/egravedotbelowsánlòpin/Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow;ibiabánil/oacutedotbeloww/ogravedotbelowniilé
ẹni.
Akẹsan is the boundary of /Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow; the place
where one is found in dignity is one’s home.
2
(Home is wherever one is welcome and
accorded dignity.)
B
4395. Bíakòf/eacutedotbelowẹninílùú,akìítóab/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelow.
If one is not wanted in a town, one is worth
less than a needle. (An unwanted person
enjoys no regard.)
4396. Bíikúyópaniágb/oacutedotbelowtẹnuẹni;òpìtànní
ńﬁìtàngbaara-ar/egravedotbelowkal/egravedotbelow.
I fd e a t hw i l lk i l lo n e ,i ts h o u l dl i s t e nt ow h a t
one has to say; he who tells tales may by that
means deliver himself. (One should not im-
pose punishment before hearing from the
oﬀender.)
2. Ak/egravedotbelowsán, the king’s market in /Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow, was tradition-
ally at the edge of the city. The expression translated as
‘‘the end’’ or ‘‘boundary’’ could also mean ‘‘the ultimate
place,’’ a translation that would also be appropriate
here, inasmuch as the market was the focus of impor-
tant events in the life of the city. The proverb is still
applicable, therefore, even though the city has grown
far beyond the market.


--- PAGE 442 ---
E
4397. Eégúnnibabal/oacutedotbelowrun;Pààkánibaba
nígbàl/egravedotbelow.
The masquerader is the father ﬁgure in
heaven; Pààkáis the father ﬁgure in the
masquerader’s secret grove. (There is no dis-
puting the preeminence of a person among
h i so rh e rp e e r s . )
4398. Ejò-ókérékòkéré,kòṣéédìníìgbànú.
However small a snake may be, it cannot
be used as a belt. (However mean or weak a
person may be, there is a limit to what one
can do to him or her.)
Ẹ
4399. Ẹnitíatìrànm/oacutedotbelowòlèdák/eacutedotbelow;ẹnitíapè
lólèòlèfojúrerewoni.
A person one has falsely accused will not
remain quiet; a person one has called a
thief will not look kindly on one. (One who
causes others injury should not expect them
to be indiﬀerent.)
4400. Ẹnitíkòkúyóhọra.
A person who is not dead will be able to
scratch where he itches. (So long as one has
life, one can act in one’s own interest.)
4401. Ẹrúkìíṣeọmọigi;èèyànlóbíìyá-ar/egravedotbelow.
As l a v ei sn o tb o r no fat r e e ;h i so rh e r
mother was the oﬀspring of a human being.
(Even a slave deserves the consideration due
every human being; misfortune does not
rob people of their humanity. Compare the
following entry.)
4402. Ẹrúṣeọmọníléìyá-ar/egravedotbelowrí.
A slave was once a freeborn person in his or
her mother’s house. (A person who is down
o nh i so rh e rl u c kw a so n c ei nb e t t e rc i r c u m -
stances; people’s circumstances do change.
Compare the preceding entry.)
I
4403. Iléahunlàńpaahunsí.
It is inside the tortoise’s own house that one
kills it. (One should make a stand in defense
of one’s rights and property, even to the
death.)
4404. Ilélàḿbáoním/oacutedotbelowtògbé;oní-báísíkùlù,
mát/egravedotbelowwám/oacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelowpa.
One is able to share a home with the owner
of a motor vehicle; owner of a bicycle, do
not crush us to death. (People with little
advantages should not throw their weight
around, especially when truly great people
are considerate of others. Compare the next
entry.)
4405. Ìlúlàḿbáọbagbé,kíìjòyèmát/egravedotbelowwá
m/oacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelowpa.
One is able to live in the same town with the
king; the chief should not stomp us to death.
(The minor oﬃcial should not impose on
people more than the important oﬃcials do.
Compare the preceding entry.)
K
4406. Kìíburúfúnèèyànkálọﬁajáwa.
Ap e r s o ni sn e v e rs od o w no nh i so rh e rl u c k
that one sends a dog to seek him or her out.
(A person, however disgraced, still deserves
to be treated like a human being.)
4407. Kíkérélab/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowkéré,kìíṣemímìadìẹ.
A needle may be small, but that does not
make it something a chicken can swallow.
(One should not underestimate people
simply because they seem unimpressive.)
Ontherighttohumandignity 429


--- PAGE 443 ---
M
4408. Máﬁòdùf/oacutedotbelowminíàdó;máﬁẹṣint/egravedotbelowmí
lágùntànpa.
Do not break my tiny gourdlet with your
large pot; do not use your horse to trample
my sheep to death. (Do not take advantage
of me, even though you are wealthier and
more powerful than I.)
O
4409. Ódi/egravedotbelowhìnìgbínkátófìkaraun/egravedotbelowhọ
igbá.
Not until the demise of the snail can one use
its shell to scoop out the inside of a calabash.
(As long as one is still around, one does
not permit one’s interests to be assaulted
without making a scene. Compare 4348.)
4410. Ojúẹrúògbéìpàk/oacutedotbelow;a-bojú-níwájúbí
ọmọ.
The slave’s eyes are not at the back of his
head; his eyes are in front just like a free-
born child’s. (A slave is just as human as the
freeborn child.)
4411. Ojúkìíp/oacutedotbelownòkúkómánas/egravedotbelowt/oacutedotbelowt/oacutedotbelow.
A corpse is never so benighted that it can-
not stretch its legs. (Even in the worst of
circumstances, one can still count some
blessings.)
4412. Ojúkìíp/oacutedotbelownnikámánìíaṣọkan.
One is never so poor that one does not own
one single item of clothing. (Suﬀering is
never absolute.)
4413. Olówóẹnikìíroròkóníkámáṣu.
One’s master cannot be so tyrannical that he
orders one not to shit. (Even servants have
some rights.)
4414. Owótíkòsí,ọbaòlègbàá.
Money that does not exist, no king can take
from you. (One cannot be at risk for what
one does not own.)
Ọ
4415. Ọbakìíkọobìnrinsíl/egravedotbelowkítálákàlọgbé
esílé.
A king does not divorce a woman, only for
her to be married then by a pauper. (A dis-
graced person is not necessarily without
some residual dignity and standing.)
4416. Ọmọdéhuirùngb/ogravedotbelown,óníòunòìtó
babaòun;babar/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowhuj/ogravedotbelowj/ogravedotbelowàgbò?
A youth grows a beard and yet claims he has
not achieved the same status as his father;
did his father grow a dewlap? (One should
not contrive to defer adult responsibilities.)
P
4417. Pàṣípààr/ogravedotbelowobìnrinòṣeéṣe.
One cannot take a woman back for an ex-
change. (Wives are not like commodities
purchased at the market.)
4418. Pátá-páták/oacutedotbelownìjàpáòníru.
It is not completely that a tortoise lacks a
tail. (A poor person is not absolutely bereft
of means.)
T
4419. Tolètolènim/egravedotbelowkúnnùúﬁńrìnlójú
olówó.
E v e rw i t hap r o p e n s i t yt os t e a li st h ea p p e a r -
ance of a simple person’s movement in the
eyes of the wealthy. (The well-oﬀ are ever
suspicious that the worse-oﬀ are after their
wealth.)
430 rights and responsibilities


--- PAGE 444 ---
W
4420. W/oacutedotbelownsoajám/oacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelow,w/oacutedotbelownsoẹkùnm/oacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelow,
w/oacutedotbelownfìrùẹkùnléajál/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow.
They tied down the dog; they tied down the
leopard; and then they delivered the leop-
ard’s tail into the dog’s paws. (One’s enemies
have conspired to make one vulnerable to
people who otherwise would not have dared
to confront one.)
Ontherighttohumandignity 431


--- PAGE 445 ---
On the right to one’s patrimony
and to property
A
4421. Akìíbáekuduigbó,akìíbaẹf/ogravedotbelowndu
/ogravedotbelowdàn,akìíbáOlúkóreduipò-obaba-ar/egravedotbelow.
One does not dispute the bush with the
rodent; one does not dispute the grassland
with the buﬀalo; one does not dispute Olú-
kóre’s patrimony with him. (One should not
seek to deny people their God-given rights.)
4422. AkìígbéọmọỌbàfún/Ogravedotbelowṣun.
One does not give the child of the Ọbà river
to the /Ogravedotbelowṣun river. (Do not rob Peter to pay
Paul.)
4423. Akìíléẹl/eacutedotbelownurírùnníbiàmùìyá/egravedotbelow.
One does not chase a smelly-mouthed per-
son away from his or her mother’s water
pot. (Even problem people have their
rights.)
4424. Akìípaigúnjẹkás/eacutedotbelow;kìíṣeẹyẹbaba
ẹnìkan.
One does not kill a vulture for food and
deny doing so; it is not a bird that belongs
to anybody’s father. (Never be afraid to own
up to taking advantage of something or
someone nobody favors.)
4425. Akìípéojúọbáf/oacutedotbelowkámápeẹl/eacutedotbelowf/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowm/oacutedotbelow.
One cannot, simply because the king is
blind, stop hailing the vegetable seller. (Fear
of a touchy authority ﬁgure should not rule
one’s life.)
1
1. The proverb plays on the syllablef/oacutedotbelow,the verb
that means ‘‘to go blind’’ when it refers to eyes but
4426. Akìíṣúpóalààyè.
One does not inherit the wife of a living
man. (Do not attempt to wrest property or a
r i g h tf r o mi t so w n e rw h i l et h eo w n e ri ss t i l l
around.)
4427. Aseb/egravedotbelowfúnFádíp/egravedotbelow,Fájẹb/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowfáalá;
ọl/oacutedotbelowb/egravedotbelowlóláb/egravedotbelow.
We prepared stew for Fádíp/egravedotbelow, and Fájẹb/egravedotbelow ate
it; the person who deserved the stew got it.
(If the legitimate owner snatches an article
from the illegitimate owner, no crime has
been committed.)
2
4428. Àk/oacutedotbelowbíẹl/eacutedotbelowrankìíjám/oacutedotbelowwọnl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow.
The ﬁrst foal of the owner of the herd does
not slip from his ﬁngers.
3 (People deserve to
hold on to what is rightfully theirs. See the
following entry.)
4429. Àk/oacutedotbelowbínitiẹl/eacutedotbelowran.
The ﬁrstborn belongs to the owner of the
animal.
4 (To the owner of an object belongs
the largest right to it. This is a variant of the
preceding entry.)
also happens to constitute the term/egravedotbelowf/oacutedotbelow,meaning
‘‘vegetable.’’
2. The name Fádíp/egravedotbelow means ‘‘Ifá [the oracle] com-
miserates’’; the name Fájẹb/egravedotbelow means ‘‘Ifá eats stew.’’ The
latter obviously has better claim to the stew.
3. The reference is to the ﬁrst oﬀspring of the
owner’s livestock.
4. People sometimes give animals to others to keep
for them. If any of those animals have oﬀspring, the
ﬁrst is customarily the owner’s to dispose of.


--- PAGE 446 ---
4430. Aṣọtáabáríláraigún,tiigúnni.
Whatever cloth one ﬁnds on the vulture be-
longs to it. (The vulture may lack feathers,
but it does not borrow from other birds.)
4431. Aya/ogravedotbelowlẹlàńgbà,akìígbọmọ/ogravedotbelowlẹ.
It is a lazy person’s wife that one may take;
one may not take a lazy person’s child. (Even
the lazy person has some rights. Compare
4445.)
B
4432. Bíoògùnòbáj/eacutedotbelow,owó/egravedotbelowájíṣ/eacutedotbelow.
If the medicine does not work, the money
expended on it must explain why. (One has
a right to the service one has paid for or an
explanation for the withholding of it.)
E
4433. Eégúnm/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowjókòm/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowjó;yógbaowó
ọjà-ar/egravedotbelow.
Whether the masquerader knows how to
dance or does not, he will receive his market
fee. (People in authority will receive their
reward whether they perform well or ill.)
4434. Èèyànlásánòníg/ogravedotbelowbì;olówóòníìlàrí.
An ordinary person does not have a throne
room; a wealthy man does not have royal
courtiers. (Each position has its proper
privileges.)
4435. Èkútéiléòl/eacutedotbelownubáalákàáwíj/oacutedotbelow.
The house mouse has no mouth to dispute
a case with the owner of the granary. (A
known culprit cannot successfully plead
innocence.)
4436. Èwonìjànínú‘‘Ògúndárèké’’?Ṣebí
Ògúndárèkélóniìrèké-er/egravedotbelow?
Where is the problem in ‘‘Ògúndárèké ’’
[Ògún breaks sugarcane]? Is Ògúndárèké
not the owner of the sugarcane?
5 (One may
do with one’s property as one wishes.)
Ẹ
4437. Ẹjalónibú.
To the ﬁsh belongs the deep. (People should
not be begrudged what is rightfully theirs.)
4438. Ẹl/eacutedotbelownulàḿbikátógbáa.
It is from the owner of the mouth that one
asks leave before one slaps it. (One should
not take liberties with a thing without the
permission of its owner.)
4439. Ẹnitógba/ogravedotbelownà/egravedotbelowbùrúwátaojì:w/oacutedotbelownní
akìígba/ogravedotbelownà/egravedotbelowbùrúwátaojì;óníṣéalègba
/ogravedotbelownàojúlé?W/oacutedotbelownníb/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowni.
A man who came on the sly to confront his
cuckolder was told one does not confront
one’s cuckolder on the sly; he asked if one
could do so frontally and was told, yes. (If
one’s cause is just, one should press it boldly
and openly.)
F
4440. Fúlànílónipàpá-adaran-daran.
To the Fulbe man belongs the cattle-herding
staﬀ. (The objects people favor are good
indicators of their occupations.)
I
4441. ÌranAwúsáníńjẹgórò,ehínap/oacutedotbelown
koko.
5. The proverb is an elaborate pun. The statement
‘‘Ògúndárèké’’ says that the god of iron has broken
the cane. But since the shortened form of the name
Ògúndárèké (which can be a person’s name) is Ògún,
one also says that the person Ògún[dárèké] has broken
a cane. The proverb says Ògúndárèké is the owner of
the sugarcane, in which case, when one says the god has
broken the cane, there is no problem.
Ontherighttopatrimony&property 433


--- PAGE 447 ---
It is the lineage of the Hausa that eats kola
nuts; their teeth are brilliantly red. (In-
herited habits leave their indelible marks.
Compare the next entry.)
4442. ÌranÌbàdànníńjàmàlà;iyánnitÌjèṣà.
It is Ibadan’s lineage that eatsàmàlà;
pounded yams are what the Ìjèṣà eat. (Dif-
ferent people have diﬀerent habits. Compare
the foregoing variant.)
4443. Ìṣ/eacutedotbelowkìímúọkọmúayakómáranọmọ.
Suﬀering does not grip the husband and grip
the wife but spare the child. (The dependent
cannot escape the hardship that befalls his
or her benefactors.)
4444. Ìw/ogravedotbelowfààjọyá,orí/egravedotbelowníńkún.
Ap e r s o np a w n e dt os e v e r a lc r e d i t o r si st h e
one whose hair overgrows. (Everybody’s
responsibility is nobody’s responsibility.)
4445. Ìyàwó/ogravedotbelowlẹlàńgbà,akìígbaọmọ/ogravedotbelowlẹ.
The shiftless man’s wife one may take from
him, but one may not take his children.
(Everybody has some inalienable rights.
Compare 4431.)
K
4446. Kàkàkíekumájẹsèsé ,aﬁṣe à-wà-
dànù.
Rather than leave the yam beans uneaten,
the rat will scatter them. (If one cannot
have access to one’s property, one would
rather destroy it than permit others to have
access.)
4447. KòsíohuntíAlágbaàòl/egravedotbelowṣenígbàl/egravedotbelow
eégún.
There is nothing the Alágbaà cannot do
in the eégungrove. (The person invested
with absolute authority can do as he or she
wishes.)
O
4448. Ohuntówuolówóníńﬁowó/egravedotbelowrà.
It is whatever the wealthy person wishes that
he or she does with his or her money. (One
can do as one wishes with one’s property.)
4449. Ojúkìíp/oacutedotbelownààfáàkómánìít/egravedotbelowsùbáà
kanṣoṣo.
A Muslim priest is never so hard up that
he does not have a solitary string of telling
beads [prayer beads]. (Whatever condi-
tion one may be in, one will always have
something to fall back on.)
4450. Ojúkìíp/oacutedotbelownKurumákómánìíṣíbí
ìjẹunkan.
Ac r e wm a ni sn e v e rs od e s t i t u t et h a th e
does not have a single spoon.
6 (One is never
so destitute as to have absolutely nothing.)
4451. Okotiikún,il/egravedotbelowti/egravedotbelowpà;akìíbáàlùkẹrẹsẹ
duilé-ebaba-ar/egravedotbelow.
The farm is the domain of the squirrel; the
ground is the domain of the groundnut; one
does not dispute its father’s house with the
plant àlùkẹrẹsẹ.(Each person has the right
to enjoy his or her patrimony in peace.)
4452. Olórùkágbòrùka,ọw/oacutedotbelowàwédòfo.
The owner of the ring has taken back his
ring; the ﬁngers of the friend are now empty.
(When the owner takes his property back,
the ﬂaunting of it by the borrower comes to
an end.)
4453. Olówóṣebítòunlàńná.
The rich person thinks it is his money other
people are spending. (The rich would be-
grudge others any money of their own.)
6. Kurumáis the Yoruba rendering of ‘‘crew man,’’
designating a member of the crew on any of the trading
ships that plied the West African coast.
434 rights and responsibilities


--- PAGE 448 ---
4454. Olówóṣebítòunlàńwí;òtòṣìòjẹ
iyanrìn.
The rich person believes that it is he every-
body thinks and talks about, [but] the poor
person does not eat sand. (There are other
people in the world besides the rich, even if
the rich do not think so.)
4455. Òṣùpáòmòdeòtòṣì;bóbádéléọl/oacutedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowá
détèmi.
The moon does not know which yard be-
longs to a poor man; if it reaches a wealthy
man’s abode, it will reach mine also. (With
regard to Nature, all people are equal.)
4456. OyetóbáwunilàńtaIfáẹnipa.
Whatever amount one pleases is what one
demands for one’s Ifá paraphernalia. (One is
at liberty to do as one pleases with what one
owns.)
Ọ
4457. Ọmọàjànàkúkìíyaaràrá;ọmọerínbí
erinníńjọ.
An elephant’s baby will not turn out to be
dwarﬁsh; the baby sired by an elephant re-
sembles nothing but an elephant. (People
take after their parents.)
4458. ỌmọAlákéníńjọbalÁké,ọmọolókoní
ńjọbalóko,àk/oacutedotbelowbíOnjoníńjọbanÍj/egravedotbelowbúÒde.
It is the ﬁrstborn of the Aláké [king of
Ab/eacutedotbelowòkúta] that inherits the throne of Aké;
it is the ﬁrstborn of the farmer who rules
on the farm; it is the ﬁrstborn of Onjo who
inherits the throne at Ìjèbú Òde.
7 (The right
to certain privileges is determined by set
precedence, not at random.)
7. Johnson (76) identiﬁes the Onjo (of Òkèehò) as a
kingling of one of the provinces of the /Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow kingdom,
the /Egravedotbelowkún /Ogravedotbelowtún.
4459. Ọmọalápatà-ájogún/ogravedotbelowbẹ.
The son of the butcher inherits a knife. (One
takes after one’s parent’s trade.)
4460. Ọmọerin-ínjogúnọlá.
An elephant’s child inherits greatness. (One
takes after one’s parents.)
4461. Ọmọẹniìbajọniàbáy/ogravedotbelow;ọmọtíGà/mgrave-
bàríbíokùnniyóran.
Were one’s child to resemble one, one would
rejoice; the child of a Hausa man takes up
the rope-weaving trade. (One always hopes
that one’s oﬀspring will take after one. Com-
pare 4465 and 4466.)
4462. Ọmọ/ogravedotbelowlẹníńlágbára;ọmọalágbáraní
ńlẹ.
The child of a lazy person is usually strong;
the child of a strong person is usually lazy.
(Children often turn out as opposites to
their parents.)
4463. Ọmọtíajíadìẹbí,yójìíadìẹjuìyá/egravedotbelow
lọ.
A child born while the mother is a habitual
chicken stealer will steal chickens even more
compulsively than its mother. (Children
take after their parents. The following is a
variant.)
4464. Ọmọtíap/ogravedotbelownlọyọ/ogravedotbelowmùnù-unkoóko,
yóyọ/ogravedotbelowmùnù-unkoókojuìyá/egravedotbelowlọ.
The child carried on the mother’s back while
the mother plucks young grass proposes to
pluck more young grass than its mother.
(This is a slam at anyone who presumes to
do better than those who enable him or her
to do anything at all. See the previous entry
for comparison.)
4465. Ọmọtíàgb/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowbí,okoniyóro;ọmọtí
Gà/mgravebàríbí,okùnniyóran.
The child sired by a farmer will engage in
farming; the child sired by a Hausa man will
Ontherighttopatrimony&property 435


--- PAGE 449 ---
engage in rope weaving. (People usually take
up their lineage profession. Compare 4461
and the following entry.)
4466. Ọmọtíẹjábíẹjaníńjọ;ọmọtíẹkùn-
únbíẹkùnniyóyà;ọmọtíFúlàníbíokùnni
yóran.
The child spawned by a ﬁsh resembles a
ﬁsh; the child sired by a leopard resembles
a leopard; the child born to a Fulbe per-
son will weave ropes. (One takes after one’s
parents. Compare 4461 and the preceding
entry.)
4467. /Ogravedotbelowtáelésùúsúyókòóti/egravedotbelow.
The enemy of the person in charge of the
saving scheme will collect when his or her
turn arrives. (People’s rights do not depend
on whether one likes them or not.)
Ṣ
4468. Ṣòkòtòníńjogúnìdí;ọmọníńjogún-un
baba.
To the trousers belong the heritage of the
buttocks; to the child belongs the patrimony
of the father. (Children survive and inherit
from their father, just as the trousers survive
and inherit from the buttocks.)
T
4469. Taníḿbáad/eacutedotbelowt/egravedotbelowduońjẹjẹ?
Who would scramble for food in the same
plate with a leper? (People are unlikely to
expose themselves voluntarily to abomina-
tions.)
4470. Taníḿbák/ogravedotbelow-ǹ-k/ogravedotbelowṣ/ogravedotbelowduèlùb/oacutedotbelowkù?
Who would dispute with the sieve the func-
tion of sifting yam ﬂour? (No one can or
should deprive people of what is rightfully
theirs.)
4471. Taníḿbáyímí-yímíduìyípo?
Who would ever wish to take over the dung
beetle’s habit of rolling dung? (There are
certain things one should have no aspiration
whatsoever of achieving.)
4472. Tẹnintẹni,ààtànlólàkísà.
One’s property belongs to one; to the dung
heap belongs the rag. (No one should be-
g r u d g eap e r s o nw h a ti sr i g h t f u l l yh i so r
hers.)
436 rights and responsibilities


--- PAGE 450 ---
On subservience to authority
A
4473. Akìígbèjàèèw/ogravedotbelow;èèw/ogravedotbelowníyógbèjà
ara/egravedotbelow.
One does not ﬁght on behalf of a taboo; the
taboo will ﬁght its own ﬁght. (It is unneces-
sary to try to keep people from committing
crimes; the system will seek out oﬀenders.)
4474. Ayélòyìnbóńjẹkú.
Lifelong luxury is the lot of the white man.
(The white man enjoys nothing but the best
all his life long.)
Ẹ
4475. Ẹnitóbábúọbal/eacutedotbelowhìn,tódójúọbató
sé,/egravedotbelowrùọbalóbà.
The person who insults the king in the
king’s absence and denies doing so in the
king’s presence shows his fear of the king.
(People’s behavior in one’s presence counts
more than their behavior in one’s absence, at
least as an index of their fear. Compare 1378
and 1379.)
4476. Ẹnitógbaọtífúneégún,òunnáàní
ńgbaobìfún/ogravedotbelowgb/egravedotbelowrì.
The person whose oﬃce is to bring wine to
the masquerader is the same who will bring
kola nuts to the novices.
1 (The servant can-
1. The eégúnare attended during their outing by
novices, or the uninitiated. When they visit dignitaries,
they receive gifts: wine for the masqueraders and kola
nuts for the attendants.
not choose whom he or she will serve and
whom he or she will not.)
4477. Ẹnitóránniníṣ/eacutedotbelowlàḿb/egravedotbelowrù,akìíb/egravedotbelowrù
ẹnitíaój/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowẹfún.
One fears the person who sent one with a
message; one does not fear the person to
whom one will deliver it. (The messenger
need not fear the recipient of his or her
message, since he or she is not responsible
for its content; one’s duty is to one’s mas-
ter, not to those one serves on his or her
behalf.)
F
4478. Ibitówu/egravedotbelowfúùfùl/egravedotbelowl/egravedotbelowníńdaríìgb/eacutedotbelowsí;ibi
tówuolówóẹniníńrannilọ.
The stiﬀ breeze bends the bush in whichever
direction it pleases; the person in control
may send one wherever he or she wishes. (A
person under authority has no choice but to
obey the orders of the powers over him or
her.)
Ọ
4479. Ọbalónil/egravedotbelow.
The king is the owner of the land. (There is
no higher authority on earth than the king.)
4480. Ọbaníńgbaowóibodè.
It is the king who receives customs dues.


--- PAGE 451 ---
(The wealth of the community belongs to
the king.)
4481. Ọbaníńjẹọr/ogravedotbelow.
It is the king who enjoys all prosperity. (It is
the king’s lot to prosper.)
4482. Ọbatóniapá/ogravedotbelowtúnlóniapáòsì.
The king who owns the area to the right also
owns the area to the left. (The lord of all has
authority over all.)
438 rights and responsibilities


--- PAGE 452 ---
On just deserts
A
4483. Akìísinnikámánìíàpèjúwe.
One does not escort a traveler and lack a
description. (The helper must be acknowl-
edged and rewarded.)
4484. Ààbàòṣéékànm/oacutedotbelowẹnil/eacutedotbelows/egravedotbelow,àﬁẹnití
ńṣebúburú.
Stakes are not meant for people’s legs, only
for the legs of evildoers. (One who has not
committed an oﬀense does not deserve
punishment.)
4485. Agídípáálíòunìyọnu;akùrẹt/egravedotbelowòunìyà.
Unalloyed obstinacy with its attendant
troubles; lowly birth with its attendant suf-
fering. (Each condition imposes its woes.)
4486. A-gúnyán-sanyánkìíb/egravedotbelowrùòkèlè.
He-who-will-pound-yam-to-repay-
pounded-yam is not bashful about morsels.
(One can be as free as one chooses with a
loan one will repay.)
4487. Àgbàtíkòbádáwó,omitooroọb/egravedotbelowniyó
jẹ.
An elder who does not contribute money
will eat the watery remnants of the stew.
(Nothing goes for nothing.)
4488. Àgbàtíkòmúiṣuwásábàònííjẹiyán
al/eacutedotbelow.
An elder who does not bring yams to the
hut will not eat pounded yams at supper
time. (One may not reap where one has not
sown.)
4489. Agbèf/oacutedotbelowbakìíj/egravedotbelowbifúnun.
The king’s spokesman does not bear the
king’s guilt. (The servant is not liable for the
master’s misdeeds.)
4490. Àìtàniàdánùonígi.
Failure to make a sale is the loss of the ﬁre-
wood seller. (Every exertion is worthwhile as
long as it is rewarded.)
1
4491. Ajákìíkọs/egravedotbelowibisíààtàn;bíkòbátútù
abágbígbẹ.
A dog never encounters an ill omen (like
stubbing its toe) on its way to the dung
heap; if it does not ﬁnd fresh dung there, it
will ﬁnd dry. (Whatever the circumstance,
one cannot be left entirely without some
asset.)
4492. Ajátólọsíléẹkùntób/ogravedotbelow,kákíikúewu.
A dog that goes to a leopard’s home and
returns: one should congratulate it on sur-
viving the ordeal. (One should acknowledge
and praise unusual feats.)
4493. A-jí-ṣeṣ/eacutedotbelow-l/oacutedotbelowd/egravedotbelowd/egravedotbelowníńjẹunjua-jí-gbọn-
enini.
He-who-wakes-in-the-morning-and-works-
1. The proverb plays on the worddá,meaning
‘‘break’’: the ﬁrewood seller goes to the forest to break
dry branches to sell as ﬁrewood. The word also occurs
as one syllable inàdánù,translatable as ‘‘breaking for
nought’’ but meaning ‘‘loss.’’ If the seller makes some
money, he has not lost.


--- PAGE 453 ---
on-the-porch usually eats more than He-
who-wakes-in-the-morning-and-brushes-
against-morning-dew. (Those who have it
easier often also receive the larger rewards.)
4494. Akátájẹyìnóṣuihá;ohunabájẹlà
ńṣu.
The civet cat ate palm fruits and excreted
palm-fruit pericarp; one excretes what one
eats. (One should not be surprised at the
logical consequences of one’s actions.)
4495. Akédeòjẹiyángbígbóná.
The town crier does not eat steaming
pounded yam. (Every obligation has its toll.)
4496. Ak/egravedotbelowsánlòpin/Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow;iléọkọnibìsinmi
obìnrin.
Ak/egravedotbelowsán is the frontier of /Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow; a spouse’s
h o m ei saw o m a n ’ sp l a c eo fr e s t .( J u s ta s
Akẹsan is /Ogravedotbelowyọ’s city limit, so a spouse’s
home is a woman’s ﬁnal destination.)
4497. Aláàárùtíńjẹranńjẹawọorí-ir/egravedotbelow.
Ah i r e dc a r r i e rw h oe a t sm e a te a t ss k i no ﬀ
his skull. (The laborer eats of his sweat; the
laborer with a luxurious taste pays for it with
his sweat. Compare 4499.)
4498. Alákata/mgravepò-óbojúwòkè.
The user of a crossbow casts his eyes upward.
(One’s trade imposes certain behaviors.)
4499. Alápatàtíńjẹran,ẹranorí-ir/egravedotbelowlóńjẹ.
The butcher who eats meat eats the skin oﬀ
his skull. (One eats of one’s labor. Compare
4497.)
4500. Àpáàdì-íbáwọndínàgbàdokòrírún;
ọk/oacutedotbelowtóbáwọnṣáoko-ósùnlébi.
The potsherd makes itself available for pop-
ping corn but gets no share of it; the hoe
that helped to clear the farm sleeps in hun-
ger. (The fate of some is to work so that
others might thrive.)
4501. À-pa-ì-déléòj/eacutedotbelowkám/ogravedotbelowpéológbòńṣọdẹ.
F a i l u r et ob r i n gh o m ei t sk i l ld e n i e st h ec a t
recognition as a hunter. (Secret accomplish-
ments are like no accomplishments at all.
Compare 4688.)
B
4502. Baál/egravedotbelowÌròkò-óyanti/egravedotbelowt/eacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelow;óníbíẹ
r/oacutedotbelowkùnrinẹṣáa;bíẹróbìnrinẹṣáa.
The chief of Ìròkò made his pronouncement
beforehand; he said, ‘‘If you come upon a
man, slash him, and if you come upon a
woman, slash her.’’ (The law does not distin-
guish between man and woman, or between
one oﬀender and another.)
4503. Bíabábuomisórí,óńwáẹs/egravedotbelowb/ogravedotbelow.
If one pours water on one’s head, it comes
looking for the legs. (Actions have their
inevitable consequences; matters will not
be resolved until they have reached their
conclusions.)
4504. Bíabápẹjatán,lébéẹjalaﬁńháẹja
l/eacutedotbelownu.
After killing a ﬁsh, one stuﬀs its tail ﬁn into
its mouth. (An oﬀender furnishes the means
of his or her own punishment.)
4505. Bíaólọnílùú,aómọohuntíńléni.
If one must ﬂee a town, one should know
what is chasing one oﬀ. (One must know the
cause of one’s suﬀering or punishment.)
4506. Bíàrígiṣ/eacutedotbelowgi-íbáṣ/eacutedotbelowgi,oríara-ar/egravedotbelowníńﬁí
rùú.
After the twig-cutting insect cuts twigs, it
carries them on its own head. (The disaster
a person causes descends on his own head.)
4507. Bíegbòòbápaelégbò,kìípaẹnitíńw/egravedotbelow
/eacutedotbelow.
If an ulcer does not kill the person who has
440 rights and responsibilities


--- PAGE 454 ---
i t ,i tw i l ln o tk i l lt h ep e r s o nw h ot r e a t si t .
(Each person suﬀers his or her own woes.)
4508. Bíẹk/oacutedotbelowbáníkókó,kìíṣẹj/oacutedotbelowalágbàdo.
If the corn meal is lumpy, the fault does not
lie with the corn seller. (The person who
furnished the raw material is not responsible
for the ﬂaws of the ﬁnished product.)
4509. Bíìyàwóbáṣojúẹni,tótúnṣ/egravedotbelowhìnẹni,ó
nílátiníèrètíyójẹníb/egravedotbelow.
If a wife honors one’s wishes in one’s pres-
ence and also honors one’s wishes in one’s
absence, some reward is certainly due her.
(The ever-faithful mate deserves some rich
reward.)
4510. Bíowóbátimọnioògùnńmọ.
The limit of the money is the limit of the
medicine. (One gets only as much as one’s
money can buy.)
4511. Bíọm/oacutedotbelowbátirílàńṣeàna-ar/egravedotbelow.
The considerations one oﬀers to the par-
ents and relatives of one’s ﬁancée are always
commensurate with the quality of the ﬁan-
cée. (One oﬀers equal value in exchange for
whatever one procures.)
Ẹ
4512. /Egravedotbelow/egravedotbelowmejìlojúahunńp/oacutedotbelown.
The miser’s eyes redden twice.
2 (One is often
paid back in one’s own coin.)
4513. /Egravedotbelowf/oacutedotbelowkìísún/egravedotbelowf/oacutedotbelows/oacutedotbelowhùn-ún.
Vegetables do not push vegetables out of the
way. (One must respects others’ claims as
one asserts one’s own.)
2. The miser’s eyes redden at the fear that others
wish to share what he or she has; they redden again
when others, remembering that refusal to share, deny
the miser a share of whattheyhave.
4514. /Egravedotbelowgànni‘‘H/egravedotbelow.’’
A sneer is a mere indication of jealousy. (Let
us acknowledge achievements when we see
them and not sneer in envy.)
4515. /Egravedotbelowgànòpékóyinmádùn.
Detraction does not rob honey of its sweet-
ness. (People’s failure to acknowledge one’s
achievements does not detract from their
value; one’s ability to thrive does not depend
on other people’s approval.)
4516. Ẹnídaeérúleérúńt/ogravedotbelow;elételèteńyé;oun
abáṣeníńyéni.
Ashes blow toward the thrower; the plotter
alone knows what he or she is plotting; one
i sp r i v yo n l yt ot h a tw h i c ho n ei si n v o l v e d
in. (Evil recoils on those who plot evil, and
t h o s ew h oa r ev i s i t e dw i t he v i lm u s tk n o w
what actions of theirs caused it. Compare
2485.)
4517. Ẹnífúnnil/eacutedotbelowgbàáòṣeunbíẹniafún.
T h ep e r s o nw h og i v e ss i xp e n c ed e s e r v e sl e s s
praise than the person to whom it is given.
( W h o e v e rg i v e sat r i ﬂ ea sag i f ti sl e s st ob e
valued than the person who accepts such a
gift.)
4518. Ẹnitíabáṣelóoretíkòdúp/eacutedotbelow,bíabáṣe
éníkàkòníídùnún.
The person who shows no gratitude when he
or she is done a favor will feel no hurt when
he or she is done an injury. (Ungrateful
people deserve to be deliberately hurt.)
4519. Ẹnitíakòf/eacutedotbelowlàńgàn.
People we do not like are the ones we sneer
at. (One can always ﬁnd fault with people
one does not like.)
4520. Ẹnitíkòkíni‘‘Kúàb/ogravedotbelow’’-/oacutedotbelowpàdánùú
‘‘Kúule.’’
The person who does not give one ‘‘Wel-
come’’ forfeits the arriving person’s saluta-
Onjustdeserts 441


--- PAGE 455 ---
tion to those already there. (Courtesies and
discourtesies are repaid in kind. Compare
302.)
4521. Ẹnitíkòníyàwókìíbíàbíkú.
A man who has no wife does not father
born-to-die children. (Misfortunes have
their fortunate aspects. Compare 4389.)
4522. Ẹnitóbádẹ/egravedotbelowbìtìkágbóníńpaorí
kágbó.
The person who sets traps all over the for-
est is the one who has to wander all over
the forest. (One will have to live with the
consequences of one’s actions.)
4523. Ẹnitóf/eacutedotbelowniníàf/eacutedotbelowìlówó,iwọníńfúnnijẹ.
A woman who marries one even though one
paid no dowry feeds one nothing but gall.
(One cannot expect much from something
o n ea c q u i r e sf r e eo rt o oc h e a p l y .C o m p a r e
963.)
4524. Ẹnitólẹrúlólẹrù.
The owner of the slave also owns the luggage
[he carries]. (Appendages go with the main
item.)
4525. Ẹnitómọiyì-iwúràlàńtàáfún.
One sells gold only to those who appreci-
ate its value. (Do not squander treasure on
those incapable of appreciating it.)
4526. Ẹnitónaàjànàkúládàánídìíṣeaájò
ajé.
The person who smites an elephant on its
rump with a machete makes at least a ges-
ture toward riches. (However modest the
eﬀort, it should be acknowledged.)
3
3. The person cannot kill the elephant with his puny
blows and therefore will not have it to sell, but he has at
least tried.
4527. Ẹnitópaèèyànniyóruòkú;ẹnitóf/oacutedotbelow
kotoejòniyógbèée.
It is the person who kills another person
who will carry the corpse; it is the person
who breaks the gourd housing a snake who
will carry the snake. (Each person is re-
sponsible for the consequences of his or her
actions.)
4528. ẸnitóríAláké,tíóńyínmú,jorí-joríní
ńjẹ/eacutedotbelow.
Whoever sees Aláké and wrinkles his or her
nose in a sneer has got a worm in his or her
nose.
4 (It is futile to sneer at an illustrious
person.)
4529. Ẹnitóseọb/egravedotbelowtíkòdùn,aníkíòrìṣápa
á;ẹnitíkòsèńk/oacutedotbelow?
The person who makes a stew that is not
delicious, we ask the gods to kill; what about
the person who did not cook anything? (We
should not overreact to other people’s minor
ﬂaws.)
4530. Ẹnitóṣe/ogravedotbelowrànòtùfùníńkíyèsí/egravedotbelowhìnkùlé.
It is a person who has done something that
calls for the torch [light] who must keep
a close watch on his back yard. (If one has
done something underhanded, one has good
reason to be apprehensive.)
4531. Ẹnuasoṣọk/oacutedotbelowkìító/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow.
The mouth of the person whose garment is
a loincloth is never welcome in a discussion.
(A shiftless person has no privileges in the
community.)
4532. /Egravedotbelowpàp/egravedotbelowlúolúwa-ar/egravedotbelowníńfojúwiná.
Both the peanut and its owner will feel the
eﬀects of the ﬁre. (The person belaboring
others will also suﬀer from the exertion.)
4. Alákéis the title of the king of the Ẹgbá.
442 rights and responsibilities


--- PAGE 456 ---
4533. Ẹrantójẹèbùlóníkágbéolówó-or/egravedotbelow
yíl/egravedotbelow.
The goat that ate the yam cut for planting
caused its owner to be ﬂung to the ground.
(One may be blameless and yet be dragged
into trouble by the actions of those one is
responsible for.)
4534. Ẹṣinpòpóòròkìísáréjuẹnitógùnún
lọ.
A cornstalk horse does not gallop faster than
its rider. (The limit of one’s eﬀort is the limit
of one’s reward.)
I
4535. Ibiòjópaigúndé,yóròfúnẹnitó
rán-anníṣ/eacutedotbelow.
The extent to which the rain beat the vul-
ture, it will recount to the person who sent
it on an errand.
5 (The servant has a right
to let his or her master know the hardships
endured in doing the master’s bidding.)
4536. Ìgb/eacutedotbelowlẹtuḿbáeringbé.
The antelope shares the forest with the ele-
phant as its home. (The lowliest creature has
a claim to some space just as the mightiest
has.)
4537. Ìkàamáagbó;ìkàamáat/oacutedotbelow;àtisùnìkà
nikòsunw/ogravedotbelown.
The wicked may live long, and the wicked
may survive long, but the end of the wicked
is never pleasant. (However long the wicked
succeeds, he or she comes to grief in the
end.)
4538. Ìkàòj/eacutedotbelowkíparam/oacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelowódàgbà:ìbágùn
tóọká,ìbágùntóerè;ayógbọ-gbọbíiṣan.
5. See note 72 to 1003 for the traditional vulture
story.
Wickedness kept the night adder from full
development: it would have been as long
as the cobra; it would have been as long as
the python; it would have been as thick as
sinews. (Wickedness takes its toll on the
wicked also.)
4539. Ìkàtè-éforígbùsì;ountíńpẹja-áwà
nísàl/egravedotbelowomi.
The stick to which the ﬁshhook line is tied
receives the curses on its head, but what kills
the ﬁsh is under the surface of the water.
(Sometimes one’s position makes one bear
the blame for others’ misdeeds.)
4540. Ìkòkòtíńseẹyìn,ẹyìnniyóf/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowọ.
The pot used for cooking palm fruits will
be broken by palm fruits in the end. (Those
who live dangerously die dangerously.)
4541. Ikúẹwàníńp/ogravedotbelowkín;ikúara-ríréníńpa
odídẹ.
It is the death of beauty that kills the egret;
it is the death of swaggering that kills the
parrot. (Calling attention to one’s envi-
able assets invites trouble and ultimately
disaster.)
6
4542. Ikúogunníńpaakíkanjú;ikúodòní
ńpaòmùw/egravedotbelow;ikúara-ríréníńpaarẹwà,màjà-
màsáníńpaonítìjú;òwòtádàábám/ogravedotbelowníńká
àdáléhín.
It is death related to warfare that kills the
warrior; it is the death associated with the
river that kills the swimmer; it is the death
attendant on preening that kills the beautiful
person; wondering whether to stand and
ﬁght or run kills the easily embarrassed per-
son; the trade that the cutlass knows knocks
out its teeth. (Each person’s bane is closely
6. The egret and the parrot stand out among birds
for their attractiveness and therefore invite the attention
of humans far more than other birds do.
Onjustdeserts 443


--- PAGE 457 ---
connected to his or her calling. Compare
3918, 4544, and 5190.)
4543. Ikúọmọníńpaayíntal/egravedotbelow.
It is death that comes of having children
that kills the grub. (Some obligations carry
deadly risks with them.)
7
4544. Ikútíyópọdẹḿbẹnínúigbó;ikútíyó
pàgb/egravedotbelowḿbẹl/oacutedotbelowrùnebè;ikútíyópaajókakanfa
ḿbẹl/oacutedotbelowjàtówégèlèga-n-ga.
The death that will kill the hunter is in the
forest; the death that will kill the farmer is
coiled around the heap; the death that will
kill the dancer to thekakanfadrums is in
the market, sporting gargantuan headgear.
(One’s favorite addiction is likely to be one’s
undoing. Compare 3918 and 4542.)
4545. Imúkìítóbikógba/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowẹnusọ.
The nose cannot get so big that it takes the
speech out of the mouth. (No one, however
mighty, may usurp tthe rights of others.)
4546. Ìpínàìṣ/egravedotbelowniyópaaláròká.
The protective mystical force of the innocent
will kill whoever speaks ill about him or her.
(Whoever spreads scandal about an inno-
cent person will answer to the powers of the
universe.)
4547. Ìrànìtà.
Buying determines selling. (How one goes
about acquiring something will determine
one’s manner of expending it or disposing
of it.)
4548. Ìṣ/eacutedotbelowibi,èrèibiátál/eacutedotbelow.
The suﬀering that results from doing evil,
the rewards for doing evil, will last until
7. Ayíntal/egravedotbeloware supposedly grubs that invade the
mud ﬂoors of homes in order to lay eggs; people kill
them because they are a nuisance.
nighttime [i.e., until old age]. (The reward
for wickedness is not ﬂeeting.)
4549. Ìṣòkúniìjogún.
One’s manner of performing the burial de-
termines how one inherits. (One’s claim to
inheritance is dependent on how worthy a
survivor one proves oneself.)
4550. Iṣuẹniníńkiọw/oacutedotbelowẹnibọepo.
It is on account of one’s yams that one’s ﬁn-
gers come to be soiled by palm oil. (Said
when one is forced to endure some indignity
because of the behavior of others close to
one.)
4551. Ìtàataolèlàńtaadóhunm/oacutedotbelow.
The terms with which one sells the thief are
the same as those one applies to the false
accuser. (The thief and the perjurer deserve
the same fate.)
4552. Ìtàdógúnkùsíd/egravedotbelowd/egravedotbelow;ọj/oacutedotbelowẹl/eacutedotbelowsìn-ínk/ogravedotbelowla.
The seventeenth day is at hand; the day [of
reckoning] for the person who deserves ridi-
cule is one day away. (The day approaches
when the shiftless person will be exposed.)
8
4553. Ìtàdógúnlàjọ/Egravedotbelowgbá.
The plenary gathering of the /Egravedotbelowgbá is every
seventeenth day.
9 (The day of reckonning
approaches inexorably.)
4554. Ìwàadìẹníńwípékátuìy/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelow.
It is the chicken’s behavior that caused its
wing feathers to be plucked. (People by their
8. The seventeenth-day sabbath of the gods (day
of worship) calls for elaborate sacriﬁcing and feasting;
on that occasion the shiftless person who lacks the
required means is exposed to public ridicule.
9. In the /Egravedotbelowgbá mutual saving system,èésú,each
person makes his or her contribution at the meeting
that falls every seventeenth day.
444 rights and responsibilities


--- PAGE 458 ---
own habits suggest what restrictions should
be placed on them.)
4555. Ìwàawóníńpeawól/eacutedotbelowtù.
It is the guinea fowl’s behavior that makes
one know it as a guinea fowl.10 (By their
habits shall people be known. Compare
3054.)
4556. Ìw/ogravedotbelowfàẹgbàáàtolúwa-ar/egravedotbelowníńsinẹrú.
The person pawned for 2,000 cowries [six
pence in old British currency] will share the
slave labor with the creditor. (One cannot
expect a great deal of service from some-
thing acquired on the cheap.)
4557. Ìw/ogravedotbelowfàtíkòwáníńj/eacutedotbelowòkú-ùgb/eacutedotbelowlójú
olówó.
The pawn who does not come to work is the
one the creditor regards as a deadbeat. (A
person who does what is expected of him or
her avoids criticism.)
4558. Ìyákà,ọm/oacutedotbelowkàniòwò.
Mother counts and then the child [or daugh-
ter] counts; such is the practice in trading.
(In a joint venture each person involved
must do his or her share.)
4559. Iyándíkókó,kìíṣẹj/oacutedotbelowoníṣu;ọkàámẹrẹ,
kìíṣẹj/oacutedotbelowelélùb/oacutedotbelow.
If the pounded yam is lumpy, the fault does
not belong to the seller of the yams; if the
yam-ﬂour meal is ill cooked, the fault does
not belong to the seller of the yam ﬂour.
(One should not blame those from whom
one obtained materials if in the end one
botched their use.)
4560. Ìyàwótíagbélóṣùagà,tóńﬁiyán
mọlé,Yóbaníb/egravedotbelowlọmọ/egravedotbelowńj/eacutedotbelow.
10. Ẹtùand awóare diﬀerent names for the same
bird.
The wife who was married during the lean
month of May and who plasters pounded
yams on the walls: the child she bears will be
named Her-comeuppance-awaits her. (Said
of nonproducing but wasteful people.)
4561. Iyeajábílajáńṣ/oacutedotbelow.
The dog looks after whatever the number
of pups in its litter. (One is entitled only to
what one owns.)
J
4562. Jagun-jagunníńjẹobì;àgb/egravedotbelowjẹawùsá
ṣẹnuyángí-yángí.
It is the warrior that eats kola nuts; the
farmer eats onlyawùsánuts, which make the
mouth bitter. (To the valiant belong the best
of the spoils; the rest get only the leavings.)
K
4563. Káﬁinúṣèkà,káfòdeṣòót/oacutedotbelow,kan-kan
larańnini;ohuntíḿbinikònííṣàìbiniwò.
If one is kind outwardly but secretly wicked,
one is beset by unease; whatever is supposed
to call one to account will not fail to do so.
(Wickedness, however well concealed, will
not go unpunished.)
4564. Kàkàkáﬁọmọoyèjoyè,w/oacutedotbelownńwáọmọ
aṣ/eacutedotbelowwé.
Instead of placing the legitimate heir on
the throne, they go in search of the son of a
seller of leaves. (Said of people who bypass
gems in preference for pebbles.)
4565. Kíikúmápaẹnitíńdánilóro;kíòrìṣà
máj/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowkíǹkanṣeẹnitíńṣeèèyànníkà;bóp/eacutedotbelow
títíoríẹniadáni.
May death not take the person who deprives
one of the things one needs; may the gods
Onjustdeserts 445


--- PAGE 459 ---
not permit anything to happen to the per-
son who does wicked things to one; sooner
or later one’s head will vindicate one. (One
should let evil people do their evil without
seeking revenge; eventually they will reap
what they have sown.)
4566. Kòtètèdéòníítètèlọ;ẹniòtètèdáyéò
níítètèlọs/oacutedotbelowrun.
The person who was not early in arriving
will not be early in departing; the person
who did not come into this world early will
not go early to heaven. (Older people should
die before younger ones.)
L
4567. Láḿb/eacutedotbelowlèyàgbàdolókokáwágbáìbejì
lójúnílé?
Because a monkey cut some corn on the
f a r m ,c a no n es l a pat w i ni nt h eh o u s e ?( O n e
cannot punish a person for another per-
son’s crimes, however closely the two may
be related.)
11
M
4568. Másọ/oacutedotbelowlóﬁn,òﬁnníńsọara/egravedotbelow.
Do not lay down the law; the law will lay
itself down. (One does not need to be a vigi-
lante for the wrongdoer to come to grief.)
4569. Méjìkìíko/ogravedotbelowb/eacutedotbelowmu;bíkòbárímuyórìí
tà;bíkòbárítàyórìímu.
Two misfortunes will not befall a palm-wine
tapster; if there is not enough to drink, there
will be enough to sell; if there is not enough
to sell, there will be enough to drink. (Every
11. The Yoruba usually refer to twins as ẹdun, the
name for the colobus monkey, believing in an aﬃnity
between twins and that animal;láḿb/eacutedotbelowis another name
for the same animal.
misfortune has its consolation. Compare the
next entry.)
4570. Méjìniìl/egravedotbelowkùn;bíkòṣísínúaṣísóde;bí
kòtìsínúatìsóde.
Doors come in two diﬀerent dispositions; if
they do not open inward, they will open out-
ward; if they do not shut inward, they will
shut outward. (One always has an option
in the face of any diﬃculty. Compare the
preceding entry.)
4571. M/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowgún,m/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowt/egravedotbelow,oníṣulóniyán.
One may be an expert at pounding and
mashing, but the pounded yam belongs to
the owner of the yams. (The owner’s claim is
always superior to the helper’s.)
N
4572. Níọj/oacutedotbelowtíìjímèrè-ébáﬁojúkanAláàpíni
l/ogravedotbelowràninú/egravedotbelowńtán.
The day the brown monkey meets the
Aláàpíni [head of the egúngúncult] is the
day all his troubles will end. (Whenever one
encounters one’s savior, one’s troubles are
over.)
12
O
4573. Obìnrinkìígbaowóàlètánkónígìnìsà
ńṣeòun.
A woman does not take a lover’s money
and then complain of menorrhagia. (One
should perform obligations for which one
has received payment.)
4574. Obìnrínńdágbèsèaníkábawí,ẹní
tọmọ/egravedotbelownikáwò;èyítíńyáìw/ogravedotbelowfàfúnọkọ/egravedotbelow
ḿbíìtìigibí?
12. The assumption is that there is a secret pact
between the brown monkey and theeégún(egúngún)
cult.
446 rights and responsibilities


--- PAGE 460 ---
A woman keeps incurring debts, and we
propose to caution her; you advise that we
consider only the fact that she has borne
some children; does the one [wife] who pro-
cures pawns for her husband give birth to
logs of wood? (A person’s performance of a
certain duty does not relieve him or her of
responsibility in all other regards.)
4575. Òfòlomi/egravedotbelowf/oacutedotbelowńṣe.
To be tossed away is the fate of the liquid
squeezed from vegetables.
13 (An expression
that the person addressed or referred to is
fated for destruction, or a curse or wish to
the same eﬀect.)
4576. Ogunníńṣiẹnimú;èpèkìíṣiẹnijà.
A war might capture a person by mistake;
a curse never aﬀects one by mistake. (More
often than not one’s misfortunes are the
clear results of curses, not simply happen-
stance.)
4577. Ohunìdílàńtàraìdí;bóbìnrínbágba
owóàlèaﬁràl/egravedotbelowk/egravedotbelowsídìí.
It is something that pertains to the buttocks
that one sells to buy buttocks; if a woman
receives money from her paramour, she uses
it to buy beads for her waist. (The proﬁt
from a venture should go to promoting that
venture.)
4578. Ohuntíasọsíwájúlàḿbá;ohuntía
gbìnlàńwà;nígbàt íaòsọsíwájú,tíaògbìn
s/eacutedotbelowhìn,kílaóbàá?
Whatever one throws ahead is what one
comes upon; whatever one plants is what
one reaps; when one does not throw any-
thing ahead and does not plant anything,
what can one expect to ﬁnd later? (One can
expect no proﬁt without investment.)
13. This is a reference to the cooking practice of
parboiling vegetables and squeezing them dry before
using them for stew.
4579. Ohuntíawálàńrí.
One ﬁnds what one seeks. (Whatever befalls,
it has most likely been invited.)
4580. Ohuntódélóníkáwááwoòun.
It is the phenomenon that occurred which
summoned people to come witness it. (If
something did not attract people’s attention,
they would not assemble to watch it.)
4581. Ojúàánútif/oacutedotbelowtìkàlókù.
Merciful eyes have gone blind; only wicked
o n e sr e m a i n .( T h et i m ef o rm e r c yi sp a s t ;
now is the time for hardheartedness.)
4582. Ojúkìíríarẹwàkómákìíi.
The eyes never see a beautiful person with-
out acknowledging him or her. (Things that
deserve one’s attention should receive it.)
4583. Ojúkìítiọkọkómábàáìyàwó/egravedotbelows/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow.
A husband can never be so bashful that he
cannot speak to his wife. (However reti-
cent one might be, some duties one must
perform.)
4584. Ojúníńyin-nik/eacutedotbelownióṣèmín-ìn.
It is the eyes that praise one and cause one
to do even better. (Approving eyes are an
encouragement to do even better.)
4585. Ojúolókolàgbàdóṣeńgbó.
The corn matures in the presence of the
farmer. (An incantation or a prayer that
the fruition of one’s eﬀorts will happen in
one’s lifetime. Compare the next entry and
4088.)
4586. Ojúoníkànnikàn-ánṣeńw/egravedotbelowwù/egravedotbelowj/egravedotbelow.
It is in the presence of the locust-bean
planter that the locust bean puts on a cloth
of blood [or ripens]. (One will know of the
consequences of one’s actions. Compare the
preceding entry and 4088.)
Onjustdeserts 447


--- PAGE 461 ---
4587. Òkúkúaníkáwáoúnjẹfúnàwọn
ọmọdéilé;àgbàilélópaábí?
Ap e r s o nd i e s ,a n dt h ec o n c e r ni se x p r e s s e d
that the young ones of the household be fed;
are the elders of the household responsible
for the death? (In a disaster one should be
mindful of the needs of all concerned, not
only of the youngest, the weakest, or the
most helpless.)
4588. Okùn-únmúẹl/eacutedotbelowdà.
The noose has caught a trickster. (A person
is hoist with his own petard.)
4589. Olókùnrùntójẹiyánogójì,tòuntiwọn
níńreogun.
The invalid who eats pounded yams worth
40 cowries: both he and the warriors will
head for the war. (One cannot have a healthy
appetite and also complain of ill health.)
4590. Omikìíw/oacutedotbelownkámáﬁfúnòdemu.
Water is never so scarce that one does not
give some to the outdoor earth to drink.
(However hard up one is, one will do those
things that are essential.)
4591. Onídìígègèrèniyógbaẹgbàá;ohunẹ
báríẹféléegun.
The person with a hefty backside is the one
w h od e s e r v e s2 , 0 0 0c o w r i e s[ s i xp e n c e ] ;
whatever else you can aﬀord, give it to the
bony person. (The better-endowed woman
is the one to spend money on.)
4592. Oníyàniyójẹèyítójù.
The person who earned the punishment
will bear most of it. (The person respon-
sible for a problem will suﬀer most of its
consequences.)
4593. Òòj/oacutedotbelowlàńṣuimíàgbagbà.
The shit from a plantain meal comes on the
same day. (The consequences for certain
actions are virtually immediate.)
4594. Orí/egravedotbelowlókúntíàḿbáafáa.
It is his head that has grown bushy and that
we are helping him to groom. (It is because
a person has erred that he is being lectured
f o rh i so w ng o o d . )
4595. Orílab/eacutedotbelow;àyàlalà;ibitíoríbáwániyó
bàálọ.
The head is what was severed; the chest
is what was split open; the manner of the
head’s coming will be the manner of its
going. (The condition in which a person be-
comes involved in a venture will determine
the way he emerges at the end of it.)
14
4596. Oríòpómù:ók/oacutedotbelowajál/oacutedotbelowdẹ;ajámọdẹtán
ópaorí/ogravedotbelowbọjẹ.
The monkey’s fortune: he taught the dog
hunting; the dog became adept at hunting
and killed the monkey for food. (A person
one has helped may turn around to plot
one’s destruction.)
4597. Òròmọ-adìẹòlènùkíeégúngbaòbúkọ.
A young chick that goes missing cannot
thereby justify the presentation of a he-goat
to the masquerader as replacement. (The re-
placement or compensation for a thing must
be commensurate with that thing.)
Ọ
4598. /Ogravedotbelowgánioníjó,/ogravedotbelowgániarìnnà,/ogravedotbelowgániàtè
tómúẹyẹl/eacutedotbelows/egravedotbelowtíkòlèlọ.
The dancer is honorable; the wayfarer is
honorable; also honorable is the birdlime
that catches a bird and prevents it from
ﬂying oﬀ. (Anybody who performs a com-
mendable feat deserves honor.)
14. The reference to beheading and chest split-
ting suggests criminality and, thus, that the person’s
criminal propensities will lead him to a terrible end.
448 rights and responsibilities


--- PAGE 462 ---
4599. /Ogravedotbelowgátà,/ogravedotbelowgáòtà,owóaláàárùápé.
Whether the master’s wares sell or not, the
porter’s fees must be paid in full. (Whether
you use the services well or not, the pro-
vider’s fee must be paid. See the next entry.)
4600. /Ogravedotbelowg/oacutedotbelowtà,/ogravedotbelowg/ogravedotbelowòtà,owóaláàárùápé.
Whether the foolish trader proﬁts or not,
the porter’s fees must be paid in full. (One’s
folly will not absolve one of obligations. See
the preceding entry.)
4601. Ọj/oacutedotbelowgbogbonitolè,ọj/oacutedotbelowkannitolóhun.
Every day belongs to the thief; one day be-
longs to the owner. (The evildoer may enjoy
prolonged success, but the day he is exposed
is the one that matters.)
4602. /Ogravedotbelowk/ogravedotbelowṣ/eacutedotbelowògbàjẹ.
A person who refuses to run errands does
not receive gifts of food. (Never expect
rewards if you never oﬀer help.)
4603. /Ogravedotbelowk/ogravedotbelowṣ/eacutedotbelowòmọìpèbúburú,kòmọìpèrere.
A shirker does not know which summons
will be taxing and which will be reward-
ing. (People who will answer no call cannot
know which is proﬁtable.)
4604. Ọmọkìíforípẹkànkómúbàbá/egravedotbelowdání;
iyeọmọlọmọḿmúlọ.
A child does not emerge from a womb with
its father in tow; the child emerges all by
itself. (A child who gets in trouble cannot
depend on his father to bear the conse-
quences.)
4605. Ọmọọbatókúl/Oacutedotbelowy/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowòl/eacutedotbelowj/oacutedotbelow;ọmọọbató
kúníbòmírànloníaápọn.
The prince’s death in /Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow entails no dif-
ﬁculty; it is the prince’s death elsewhere
that demands explanations.
15 ( I fam a t t e r
15. The Aláàﬁn(king) of /Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow is preeminent among
all Yoruba rulers. If an /Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow prince dies outside of /Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow,
in one’s charge goes wrong, one cannot be
blamed, so long as one was doing as one was
supposed to do.)
4606. Ọmọtóna/Ogravedotbelowy/egravedotbelowkúńlátiríìjàOgbè.
A child that whips /Ogravedotbelowy/egravedotbelowkú will undoubt-
edly face repercussion from Ogbè.
16 (Never
victimize a person who has a powerful
champion.)
4607. Ọmọdékìíwọokoèèsìkómájo.
Ac h i l dd o e sn o tv e n t u r ei n t oab u s ho f
stinging nettles and escape being stung.
(One cannot escape the consequences of
one’s actions.)
4608. Ọtípani,oòrúnpab/ogravedotbelowtí;orótíadáọkà
lọkàńdánisan.
Wine intoxicates people; the sun beats down
on the malt; the suﬀering that people in-
ﬂicted on the corn is what the corn is aveng-
ing.
17 (When one suﬀers, one is accounting
for an earlier misdeed.)
4609. Ọw/oacutedotbelowkékerélaﬁńgbańlá.
It is with a small hand that one provokes a
big one. (A weakling should take care not
to attract the attention of a bully through
provocative behavior.)
4610. Ọw/oacutedotbelowkìíp/eacutedotbelowníhòàkèekèe,àﬁbíaòbá
báanílé.
The hand does not stay long in a scorpion’s
hole unless the scorpion is not at home.
(Unless he is somehow incapacitated, a
vindictive person does not delay before ex-
tracting vengeance; unless the world has
the ruler of the place where the event occurs will surely
feel some anxiety.
16. /Ogravedotbelowy/egravedotbelowkú is one of the junior headings of the Ifá
corpus, whereas Ogbè is the senior heading.
17. The ingredients for making malt liquor are dried
in the sun in the process.
Onjustdeserts 449


--- PAGE 463 ---
turned upside down, retribution for certain
oﬀenses is swift.)
T
4611. TàkútéỌl/oacutedotbelowrun,kòs/eacutedotbelownitíkòlèmú;bó
májá,am/eacutedotbelowran,asìmúadìẹòkókó.
No one is beyond being caught in God’s
mousetrap; it catches the dog, catches
the goat, and catches even the strapping
chicken. (No one is beyond God’s judg-
ment.)
450 rights and responsibilities


--- PAGE 464 ---
Truisms
six


--- PAGE 465 ---



--- PAGE 466 ---
Miscellany
A
4612. Àbám/ogravedotbelowakòṣeé;aṣétánódiaápọn.
Had one known, one would not have done
it; having been done, it becomes a bother.
(If one knew what the consequences of cer-
tain actions would be, one would avoid
them, but hindsight does not diminish the
consequences. See 3481.)
4613. Àbáríkàdárà,kederelàbáróhuntí
ńṣeni.
Were one able to discern what lot one had
chosen, plainly would one see the source of
one’s problems.
1 (Clairvoyance removes all
mystery from one’s misfortune).
4614. Àbásọpéominiyóseẹjajinná,àpé
ir/oacutedotbelow.
Had anyone said that water would cook ﬁsh,
one would have argued the opposite. (Water
is the natural medium for ﬁsh; who would
have thought that it could also be the death
of ﬁsh?)
4615. Ab/oacutedotbelowikel/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow/ogravedotbelowtún,aﬁbọọw/oacutedotbelowòsì;l/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow
l/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelownikéwà.
One removes an ivory bangle from one’s
right wrist and slips it onto the left wrist; for
all that, the bangle remains on one’s wrist.
(The gesture or eﬀort has not signiﬁcantly
altered the status quo ante.)
1. The underlying idea here is the Yoruba belief that
each person chooses at creation what lot he or she will
endure in life but that the information is deleted from
the person’s memory at birth.
4616. Abúológbònía-b/egravedotbelowr/egravedotbelowk/eacutedotbelow-kangiri;aha
pur/oacutedotbelowm/oacutedotbelowọ?
We insult the cat as being bulge-cheeked;
do we misspeak? (The insult is a justiﬁed
description of a cat.)
4617. Akìídéìgbàroèṣíkáf/eacutedotbelowohunokòókù.
One does not get to last year’s farm and not
ﬁnd things worth 20 cowries. (One cannot
become so destitute that one is left with
absolutely nothing. Compare 1659 and
2183.)
4618. Akìídéiléarúgból/oacutedotbelowf/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelow.
One does not go to an old person’s home for
nothing. (Nothing in life is free.)
4619. Akìídéiléikúkáf/eacutedotbeloworíkù;bíaòbá
tútù,aóbàágbígbẹ.
One does not get to Death’s home and fail to
ﬁnd heads; if one does not ﬁnd fresh ones,
one will ﬁnd dry ones. (The sole custodian
of a commodity is unlikely to experience a
lack of it.)
4620. Akìídẹigbókápẹja;akìígb/oacutedotbelownodò
kápaàfè.
One does not hunt in the bush and kill ﬁsh;
one does not drain a river and kill a grass
mouse. (Some occurrences would be impos-
sible and unexpected in certain places.)
4621. Akìídóọkọdágbèsè;ọmọlaﬁḿbí.
One does not make love to a person and
get into debt; it is childbirth that results. (A


--- PAGE 467 ---
routine and pleasurable activity should not
lead to disaster.)
4622. Akìídùnyùngbàkáﬁwéìbòsíìgárá.
One does not make a joyful noise that can
be compared to the alarm that announces
a theft. (Joyousness should express itself
diﬀerently from disaster.)
4623. Akìíﬁojoojúm/oacutedotbelowr/oacutedotbelowkọẹni;ọmọẹnikìí
níọbàkan.
One does not see one’s husband every day;
one’s child does not have a half-brother.
(Never expect the impossible.)
4624. Akìígbélémọẹniogúnpa.
One cannot remain at home and know
who has been killed in battle. (There is no
knowledge like ﬁrsthand knowledge.)
4625. Akìígbélémọoguntíòníídùn.
One does not stay at home and know which
battle will be unpleasant. (Only an eye-
witness knows the truth of an aﬀair.)
4626. Akìígbinàlùb/oacutedotbelowsàkóhu/egravedotbelowf/oacutedotbelow.
One does not plant onions and have [the
ground] yield spinach. (What one plants is
what one reaps.)
4627. Akìígb/oacutedotbelowbúburúl/eacutedotbelownuAbọrẹ.
One never hears evil from the mouth of
Abọrẹ. (Only good issues from the mouths
of the gods.)
2
4628. Akìíháẹrankíòróòromágbati/egravedotbelow.
One does not butcher and share out an ani-
mal’s meat without the gallbladder taking its
share. (Never seek to do rightful claimants
out of what they deserve.)
4629. Akìíjálórí/ogravedotbelowpẹkátúnjọbanísàl/egravedotbelow.
One does not fall from atop a palm tree and
2. Abọrẹ is a god worshiped in Ile Ifẹ.
then become a king below. (One does not
reap glory from disgrace.)
4630. Akìíjànígbóráhùnọpa.
One does not ﬁght in the bush and lament a
lack of sticks. (There can be no drought in a
deluge.)
4631. Akìíjẹaládùnméjìp/ogravedotbelow.
One does not enjoy two pleasures at the
same time. (One cannot have everything at
once.)
4632. Akìíjẹejòkájẹogúninú/egravedotbelow.
One does not eat a snake and eat the un-
born snakes inside it. (It is not done to have
an aﬀair with a mother and also with her
daughter.)
4633. AkìíjẹméjilábàÀlàdé;ẹníjẹyánò
gbọd/ogravedotbelowjẹṣu.
One does not eat two things on Àlàdé’s
farm; whoever eats pounded yams may not
eat yams. (One must choose among alterna-
tives, not have everything. See the following
variant.)
4634. AkìíjẹméjìlókoN `tọfà;ẹníbájẹyánkì
íjẹ/egravedotbelowkọ;ẹníbájẹiṣukìíjẹàmàlà.
One does not eat two things on N` tofà’s farm;
the person who eats pounded yams may not
eat corn-meal loaf; whoever eats yams may
not eat yam-ﬂour loaf. (One cannot have all
amenities. Compare the preceding entry.)
4635. Akìíjẹòkèlèléríòkèlè.
One does not eat one morsel [or mouthful]
atop another. (Do things at a seemly pace,
not in a rushed manner.)
4636. Akìíkóimítánkótúnmáarùn.
One does not remove excrement and yet en-
dure its stink. (Once a problem is resolved,
there should be an end to its attendant bad
blood.)
454 truisms


--- PAGE 468 ---
4637. Akìílápá-abàbákámánìítiìyá.
One does not have relatives on the father’s
side and not have relatives on the mother’s.
(There is complementarity in all things.)
4638. Akìíríewúl/oacutedotbelowsàn-án.
One does not see the nocturnal bush rat at
high noon. (Everything at its proper time.)
4639. Akìíríidàl/oacutedotbelowrùneṣinṣin.
One does not see a sword at the neck of a
ﬂy. (It is unnecessary to use a sledge ham-
m e rt ok i l laﬂ y .A l s o ,s o m ea p p r o a c h e sa r e
improper in tackling certain problems.)
4640. Akìíríkékeréẹkùn.
One never sees an insigniﬁcant leopard.
(Never minimize any danger.)
4641. Akìírorerekámárobúburú.
One does not think of the good without
thinking also of the bad. (There is not good
without evil.)
4642. AkìíṣeméjìníM/eacutedotbelowkà:akìíkírunní
M/eacutedotbelowkà,kátúnnájàníM/eacutedotbelowkà.
One does not do two things in Mecca: one
does not worship in Mecca [performing
the hadj] and also trade in Mecca. (Always
concentrate on one major project at a time.)
4643. Akìít/egravedotbelowhìnakiṣalẹwúre.
One cannot make good-luck charms without
the akiṣalẹplant. (No venture can succeed in
the absence of the condition most essential
for its success.)
4644. Akìíwáyékámádanǹkan;ounaó
dàlaòm/ogravedotbelow.
One does not come into this world without
becoming something; what one does not
know is what one will become. (Everybody
has a future, but no one knows what it is
ahead of time.)
4645. Àńdíni,kòdùnniàńwípéadì/eacutedotbelowní
itanm/eacutedotbelowta.
It is when one fries a chicken but it does
not taste good that one says it had three
thighs. (A bad cook quarrels with his ingre-
dients.)
4646. Aníkájẹìr/ogravedotbelowkórọni,ótúnńfúnni
l/oacutedotbelowrùn.
We decide to eatìr/ogravedotbelowso that one might enjoy
some ease, and yet one chokes on it.
3 (What
one turns to for relief can turn out to be the
source of more diﬃculties.)
4
4647. Aòmọibioríḿbáẹs/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowrè.
No one knows where the head will ac-
company the feet. (The future is hidden
from us.)
5
4648. Aòmọiṣutíyók/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowhìnọgbà.
No one knows which yam will be the last in
the barn. (Parents do not know which child
will survive them.)
4649. Apaìgbínaòbá /egravedotbelowp/oacutedotbelown;apaìr/egravedotbelowaòkan
/egravedotbelowj/egravedotbelow.
W ek i l las n a i lb u tﬁ n dn or e dm a t t e r ;w ek i l l
a cricket and ﬁnd no blood.
6 (One cannot
expect to get blood out of a turnip; not all
creatures are alike.)
3. Ìr/ogravedotbelow,a meal made by steaming ground and sea-
soned corn, is also known asàbàrí.
4. The proverb features a play on the name of the
food, because its second syllable,r/ogravedotbelow,means ‘‘soft’’ or
‘‘be soft’’ (i.e., softness or ease).
5. Oríin this instance is again not the physiologi-
cal head but the repository of a person’s destiny. The
proverb, despite its wording, actually means that no
one knows where oríwill guide or conduct the feet. It
can, of course, also be used to suggest that althoughorí
directs one’s destiny, it is the feet that do the walking,
and they may conductoríwherever it suits them.
6. Neither a snail nor a cricket has red blood. The
suggestion is that one is disappointed at not ﬁnding
what one expended considerable eﬀort in seeking.
Miscellany 455


--- PAGE 469 ---
4650. Aríèèm/ogravedotbelowlÉréko;ajáw/egravedotbelowwùóróṣọ.
We saw an abomination at Eréko: a dog
wore a blouse and wore a wrapper around
its waist.
7 (The world is full of wonders.)
4651. At/eacutedotbelowníbẹẹrẹkòsíoǹdá;apàjùbàbẹẹrẹ
kòsíoǹkọ.
We spread the divination mat wide, but
there is no client; we clear the ﬁeld for plant-
ing, but there is no tiller. (Some human
aspirations come to nought.)
4652. Atiokoìrokodeokoìrokòtò.
We have gone from hoeing a farm to hoe-
ing a gully. (Matters have gone from bad to
worse.)
4653. Àbálél/ogravedotbelowrànìpil/egravedotbelowḿbáògiri.
It is one after the other that problems of
foundation-building befall walls. (Problems
have a way of piling on one another.)
8
4654. Àbàtàbútúojú/ogravedotbelowrunòhukoríko.
The wide expanse of the sky grows no grass.9
(Certain things can never be.)
4655. Ab/egravedotbelowb/egravedotbelowníḿbẹikú;ab/egravedotbelowb/egravedotbelowníḿbẹ/ogravedotbelowràn;
bioorúbámú,ab/egravedotbelowb/egravedotbelowníḿb/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelow.
It is an intercessor that pleads with death;
it is an intercessor that pleads with trouble;
when one is beset with sweat, it is a fan that
intercedes for one.
10 (There is a means of
d e a l i n gw i t ha n ys o r to fd i ﬃ c u l t y . )
7. Eréko is a market ward in Lagos. It is tempting to
suspect that the reference is to the covers that colonial
British people placed on their dogs in the relatively
chilly periods of the tropics. No African, certainly,
would dream of clothing a dog.
8. The mud for building foundations is piled up
with a hoe, one scoop after the other. The comment is
that one’s troubles pile up one atop the other. In incan-
tations this would be a curse that troubles pile up on
someone.
9. Àbàtàbútúis an onomatopoeic suggestion of
vastness.
10. This proverb plays on the wordab/egravedotbelowb/egravedotbelow,which
4656. Ab/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowb/oacutedotbelowl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowad/eacutedotbelowt/egravedotbelowódète;/ogravedotbelowránbal/egravedotbelowó
dèrò.
A needle drops from a leper’s hand and
presents an impossible problem; a grievous
matter hits the ground and imposes deep
contemplation. (Certain problems defy easy
solution.)
4657. Abiyamọlómọw/oacutedotbelow/ogravedotbelowjá.
It is a nursing mother that is adept at tying
the child-support strip. (One cannot beat an
e x p e r ta th i so rh e rt r a d e . )
4658. Adùn-únṣebíàlejòomi.
Painless hospitality, like one requiring only
the oﬀering of water. (A good deed that en-
tails hardly any cost is easily and cheerfully
performed.)
4659. Afàkàràj/egravedotbelowkọ,óníòúngbéatamì.
He-who-eats-corn-meal-with-bean-fritters
says he has swallowed pepper. (Every ven-
ture has its hazards.)
11
4660. Àf/eacutedotbelowdànùnitìyàngbò.
To-be-blown-away-in-the-wind is the fate of
fallen leaves. (The person this incantational
proverb is directed at will not escape an evil
fate, just as fallen leaves cannot avoid being
blown about by the wind.)
4661. Af/eacutedotbelowf/eacutedotbelowlẹlẹòj/eacutedotbelowkágbéoríigi;àgbàráòjò
òj/eacutedotbelowkágbéil/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelow.
Turbulent winds dissuade one from living
a t o pat r e e ;ﬂ a s hﬂ o o d sd i s s u a d eo n ef r o m
living on the ground. (Life oﬀers no risk-free
options.)
means ‘‘fan’’ but also ‘‘one who pleads’’ or ‘‘intercessor.’’
The second meaning comes from the formation of the
word as a(one who) b/egravedotbelow(begs, a peculiar rendition of
‘‘makes’’)/egravedotbelowb/egravedotbelow(plea).
11. The dish àkàrà,bean fritters, usually includes
chopped hot peppers—sometimes whole ones.
456 truisms


--- PAGE 470 ---
4662. Af/egravedotbelowf/oacutedotbelowjiyándiimíir/egravedotbelowládìrẹ.
A person who eats pounded yam with
vegetable stew makes batik of his or her
excrement.
12 (No action is without its conse-
quences.)
4663. Afínjúegbòníńgbaewéiyá;àgbàlagbà
egbòníńgba/egravedotbelowgb/egravedotbelowsì;/ogravedotbelowkánjúwàegbòníḿmúni
nísan-sanojúgun.
It is the elite among ulcers that is treated
with iyáleaves;
13 it is a venerable ulcer that
develops urticaria; it is a covetous ulcer that
aﬄicts one right at the front of one’s shin.
(Ailments came in diﬀerent forms.)
4664. Àfowór/oacutedotbelowwólaláròób/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowﬁlà;àfowór/oacutedotbelowwó
sìlaláròób/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowﬁdígbèsè.
It is by reinvesting his proﬁts that the retailer
makes his fortune; it is also by reinvesting
his proﬁts that the retailer gets into debt.
(Commerce is subject to uncertainty and
luck.)
4665. Àgùntànkìíy/ogravedotbelowwo.
Sheep never sprout horns. (Certain things
can, and should, never be.)
4666. Àgbà-ì-kàlolèńgbowó.
Snatching-without-counting is the way a
thief takes money. (The evildoer seldom has
peace of mind.)
4667. Agbáríònímùdùn-múdùn.
The skull has no marrow. (One cannot get
blood out of a turnip.)
4668. Àgbásímúààtàngélé.
Constant addition of garbage makes a
mountain of the garbage dump. (Little
things add up.)
12. Pounded yam remnants will emerge whitish;
vegetable stew remnants will emerge blackish.
13. African Copaibabalsam (see Abraham 352).
4669. Àgbélém/ogravedotbelowkanòsí;awoníńsọfúnni.
There is no medicine that enables one to
know, without leaving home, what is taking
place abroad; only compacts [with those
who know] enlighten one. (There is no
substitute for being there.)
4670. Àgbérólọmọdéńgbéagà;àkànm/oacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelowni
tièèkàn;bíabágbéọmọodóàfìdí-ir/egravedotbelowsọ.
It is upright that a youth carries a ladder; it
is straight into the ground that one drives a
stake; when one lifts a pestle, one stands it
straight on the ground. (The proper way to
hold something is erect.)
14
4671. Àgb/egravedotbelowgbinohungbogbomágbiniy/ogravedotbelow.
A farmer plants everything but not salt.
(Desirable as salt is, one cannot grow it.)
4672. Àgb/egravedotbelowlódájàsíl/egravedotbelow;ọmọodókìíluìyá-a
r/egravedotbelowlásán.
It was the farmer that sowed dissension
between them; the pestle would otherwise
have no cause to beat the mortar.
15 (Circum-
stances often force actions that one would
rather avoid.)
4673. Àgb/egravedotbelownibabaoníṣòwò.
The farmer is the father of the trader. (No
profession is as venerable as farming.)
4674. Àgb/egravedotbelowòmokoàrolà;oníṣòwòòmọọjà
ànáp/egravedotbelowkún.
A farmer does not know which planting will
bring prosperity; a trader does not know
which transaction will be his last. (No one
knows the future.)
14. This is actually an incantation to make some-
one stand still, rooted to a spot, although it has its
proverbial application.
15. The name for pestle isọmọodó, literally ‘‘the
child of the mortar’’; in Yoruba society, of course, it
is practically taboo for a child to beat its parent. The
farmer planted the yam or corn that needs pounding.
Miscellany 457


--- PAGE 471 ---
4675. Àgbìgbòlọbaẹyẹ.
The hornbill is the king of birds. (Some
people are superior to others.)
4676. Àgbòdúdúkọjáodòódifunfun.
The black ram crosses the river and becomes
white.16 (Propitious events can drastically
change a person’s fortunes for the better.)
4677. Agb/oacutedotbelownńs/eacutedotbelow;oyinńs/eacutedotbelow;ojúọmọolókoló
wúyìí.
The wasp denies responsibility; the bee de-
nies responsibility; yet here is the farmer’s
son with his eyes all swollen. (A crime has
obviously been committed, yet all possible
culprits deny responsibility.)
4678. Ahéréníńk/eacutedotbelowhìnoko;ààtànníńk/eacutedotbelowhìn
ilé.
At the demise of the farm the hut survives;
at the demise of the house the garbage dump
survives. (When the ephemeral is gone, the
permanent remains.)
4679. Àìfáríkìíṣe/ogravedotbelowbọnítúúlu;àìjẹunlèèw/ogravedotbelow-
ọr/egravedotbelow.
Want of a shave is no headache to the mon-
key; it is want of food that it cannot abide.
(Certain things are luxuries; certain things
are essentials.)
4680. Àìgb/oacutedotbelowFálàńwòkè;Ifákanòsínípárá.
It is ignorance about Ifá that causes one to
stare upward; Ifá is not to be seen on the
c e i l i n g .( I ti sa na d m i s s i o no fd e f e a tf o ro n e
to cast about for excuses or to beat around
the bush.)
17
16. This is also a riddle whose solution is soap; the
traditional soap, when dry, is blackish in color.
17. The reference is to the recitation from rote of Ifá
divination verses. The diviner who forgets them and
searches the ceiling (while racking his brain) will not
ﬁnd the verses written there.
4681. Àìp/ogravedotbelowìlúlàḿm/ogravedotbelowlẹ;bíabádéÌlọrinaò
níím/ogravedotbelowlẹ.
It is because a town is small that one knows
who is lazy there; if one goes to Ìlọrin, one
will be unable to tell who is lazy. (There is
anonymity in numbers.)
18
4682. Àì-ríèèyànníT/eacutedotbelowp/ogravedotbelownà,w/oacutedotbelownﬁkàríọrán
jẹìyálóde.
On failing to ﬁnd a human being, T/eacutedotbelowp/ogravedotbelownà
people made a kàríọrán[a person from
Iléṣà] their Ìyálóde[the highest female oﬃ-
cer in the community]. (Better any human
being at all than an Iléṣà person for a high
position, but when candidates are scarce,
any available person will do.)
19
4683. Àjànàkúkìísòpákínúbíọl/oacutedotbelowdẹ.
The elephant’s development of hydrocele
does not anger the hunter. (One cannot be
dismayed because one’s enemy has been
visited by disaster.)
4684. Àjànàkúòl/eacutedotbelowkàn;ọbatíyómùúerinso
òt/iacuteigravejẹ.
The elephant tolerates no stakes; the king
that will tether the elephant has not been
crowned. (Some people are beyond any-
body’s control.)
4685. Àj/eacutedotbelowkélánàá,ọm/oacutedotbelowkúlónìí;taniòm/ogravedotbelow
péàj/eacutedotbelowànálópọmọjẹ?
A witch announced her presence yester-
day, and a child dies today; who does not
know that yesterday’s witch killed the child?
(When the evidence suggests an obvious
conclusion, one should not shy away from
it. Compare 3882.)
18. Ìlọrin is a northern Yoruba town. As the proverb
indicates, other branches of the Yoruba family have a
low opinion of Ìlọrin people.
19. Kàríọrán is a way of saying in Ìjèṣà, ‘‘Come
here a minute.’’
458 truisms


--- PAGE 472 ---
4686. Àj/eacutedotbelowlápo,ojúur/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow.
The witch licks palm oil and becomes calm.
(A balm masters wild dispositions.)
4687. Àj/eacutedotbelowòlólúwaméjì,l/eacutedotbelowhìn-inPoolo.
The witch has no other lord besides Poolo.20
(For every force there is a check.)
4688. À-jẹ-ì-padà-wáléòj/eacutedotbelowkámọọdẹadìẹ.
Its foraging-without-returning-home pre-
v e n t sp e o p l ef r o mk n o w i n gw h a tah u n t e r
the chicken is. (Without seeing the kill,
people will not credit the hunter. See also
4501.)
4689. Àkàṣùòníbiírèlágb/ogravedotbelown.
The corn meal has nowhere to go in the
basket. (A treasure is not lost in a safe.)
4690. Akéèràkìírokoìràkósanwó.
The dealer in ìràproducts does not pay for
cutting the tree.
21 (One does not pay for
using public property.)
4691. Àkétekékeréògbaèèyànméjì.
A tiny bed will not accommodate two
people. (Some deﬁciencies cannot be ﬁ-
nessed.)
4692. Àk/egravedotbelowhìnsíoníg/egravedotbelowg/eacutedotbelow,bíẹnitíńkébòsí.
T h eb a c kv i e wo fap e r s o nw i t hg o i t e rg i v e s
the impression that he or she is hailing
someone. (Seeing something from a disad-
vantageous perspective is likely to mislead.)
4693. Akọikútíńpaojúàrùnm/oacutedotbelow.
Masculine death, that which closes the eyes
of a disease. (It is a determined death that
sees the end of an illness.)
20. Poolo is the god that exposes and executes
witches; compare note 17 at 4186.
2 1 .P r o d u c t so ft h et r e eìràare used for tanning and
for treating ﬁred clay pots.
4694. Akọológbò-ómúowórá.
A male cat renders the money invested on it
unproﬁtable. (One cannot expect kittens of
tomcats.)
4695. Àkọs/egravedotbelowbá,èyítíńj/eacutedotbelowìfà.
An unexpected ﬁnd: free booty. (Unantici-
pated good fortune is free for the taking.)
4696. Àkúdinòkọminúàáké.
The heartwood fears no axe. (Hardy souls
need fear no adversaries.)
4697. Àkùkọgàgàràníńdáj/oacutedotbelowfúnniláàrin
/ogravedotbelowgànj/oacutedotbelow.
It is a mature rooster that settles disputes for
people in the dead of night.
22 (Incontrovert-
ible evidence settles all disagreement.)
4698. A-kú-má-tòó-elèjì-rù,ód/eacutedotbelowrùpaẹnìkan.
He-who-dies-but-is-too-small-for-two-
people-to-carry constitutes a load that
weighs down one person. (A matter that
falls in the crack between two categories is a
troublesome thing.)
4699. Àlàfunfun,/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowòrìṣà.
White cloth, friend of the gods. (Each occa-
sion has its special requirements.)
4700. Aláàfáà,ìmàléadodo;óníbíòunòbá
déibúòunòmu.
Muslim priest, inhabitant of the conical
house, vows that until he reaches the deep,
he will not drink. (It is a choosy priest who
will drink nothing but water from the deep-
est part of the sea.)
4701. Àlàárì,babaaṣọ.
Reddish hand-woven cloth, father of all
cloths. (No cloth is more glorious than
àlàárì.)
22. The crowing rooster marks the hours for people,
thus settling disputes as to what time of night it is.
Miscellany 459


--- PAGE 473 ---
4702. Alágbàtàníńsọọjà-ád/ogravedotbeloww/oacutedotbelown.
It is the retail merchant who makes mer-
chandise dear. (Caretakers are often more
punctilious and stingy than owners. Com-
pare 1703.)
4703. Alágbeòkúl/Oacutedotbelowy/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelow.
A beggar does not die in /Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow. (Other
people’s generosity will save the destitute
from starvation.)
4704. Alájàpáòl/eacutedotbelowranláyà.
T h et o r t o i s eh a sn oﬂ e s ho ni t sc h e s t .( I ti s
futile to seek meat on a turtle’s chest.)
4705. Alápámálèṣiṣ/eacutedotbelow,baba/ogravedotbelowlẹ.
Ap e r s o nw i t hs t u r d ya r m sb u tn ow i l lt o
work is the laziest of creatures. (Strong arms
that will not work are lazy arms.)
4706. Aláròyé,olókotoro,onítìjúàwòkotí
ńgbónunínúoko;ódélétánóṣẹnum/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelown.
Loquacious, forward person, bashful bird
that boasts on the farm; on reaching home it
keeps its peace. (Boasting is easy where no
one will dare one to prove oneself.)
4707. Alás/eacutedotbelowm/ogravedotbelowpéóńjòkótóràá;ẹníhún
m/ogravedotbelowpéóńjòkótótàá;iṣ/eacutedotbelow-ẹjíjòniw/oacutedotbelowﬁńṣe.
The owner of the sieve knew that it leaked
before buying it; the weaver of the sieve
knew that it leaked before selling it; after all,
it is used for tasks that call for leaking. (If
the particulars of a transaction are not kept
secret, no party involved has grounds for
complaint. And, diﬀerences are proper, for
circumstances and needs are not the same.)
4708. Aláyìn-ínsíòlódó;ẹnugbó-ń-gbólodó-
owọn.
The interfering person owns no mortar;
his mortar is his overactive mouth. (The
interfering person’s only asset is his mouth.)
4709. Àlejòtíkòwálàńpaàgbààgùntàndè.
I ti sav i s i t o rw h of a i l st os h o wu pi nw h o s e
honor one killed a large sheep. (A safe lie is
one no one can disprove.)
4710. Àlejòtófòruw/ogravedotbelowlú,‘‘Igídá!’’niyójẹ.
A visitor who enters the town in the middle
of the night will have ‘‘What a misfortune!’’
for dinner. (One should not visit when
circumstances will make hospitality impos-
sible.)
4711. A-le-koko-bí-ọsán:egbòójinná,ohùnò
jinná.
A thing as resistant as bowstring: the ulcer
heals, but a spoken word does not heal.
(Words are as tough as bowstrings; while
wounds may heal, the marks words leave do
not heal.)
4712. Al/eacutedotbelowtíkòtiojúẹnil/eacutedotbelow,akìímọ
òkùnkùn-unr/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowrìn.
A night that does not fall in one’s pres-
ence, one never knows how to walk in its
darkness. (A person who does not know
t h eo r i g i no fa na ﬀ a i rw i l ls u r e l ye r ri fh e
attempts to intervene in it.)
4713. Àlòkùàdáòjọobìnrinlójú.
A secondhand machete does not impress
a woman. (Newness is all-important to a
woman, even when the newness does not
mean greater eﬃciency.)
4714. Àlọlarí;aòráb/ogravedotbelow.
The departure is all we saw; we did not
see the return. (Much was made of the be-
ginning of a project, but that was the last
anyone heard of it. This is an abbreviated
v e r s i o no f6 6 . )
4715. Àlùkò-ófínní;ìbọnr/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowfínní.
Àlùkò is well groomed, and his gun is well
groomed. (The person concerned is pains-
taking and particular about his aﬀairs.)
4716. A-mòòkùn-ṣolè,bíọbaayéòríọ,t/ogravedotbelowrun
ńwò/oacutedotbelow.
460 truisms


--- PAGE 474 ---
Person-who-lies-low-to-do-evil: if the
king on earth does not see you, the king of
heaven is looking at you. (Nothing one does
is hidden from God.)
4717. Àm/oacutedotbelowdúnòrííriì;kámúrakáṣiṣ/eacutedotbelow.
One year hence is not unforeseeable; let us
gird ourselves and set to work. (A year of
grace is soon over; one should conscien-
tiously do what is expected of one.)
4718. Am/oacutedotbelownilójúòbániwí;k/ogravedotbelowbì-k/ogravedotbelowbìlóńwò.
A-person-who-looks-disdainfully-at-one
but says nothing: it is simply that there is
something the matter with his or her sight.
(Disdainful looks cannot kill; what is more,
they do not become the looker.)
4719. A-m/ogravedotbelowràn-mòweníńlàdí/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow.
It is a-sage-who-knows-proverbs that re-
solves disputes. (Proverbs are a means of
settling diﬀerences.)
4720. Àmùtíaﬁńseiṣuòlèm/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbeloww/egravedotbelowbíèyítí
aﬁńpọnmi.
The pot used for cooking yams cannot know
swimming as well as the pot used for draw-
ing water. (In one’s métier one is master.)
4721. Amúniṣ/egravedotbelowsín/egravedotbelowt/egravedotbelowtíńmúnil/oacutedotbelowganganimú.
A-thing-that-exposes-one-to-ridicule, lep-
rosy that attacks one on the tip of one’s nose.
(A disﬁgurement that aﬄicts one in the most
conspicuous place will surely be laughed at.)
4722. Aníg/ogravedotbelow-ǹ-g/oacutedotbelowtíńkáobì,tíńkáawùsá,bó
bákáìdìẹyìnáfàya.
The hooked pole that plucks kola nuts and
plucks awùsáfruits, if it attempts to pluck
the palm-fruit cluster, will break.
23 (Some
tasks are beyond some tools.)
4723. Àpáàdìníńṣíwájú/ogravedotbelowf/ogravedotbelownná.
It is the potsherd that precedes the live coal
23. Awùsáis Tetracarpidiumconophorum,a climber
(Abraham 82).
gatherer. (Events should take their proper
order, and people should observe the proper
order of precedence.)
4724. Àparò,aṣọ-/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowṣep/oacutedotbelownbáyìí?Oníìgbà
woniaṣọòunònííp/oacutedotbelown?/Ogravedotbelowsánjíjẹ,òrusísùn,
oúnj/egravedotbelowòṣééﬁsíl/egravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowsàn-án;orunòṣééﬁsíl/egravedotbelow
lóru.
Partridge, how come your dress is so red
[dirty]? He said, how would his dress not
be red [dirty]? In the afternoon grubbing
for food, at night sleeping: one cannot leave
oﬀ food in the afternoon, and one cannot
leave oﬀ sleep at night. (The priorities of the
self-indulgent are always inverted.)
4725. Àparòńgbaikúoníkúkú,áḿb/ogravedotbelowǹtorí
ikúara-ar/egravedotbelow.
The partridge falls prey to the death meant
for others, let alone a death meant for it.
(A person whose destiny is to be a habitual
victim will not escape his or her fate.)
4726. Àparòògajuara-awọnlọ,àﬁèyító
gunebè.
No partridge is taller than another except
for those [standing] on earth mounds. (Said
of people among whom there is nothing to
choose.)
4727. Apata-áríkúk/egravedotbelowhìnsií;apataníńgbani
lógun.
The shield sees death and presents its back
to it; it is the shield that saves one in battle.
(There is nothing like the shield when it
comes to defying death.)
4728. AráÀnkoòtúnṣeoògùnìkàm/oacutedotbelow;ọmọ
m/eacutedotbelowfà-áku/ogravedotbelowkan.
T h ep e o p l eo fÀ n k oh a v eg i v e nu pe v i l
charms; of six children only one is left.
24
(Disaster teaches people to mend their
ways.)
24. The proverb refers to the sacking of Ànko by
Fulani forces in the nineteenth century, which caused
the people to move to Èrúwà.
Miscellany 461


--- PAGE 475 ---
4729. Àránnìparí/ogravedotbelowṣ/oacutedotbelow.
Velvet is the ultimate in ﬁnery. (There is no
cloth more resplendent than velvet.)
4730. A-rí-erin-látẹòmọyìerin.
One-who-sees-an-elephant-on-a-tray does
not appreciate an elephant. (Those who have
not seen you on your home ground cannot
appreciate you.)
4731. A-rí-jẹ-níjàòníṣ/eacutedotbelowmìírànàﬁìjà.
The person who proﬁts from quarrels has
no other pursuit than quarreling. (It is most
diﬃcult to wean people from their bad
habits.)
4732. Àròkìígbónákal/eacutedotbelow.
25
The cooking hearth does not stay hot until
nighttime. (There is no diﬃculty that does
not have its moments of release. There is no
diﬃculty without an end. Compare 4734.)
4733. Àròkìíjónil/eacutedotbelows/egravedotbelowlásán;ọmọaráyéní
ńfannásíi.
A cooking hearth does not burn one’s feet
o ni t so w n ;i ti sp e o p l ew h os t o k eﬁ r ei ni t .
(There is no misfortune behind which one
will not ﬁnd other people’s machination.)
4734. Àròkìírẹrùkómás/ogravedotbelow.
A cooking hearth does not bear a load with-
out eventually setting it down. (There is
no problem that does not come to an end.
Compare 4732.)
4735. Àrokò-ótibàj/eacutedotbelowlátiIléṣàwá;w/oacutedotbelownníkí
w/oacutedotbelownmúẹrúfúnL/oacutedotbelowwá,kíw/oacutedotbelowngbéobìfún
Ọ/ogravedotbelowni.
The tribute was wayward right from Iléṣà;
they said the slave should be presented to
L/oacutedotbelowwá,and the kola nuts to theỌ/ogravedotbelowni.(Attend
to causes, not to symptoms.)
26
25. Àròis also spelled Àdìrò.
26. The Ọ/ogravedotbelowniis the superior of all Yoruba kings;
4736. Àròyéòkúnàjọ.
A lengthy explanation will not ﬁll the till.
(Excuses are a poor substitute for fulﬁlling
one’s obligations.)
4737. Arọniìdènàòrìṣà.
The cripple is the gatekeeper of the gods.
(The cripple, though handicapped, is the
chosen one of the gods.)
27
4738. Arọtíḿbúogun,oríẹl/eacutedotbelows/egravedotbelowméjìlóbúu
lé.
The cripple who incites war incites it on
those who have two legs. (A person of no
means who incurs obligations for the whole
community causes problems for the people
with means.)
4739. A-r/oacutedotbelowba-má-sàápàdéa-r/oacutedotbelowba-má-yà;
p/eacutedotbelowkíkop/eacutedotbelowkí.
He-who-never-runs-from-the-king meets
him-who-never-makes-way-for-the-king;
trouble comes face to face with trouble.
(When two obstinate people meet, trouble is
in the oﬃng.)
4740. Aruguduòjòtíńṣúlaàrinòru.
The problematic rain: its clouds gather in
the middle of the night. (It is a formidable
visitation that descends when one is least
prepared.)
4741. Arúgbóẹrúòj/eacutedotbelow/ogravedotbelowf/eacutedotbelow;òtòṣìọbaòsingbà;
ìw/ogravedotbelowfàkanòdàgbàdàgbàkóníòunòsin
olówóm/oacutedotbelow.
An old slave does not go for nothing; a poor
king does not pawn himself; however old
a pawn may be, he may not refuse to serve
the creditor. (Every station has its obliga-
L/oacutedotbelowwáis one of his subordinate’s chieftaincy titles, and
Iléṣà is one of the traditional tributary kingdoms.
27. This proverb is consistent with the Yoruba belief
that like the albino, handicapped people are favored by
the gods.
462 truisms


--- PAGE 476 ---
tions and its limits; prosperity, poverty, and
duties are relative to one’s position.)
4742. Arúgbóẹṣínsànjubàtà-aṣílèm/eacutedotbelowwàálọ.
An old horse is preferable to a ten-shilling
shoe.28 (However poor the mount, the rider
is better oﬀ than the well-shod pedestrian.)
4743. Àrùnníńmúnijẹun/ogravedotbelowtá.
It is disease that makes one eat food oﬀered
by one’s enemy. (When one is prostrated by
a formidable misfortune, one is forced to do
many things one would rather not do.)
4744. Àsárébáníḿmúìrìnyá.
It is running-to-overtake-those-ahead that
s p e e d saj o u r n e y .( O n es h o u l ds t r i v et o
match those ahead of one, not behind.)
4745. As/ogravedotbelowbabaìjà.
Quarrelsome criticism is the father of a ﬁght.
(Ill-natured criticism is likely to lead to a
ﬁght.)
4746. Aṣ/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowk/eacutedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowbojúwògb/eacutedotbelow;ìgb/eacutedotbelowòdélésọ
f/eacutedotbelownìkan;ẹniaḿbáwíníńwínikiri.
The whisperer glances at the bush; the bush
does not go home to expose one’s secret; it
is the person one talks to who spreads one’s
secret about. (Secrets do not expose them-
selves; those who know about them reveal
them.)
4747. Àsúnm/oacutedotbelowd/egravedotbelowt/eacutedotbelow;èèyàngbókèèrèníyì.
Closeness breeds contempt; the person who
lives afar is made much of. (To be close by is
to be unappreciated; to be far away is to be
valued. See the next two entries also.)
4748. Àsúnm/oacutedotbelowd/egravedotbelowt/eacutedotbelow;òkèèrèníńdùn.
Closeness breeds contempt; distance is best.
28. The proverb obviously harks back to the days
when British currency was in use and, moreover, when
ten shillings was a lot of money.
(This is a variant of the preceding and fol-
lowing entries.)
4749. Àsúnm/oacutedotbelowlàḿmọìṣeẹni;èèyàngbókèèrè
níyì.
Only by living close does one know an-
other’s nature; the person who lives far
away enjoys much respect. (Distance is a
good cloak for a person’s ﬂaws. See the two
preceding entries.)
4750. Àṣágbémiládìẹkòdúró,nítoríómọ
ohuntóṣe.
The kite snatched my chicken and did not
tarry, because it knew what it had done.
(The guilty person has his or her conscience
to contend with.)
4751. Àṣákékélùké,àdàbàkékélùké,kòsíọjà
tíwọnòná.
The tiny kite, the tiny dove: there is no mar-
ket they do not patronize. (Certain things
seem insigniﬁcant but are good for many
uses.)
29
4752. Àṣánibabaẹyẹ.
The kite is the father of birds. (There is no
bird to match the kite.)
4753. Àṣáńtà,àwòdìńrà;àwòdìtíńgbéadìẹ
l/oacutedotbelowsàn-ánòsanratoigún;b/Oacutedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowrunòpaigún,
ohuntíigúnbáríamáajẹ.
The kite sells and the eagle buys; the eagle
that snatches chicks in broad daylight is no
fatter than the vulture; if God spares the
vulture, it will feed on whatever it can ﬁnd.
(The powerful may live luxuriously; the
weak, by the grace of providence, will ﬁnd
something to live on.)
4754. Àṣátógbéadìẹòtòṣì-ígbétialáròyé.
The kite that snatches a poor person’s chick
29. This is primarily a riddle whose solution is
money. Though small, money (in the form of a coin) is
welcome everywhere.
Miscellany 463


--- PAGE 477 ---
provokes endless complaint. (A poor person
never ceases bewailing a small loss.)
4755. Àṣàdànù,àṣàdànùlọmọdéńṣaòkúta
ìtabaál/egravedotbelow.
Picking-and-throwing-away, picking-and-
throwing-away is the way a child picks
stones in the chief ’s front court. (The stones
a child picks playfully never arrive home
with the child.)
30
4756. Aṣáp/eacutedotbelowfúnwèrèjó,òunàtiwèrèẹgb/eacutedotbelowra.
The person who claps for an imbecile to
dance and the imbecile are no diﬀerent.
(Any person who has time for unworthy
people is himself or herself unworthy.)
4757. Àṣàwíẹj/oacutedotbelowẹnìkan-ánṣàre.
The doctored case of the only side heard in
a dispute is always just. (If one’s opponent
has no say, one’s case is just by default.)
4758. Aṣ/eacutedotbelowniik/ogravedotbelowoyún;àt/ogravedotbelowniik/ogravedotbelowọmọ;rírà
l/oacutedotbelowd/egravedotbelowd/egravedotbelowniik/ogravedotbelowàwòdìtíńjáọmọl/eacutedotbelowhìnadìẹ.
Menstruation heralds pregnancy; sperm
heralds children; hovering in the yard sig-
nals the presence of the kite that snatches
chicks from their mothers. (Momentous
events send their omens before them.)
4759. Aṣeníṣeara-ar/egravedotbelow;asánbàǹt/eacutedotbelowsánara-a
r/egravedotbelowlókùn.
He-who-would-hurt-others hurts himself;
he who wraps himself in a loincloth ties
himself in a rope.
31 (He who would hurt
others hurts himself also.)
4760. Àṣ/egravedotbelowṣ/egravedotbelowjádeakàn,aòmọibitíóńlọ.
The newly emerged crab gives no indication
30. This proverb is used as an incantation to make
the target person lose whatever assets he or she pos-
sesses.
31. The point about the loincloth is that a rope is a
r o p ei sar o p e .
o fw h e r ei ti sh e a d e d .( I ti sf u t i l et oa t t e m p t
to predict the unpredictable.)
4761. Àṣ/egravedotbelowṣ/egravedotbeloww/ogravedotbelowlúàlejò,jolojololojúńṣeni.
On ﬁrst entering a town, the stranger’s eyes
are restless. (The eyes of a stranger do not
rest on anything for long.)
4762. Àṣetánlóníyì;akìídúp/eacutedotbelowaláṣekù.
Completing-a-job is what is appreciated; one
does not express gratitude for something
half done. (What is worth doing is worth
ﬁnishing.)
4763. Àṣìṣeòkanọgb/oacutedotbelown.
Mistakes have nothing to do with wisdom.
(To be mistaken is not necessarily to be
unwise.)
4764. Aṣiwèrè-éyẹìlú,kòyẹẹniẹni.
An imbecile is acceptable in a town but not
among one’s kin. (No one wants an imbecile
for a relative.)
4765. Àṣìwíòtóàṣìṣe;àṣìṣeòtókámúra/ogravedotbelowrun.
To misspeak is not as bad as to commit a
blunder; to commit a blunder is not as bad
as making ready to go to heaven. (Errors are
not all equally grave.)
4766. Aṣooregbèṣù:babaàdánù.
Doing-a-favor-and-receiving-wickedness-
in-return: father of losses. (Receiving evil in
return for good is the worst sort of loss.)
4767. A-ṣoore-má-ṣìkà;ẹníṣooréṣeéfúnra-a
r/egravedotbelow;ẹníṣìkàáṣeéfúnra-ar/egravedotbelow.
Doer-of-good-who-does-no-evil; who does
good does it for himself or herself; who does
evil does it for himself or herself. (Good
d e e d sa n de v i ld e e d sw i l lc o m eh o m et o
roost.)
4768. A-ṣòro-ó-bini,ìjààná.
Diﬃcult-to-ask-about, yesterday’s quarrel.
464 truisms


--- PAGE 478 ---
(A festering quarrel is a diﬃcult issue to
broach.)
4769. Aṣòroóﬁnúhànbíèké.
Diﬃcult-to-conﬁde-in like an unreliable
person. (An untrue friend is not one to
conﬁde in.)
4770. Aṣòroógbébiag/ogravedotbelow-ọMasiada;báabá
gbeníwájúabal/egravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowhìn;báabágbelẹhìna
bal/egravedotbelowníwájú.
Diﬃcult-to-wear like the costume of the
Masiada masquerade; if one lifts it in front,
it drags at the back; if one lifts it at the back,
it drags in front. (In certain circumstances,
nothing one does turns out right.)
4771. Aṣòroóṣebíohunt/Oacutedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowrunòf/eacutedotbelow;adùn-
únṣebíohunt/Oacutedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowrun-únṣetán.
Diﬃcult-to-accomplish like something God
disapproves of; easy-to-accomplish like
something God is ready to do. (What does
not please God is diﬃcult to do; what pleases
God is easily accomplished.)
4772. Aṣòroówíbíàrùnìdílé.
Diﬃcult-to-discuss like a hereditary dis-
ease. (Discussing the congenital disease of a
f a m i l yi sad e l i c a t em a t t e r . )
4773. Ataloògùn/egravedotbelowmí;/egravedotbelowmítíkòjata,/egravedotbelowmí
yẹpẹrẹ.
Pepper is the medicine for life; a soul that
does not eat pepper is an insigniﬁcant soul.
(The beneﬁts of pepper cannot be overesti-
mated.)
4774. Ataòm/ogravedotbelowpéòunódèélé.
Pepper had no idea it would end up in the
house. (One cannot foretell what lies in one’s
future.)
4775. Ataepoàtiaraepolómọohuntíw/oacutedotbelownﬁ
ńnuw/oacutedotbelow.
The seller of palm oil and the buyer of palm
oil both know what they use to wipe their
hands. (People who share the same trade or
secrets understand one another.)
4776. Àtà/mgravepàkòbabaìka.
Thumb, father of ﬁngers. (The thumb is the
chief among the ﬁngers.)
4777. Àtà/mgravepàkòòṣééjúwe/ogravedotbelowkánkán.
The thumb is useless for pointing straight
ahead. (Even an important tool is not proper
for every task.)
4778. Àtàríàjànàkúkìíṣẹrùọmọdé.
An elephant’s head is no load for a child.
(There is a limit to what youth can accom-
plish.)
4779. Àtàtàkurá:ẹnuẹyẹòranòkúta.
An impossible task: the bird’s beak avails
nothing against a rock. (The rock has noth-
ing to fear from the bird.)
4780. Àtèpẹyẹm/eacutedotbelowyẹkú.
Birdlime kills birds and causes the death of
birds. (Birdlime is the nemesis of birds.)
4781. Atètèdéléníńjoyèẹrú.
The-ﬁrst-to-arrive-home assumes the
ownership of slaves. (The race is to the
swift.)
4782. Àtètègbàlàtètèsan.
Early-arrival-at-terms means early payment.
(Too-long haggling defers the enjoyment of
the acquisition.)
4783. Àtètèlóbìnrinòkanọmọbíbí.
Taking-a-wife-early has nothing to do with
having children. (Marrying early does not
guarantee having children early.)
4784. Àtètèsùnlàtètèjí;ẹnítètèkúlómúl/egravedotbelow
l/oacutedotbelowrun.
Going-to-sleep-early is rising early; the ﬁrst
Miscellany 465


--- PAGE 479 ---
to die is the homesteader in heaven. (The
ﬁrst arrival has the richest choice.)
4785. Atètèṣágb/eacutedotbelowkìímọọgb/eacutedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowṣábíaṣánisan.
The-ﬁrst-to-wound-with-a-machete does
not know how to wound like the-person-
who-wounds-in-retaliation. (Retaliation is
usually more severe than the provocation.
Compare 3495.)
4786. Àt/egravedotbelowgbélẹs/egravedotbelowńtẹ/ogravedotbelownà.
Stepping-upon-without-repercussion is the
way the foot steps on the path. (The path
has no recourse against the foot that steps
on it.)
4787. Àt/eacutedotbelowlẹs/egravedotbelowàw/egravedotbelownùtódojúara-ar/egravedotbelowdél/egravedotbelow.
The washed-in-vain sole sets its face down
on the ground. (Avoid inconsistencies or
senseless eﬀorts.)
4788. Àt/eacutedotbelowlẹs/egravedotbelowníńj/egravedotbelowgbin/ogravedotbelownà.
I ti st h es o l et h a te a t st h eﬁ l t ho nt h ep a t h .
(One’s responsibilities often expose one to
unwarranted abuse.)
4789. Àt/egravedotbelowyúnàt/egravedotbelowwálàńtẹèkùr/oacutedotbelowojú/ogravedotbelownà.
Stepping-on-while-going, stepping-on-
while-returning is the way one steps on the
kernel in the path. (The ill-fated person can
h o p ef o rn or e s p i t e . )
4790. Àtidéonígbàjám/ogravedotbelowlàḿm/ogravedotbelow,akìímọ
àtilọ.
One knows only of the arrival of the barber,
not of his departure. (Once one has served
one’s purpose, one is soon forgotten.)
4791. Àtijẹawùsákòtóàtimumi.
Eating awùsánuts is nothing like drinking
water afterward. (Pleasures often have bitter
aftertastes.)
32
32. The nuts of awùsál e a v eab i t t e ra f t e r t a s t et h a ti s
aggravated by water.
4792. Àtijẹun,/ogravedotbelowt/ogravedotbelowt/ogravedotbelow/ogravedotbelowràn.
Finding a means of livelihood, a formi-
dable problem. (Earning a living is no mean
matter.)
4793. Àtìkààtoore,/ogravedotbelowkankìígbé.
Be it good or evil, neither goes for nought.
(Good as well as evil will be requited.)
4794. Àtilọ-ọlámi-lámilàńrí,akìíríàtib/ogravedotbelow.
One sees only the departure of the dragon-
ﬂy, never its return. (The boastful person
proclaims his accomplishments beforehand,
but is usually silent when he falls short.)
4795. Àtíòro-ój/egravedotbelowgbájẹlá,óníòunòkú;óní
bígbogboẹyẹayétińfònáàniòunńfòyí.
The allied hornbill eats garden eggs and
eats okro and proclaims that it has not died;
it says that just as other birds on earth ﬂy
around, so it also does. (However tough
the times, whoever will survive will sur-
vive.)
4796. Àtípìjí,a-wúwo-bí-àtẹ-ìbànúj/eacutedotbelow;ìbànúj/eacutedotbelow
doríàgbàkodò.
A mighty problem, heavy-as-a-tray-of-
sadness; sadness causes an elder to hang his
head. (Heavy sadness prostrates even an
elder.)
4797. Àtiràbọnòtóàtir/egravedotbelowtù;ọj/oacutedotbelowkanlàńra
ìbọn;ojoojúm/oacutedotbelowlàńr/egravedotbelowtù.
Buying-a-gun is nothing like buying gun-
powder; one buys a gun only on one day,
b u to n eb u y sp o w d e re v e r yd a y .( M a k i n g
an impressive purchase is one thing; being
able to maintain the thing purchased is quite
another.)
4798. Àtiwáyéìl/egravedotbelowk/egravedotbelowalágídígbaòṣẹhìnèkùr/oacutedotbelow.
The incarnation of the lágídígbabead will
not be in the absence of the palm kernel.
(Nothing can be done in the absence of a
person whose consent is all-important, or
466 truisms


--- PAGE 480 ---
a commodity whose availability is crucial.
You cannot make stew without the ingredi-
ents.)
33
4799. Atúmál/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowyún,aràmáṣèdin,agbẹmánìí-
ṣ/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowp/eacutedotbelow.
It-bursts-without-pus, it-rots-without-
maggots, it-dries-without-scales. (It is never
as one would expect but stops halfway.)
4800. Atúnniṣeòp/ogravedotbelowbíabanij/eacutedotbelow.
Those-who-groom-people are not as many
as those-who-soil-people. (There are far
more detractors than praisers.)
4801. Àwáìlọ-/oacutedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowsíléAsèmás/ogravedotbelow.
A-person-who-visits-and-does-not-leave
goes to the house of A-person-who-cooks-
and-does-not-remove-the-food-from-
the-ﬁre. (Two contrary characters are in a
c o n t e s to fw i l l s . )
4802. Awokanòsínínúawo/egravedotbelowwà.
There is nothing inscrutable about beans.
(Common knowledge is nobody’s mo-
nopoly.)
4803. Àwoòm/ogravedotbelowpéòunójata.
The plate did not know that it would eat
pepper. (Some boons one does not work for
or anticipate.)
4804. Àwòdììbákú,aládìẹòsunkún.
Were the hawk to die, the owner of chickens
would not shed a tear. (The death of one’s
enemy is no loss.)
34
4805. Àwòdìjẹunèpèsanra.
T h eh a w kf e e d sf a to na c c u r s e df o o d .( O n e
33. The suggestion here is that the palm kernel is an
essential ingredient in making the beads used to adorn
the waist.
34. Àwòdìis another designation foràṣá,the hawk.
cannot worry too much about oﬀending
people.)35
4806. Àwòdìńrà,inúaládì/eacutedotbelowbàj/eacutedotbelow.
The hawk hovers, and the owner of chickens
becomes unhappy. (The appearance of one’s
enemy never fails to displease.)
4807. Àwòdìònááníàńkùngb/eacutedotbelow;igíwóẹy/eacutedotbelowfò
lọ.
The hawk is not bothered that the forest
is being burned; the tree crashes, and the
bird ﬂies away. (Some people are immune to
certain perils.)
4808. Àwòdìòsíńlé,kan-na-kán-náńṣebí
ọbalóko.
The hawk is away, and the crow behaves like
a king on the farm. (In the absence of the
hawk, the crow is king.)
4809. ÀwòdìtíńreÌbarà,/egravedotbelowfúùfù-úgbanídìí,
óníiṣ/eacutedotbelowkúkúyá.
The hawk that is bound for Ìbarà is lifted
at the tail by the breeze; it says, ‘‘Now to
business.’’ (An order that one should do
what one wants to do is nothing but an
encouragement.)
4810. Àwòdìtóbàléòrùlé;ojútólé,ojútóko.
The hawk that alights on a roof: the eyes see
the home and the eyes see the farm. (One
perched on high can see near and far.)
4811. Àwòdì-ílọreìy/eacutedotbelow,w/oacutedotbelownníẹy/eacutedotbelowsálọ.
The hawk goes to molt, and they say the bird
has ﬂed. (Those who do not know why one
does what one does choose the explanation
they prefer.)
4812. Àwòdì-ísọolówóadìẹdiwèrè.
The hawk makes a maniac of the owner of
35. A reference to the curses that attend the hawk’s
snatching of chicks.
Miscellany 467


--- PAGE 481 ---
chicks. (The imperative of protecting one’s
property sometimes makes one do strange
things.)
4813. Àwòkó,w/oacutedotbelownníobúọba;óníìgbàwo
lòúnráyèbúọba,kíòuntókọigbaláàár/ogravedotbelow,
igbal/oacutedotbelowsànán;igbalál/eacutedotbelow?
Àwòko, they say you insulted the king; it
replies, when would I have the time to insult
the king, given the task of singing two hun-
dred songs in the morning, two hundred in
the afternoon, and two hundred at night?
(Too elaborate alibis call for a close look.)
4814. Àwòm/oacutedotbelowjúkìíp/ogravedotbelowtá;m/oacutedotbelowjú-m/oacutedotbelowjúlọrùn
ńdùn.
Disdainful looks do not kill an enemy; it
is the looker who suﬀers neck strain. (If
there is nothing one can do to one’s enemy,
looking at him disdainfully is no substitute.)
4815. Awoníníkọjáàlùkùráni.
Possession of charms is more eﬃcacious
than carrying a Koran. (A sure medicine is
preferable to faith in religion.)
4816. Àwòránṣètèkólóbó,igitá-abágb/eacutedotbelow
léhínòlèbunijẹ.
An image with its small lips, a piece of wood
whose teeth one carved cannot bite one.
(A sculpture one carves with one’s hands
cannot do harm.)
4817. Àwòsùn-ùn,àwònùlẹkùnńwẹyẹòkè.
It is a frustrated stare and pointless watching
that the leopard directs at the bird ﬂying
h i g ha b o v e .( W h e nap e r s o ni sb e y o n do n e ’ s
control or discipline, all one can do is stare
a th i mo rh e r . )
4818. Awọnídìíàdáòwípékíàdámákàn-
án.
Wrapping the hilt in leather will not keep
a machete from breaking. (There is a limit
to what one can do to prevent occupational
disasters.)
4819. Aw/oacutedotbelowniníńfìdíara-ar/egravedotbelowlànàfúnẹnití
ńw/oacutedotbelowlọ.
H ew h od r a g sap e r s o nu s e sh i sb u t t o c k st o
clear the bush for the person he is dragging.
(Victimizing another person does not leave
oneself unscathed. See 1693.)
4820. Àwúy/eacutedotbelowwúy/eacutedotbelow,àròyé/ogravedotbelowt/egravedotbelow;w/oacutedotbelownníkíw/oacutedotbelown
túnìlúṣe,w/oacutedotbelownf/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowtúìlú.
Clandestine whispering, the devious con-
versation of plotting; they were urged to
improve conditions in the town, but they
would rather destroy it. (Clandestine plot-
ters would rather engage in secret designs
to ruin the community than work for its
improvement.)
4821. Àyàọmọdéniwèrédìsí;ọr/eacutedotbelowlaﬁńjáa.
Insanity is bunched on the chest of the
child; it is a whip that one uses to dislodge
i t .( Aw h i pi st h es u r e s tc u r ef o rac h i l d ’ s
misbehavior.)
4822. Aya-méè-r/oacutedotbelowmọ-ríníńtannawooyún
/ogravedotbelowgànj/oacutedotbelow.
Wife-I-have-never-seen-a-child-before is
the one who lights a lamp in the middle of
the night to look at a pregnancy. (A person
new to a privilege is usually not noted for
moderation in its exercise.)
4823. Ayéàgb/egravedotbelowbíàjẹr/ogravedotbelowrun.
A farmer’s lifestyle is like something out of
this world. (Farm dwellers know no social
constraints.)
4824. Ayéàkámarà!Ayélèpaìràw/ogravedotbelowdà.
Untrustworthy humankind! Humankind
can alter people’s destiny. (People are not to
be trusted.)
4825. Ayédilẹhẹ-n-hẹ:ẹyinadì/eacutedotbelowtòkèwáf/oacutedotbelow
ìpọn.
The world has turned awry: a chicken egg
drops from above and breaks a wooden
468 truisms


--- PAGE 482 ---
spoon below. (When a raw egg breaks a
spoon, the world has turned upside down.)
4826. Ayéjìn,kòlópin;ibitíẹs/egravedotbelowòdélógún
ọdúnòló-ǹ-kà.
The world is so vast that there is no end to
it; the places a person’s feet cannot reach in
twenty years are uncountable. (No one can
claim to know all there is of the world.)
4827. Ayékìídipọlọrukáfẹs/egravedotbelowrọrísùn.
The world is never so disrupted that one
rests one’s head on one’s legs to sleep. (How-
ever the world turns, a person does not
suﬀer the same fate as a chicken.)
4828. Ayékìídipọlọrukádìẹmáfẹs/egravedotbelowrọrí
sùn.
The world is never so disrupted that the
chicken does not rest its head on its legs to
sleep.
36 (However the world goes, the fate of
the chicken will not change.)
4829. Ayéle;bíobáaopaá;bíoòbáaobù
úl/eacutedotbelows/egravedotbelow.
Humankind is awesome: if you catch up
with him, kill him; if you are unable to, put
a hex on his footprint. (Humans’ evil machi-
nations are formidable; people will explore
all means to injure others.)
4830. Ayéle,èèyàn-ánburújuẹkùn.
The world is tough; people are more evil
than the leopard. (Living among people is
full of peril.)
4831. Ayéńretíẹl/eacutedotbelowyà;níboniw/oacutedotbelownﬁtiOlúwa
sí?
The world waits expectantly for one’s dis-
grace; to what place have they relegated
God’s purpose? (People hope for a person’s
36. This is a reference to the way dressed chickens
are trussed.
disgrace without considering what God
might wish.)
4832. Ayéòf/eacutedotbelowkáruẹrùkás/ogravedotbelow;oríẹniníńsọni.
The world does not wish that one rid oneself
of the burden one carries; it is one’s head
that relieves one. (Other people do not wish
one good fortune; each person’s guardian
spirit ensures his or her good fortune. See
also the next entry.)
4833. Ayéòf/eacutedotbelownif/oacutedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow,àﬁoríẹni.
The world does not wish one to prosper;
only one’s own head does. (Only one’s
guardian spirit, not other people, wishes one
to prosper. Compare the preceding entry.)
4834. Ayéòl/oacutedotbelowràá:ọj/oacutedotbelowaríkérékájẹkéré;ọj/oacutedotbelow
aríw/ogravedotbelowmùkájẹw/ogravedotbelowmù;àgbàkìíṣubúy/egravedotbelowg/egravedotbelowkó
datiikùnsíl/egravedotbelow;ounabájẹníḿbanilọ.
There is no fat to this world: when one has
only a little, one should eat only a little;
when one has a great deal, one should eat
a great deal; an elder does not fall and spill
what is in his stomach; it is what one has
eaten that goes with one. (The future is
uncertain; one should therefore live ac-
cording to one’s present circumstances; the
only thing that can go with one in death
is what one has already enjoyed. Compare
3981.)
4835. Ayéòríninígbàtíasun/ogravedotbelowg/egravedotbelowd/egravedotbelowjẹ;ìgbàtí
aﬁ/egravedotbelowgúsíseb/egravedotbelowtóp/oacutedotbelownbíedélayéríni.
The world pays no attention when one has
t or o a s tp l a n t a i n sf o rf o o d ;i ti so n l yw h e n
one cooks melon-seed stew that is as pink
as shrimps that the world pays attention.
(People have time only for those whose stars
are ascending.)
4836. Ayòkìíjẹkáy/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelow.
One does not hit the jackpot in the game of
ayòand refuse to collect. (One does not turn
one’s back on good fortune.)
Miscellany 469


--- PAGE 483 ---
4837. Ayoòtòṣìlọl/oacutedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowńfọw/oacutedotbelowt/egravedotbelowníkùn.
I ti sas a t i a t e dp o o rp e r s o nt h a tar i c hp e r s o n
may poke in the stomach with a ﬁnger. (The
poor person’s abundance does not impress a
wealthy person.)
4838. Ay/ogravedotbelowabaratíńtín.
Happiness, a thing with a frail constitution.
(Happiness is ﬁckle.)
4839. Ày/ogravedotbelowká,ọmọẹnìkanlókù.
Universal happiness: only a certain person
is left out. (The happiness in question is
all-embracing, leaving out only the unfortu-
nate.)
4840. Ayọnil/eacutedotbelownuọkùnrinlóníòunójẹìr/ogravedotbelow.
It is the burdensome man who says he would
eat steamed corn-meal. (A person with
uncommon tastes is a great bother.)
37
4841. Àyúnb/ogravedotbelowlọw/oacutedotbelowńyúnẹnu.
Going-and-returning is the manner of the
hand’s journey to the mouth. (The hand
that lifts food to the mouth always returns
safely.)
B
4842. ‘‘Báminaọmọ-/ogravedotbelowmi’’òdénúọl/oacutedotbelowmọ.
‘‘Whip my child for me’’ does not come from
deep inside the mother. (No mother is en-
thusiastic in delivering her child to deserved
punishment.)
4843. Baál/egravedotbelowtósọọmọajádiẹgbàá,ọmọtir/egravedotbelow
áw/oacutedotbelownníb/egravedotbelow.
The chief who raised the price of a puppy to
2 0 0c o w r i e s ,h i so w nc h i l dw i l lp a yt h ep r i c e .
(The child will reap some of what the father
sowed.)
37. The food àbàrí,or ìr/ogravedotbelow,takes a great deal of eﬀort
to make.
4844. Bábábobábá;bàbàbobàbà;ewé/ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowt/oacutedotbelow
boewéòro/mgravebó.
Bábácovers bábá;guinea corn overhangs
guinea corn; the leaves of the ﬁg tree over-
arch those of the orange tree. (Although
people supposedly are of equal stature, some
are to be preferred over others.)
38
4845. Babaẹnìkanògbinyánrin;baba
ẹnìkanògbint/egravedotbelowt/egravedotbelow;fúnra-ar/egravedotbelowníńhù.
Nobody’s father plantsyánrin[a wild vege-
table], and nobody’s father plants wild
spinach; they grow by themselves. (No one
may lay an exclusive claim to public prop-
erty.)
4846. Babájoná/egravedotbelowḿbèrèirùngb/ogravedotbelown;kílófa
sábàbí?
The old man is consumed in ﬂames, and you
ask about his beard; what led to the disaster
i nt h eﬁ r s tp l a c e ?( I ft h eh a r d i e s tt h i n g ss u c -
cumb to a misfortune, there is no point in
asking about the frail. Compare 4110.)
4847. Ba-owò-j/eacutedotbelow,obìtíńsol/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowrùn.
R u i n e r - o f - t r a d e ,k o l an u tt h a tf r u i t si nt h e
dry season. (Plants that yield out of their
season undermine the market.)
4848. ‘‘Báríkà’’lónìí;‘‘Báríkà’’l/oacutedotbelowla;‘‘Ẹkú
ìr/oacutedotbelowjú’’òjìnnàsíb/egravedotbelow.
‘‘Congratulations on surviving a disaster’’
today; ‘‘Congratulations on surviving a
disaster’’ the next day; ‘‘Accept my con-
dolences’’ is not far away. (Persistent close
shaves sooner or later become real disasters.)
4849. Bàtádúnkòdún,átanil/egravedotbelowkúkanl/egravedotbelow
kanl/egravedotbelow.
Whether or not thebàtádrum sounds well,
it will do its part in the funeral obsequies.
38. Part of the appeal of the proverb derives from
the reduplication ofbásyllables. The wordbábárefers
to nothing in particular.
470 truisms


--- PAGE 484 ---
(What matters is that a thing serve its pur-
pose, not that one like it.)
4850. Bàtàlaﬁńṣagbáraláàrin/egravedotbelowgún.
Shoes make for fearlessness amid thorns.
(Who has shoes may strut even over danger-
ous ground.)
4851. Bàtàòj/eacutedotbelowkámọagés/egravedotbelowòyìnbó;aṣ/eacutedotbelowaṣọ
létíkòj/eacutedotbelowkámọẹnitíńfaṣọìyàbora.
Shoes keep one from knowing which white
man has lost his toes; hemming dresses
keeps people from knowing who is clothed
in wretchedness. (Outward appearances
often belie private woes.)
4852. Bàtáakoto,atiroàrìnjó,ṣaworo/ogravedotbelowg/egravedotbelowd/egravedotbelow,
gbogbowọnbákan-náàbákan-náà.
The bàtáakotodrum, a lame itinerant
dancer, a rattle made of bananas, all are the
same. (The enumerated things are three of a
kind, all defective.)
4853. B/eacutedotbelowmàrìwò,b/eacutedotbelow/ogravedotbelowg/egravedotbelowd/egravedotbelow,ọj/oacutedotbelowkan-náàni
w/oacutedotbelownńyọ.
Cut oﬀ palm fronds and cut down a banana
tree; they sprout anew the same day. (Said of
things that share the same characteristics.)
4854. Bèbèìdíniyólokíjìpágbó.
The large beads adorning the waist will wear
out the durable home-woven cloth in the
end. (One always pays somehow for one’s
pleasures and vanities.)
4855. Bẹbẹòtánl/eacutedotbelowhìn-inbẹbẹ.
One celebration does not end all celebra-
tions.
39 (The accomplishment of one feat
does not prevent the accomplishment of
another.)
4856. B/egravedotbeloww/egravedotbelowkó-or/oacutedotbelowk/ogravedotbelowṣ/eacutedotbelow;ṣagbekó-oráhun.
Seek help and ﬁnd out who is recalcitrant;
39. Bẹbẹis the elaborate celebration that theAláàﬁn
of Ọy/oacutedotbelow performs after a momentous achievement.
beg for alms and ﬁnd out who is a miser.
(One does not know one’s friends until one
needs help.)
4857. Bíabáb/oacutedotbelowjútíab/oacutedotbelownu;ìsàl/egravedotbelowàgb/ogravedotbelownlà
ńparí-ir/egravedotbelowsí.
After one has washed one’s face and one’s
mouth, the ablution concludes at the under-
side of the chin. (After discussing a mat-
ter back and forth, one rests it with the
proper person to decide on it. Compare
3257.)
4858. Bíabágéiginígbó,gbohùn-gbohùná
gbàá.
If one fells a tree in the forest, the echo
carries the sound. (Not even things done in
secret can be long concealed.)
4859. Bíabámáajẹundunọmọdé,híhànla
ﬁńhànán.
If one wishes to hurt a child by eating some-
t h i n gh ew a n t s ,o n es h o w si tt oh i mﬁ r s t .( I f
one intends to hurt a person, one should be
sure the person knows of one’s actions.)
4860. Bíabáńf/eacutedotbelowrànọmọdéníil/egravedotbelowkú,àm/ogravedotbelowpé
af/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowﬁsọfàni.
If a child is being made much of at a funeral
(presumably of his father), it is obvious that
he is about to be pawned. (Favors done for
an orphan have ulterior motives.)
4861. Bíabáńjiyànsípàá,àṣíaṣọkúrò.
If there is any dispute about hydrocele, let
us strip away all clothing. (There is no point
in carrying on protracted arguments when
a simple and incontrovertible means of
resolving the issue is available. Compare
606.)
4862. Bíabáńr/eacutedotbelowrìn-ính/egravedotbelown-h/egravedotbelown,tíàńgúnni
l/oacutedotbelowbẹ,kòníkómáwọnú.
If one laughs while stabbing another, that
does not keep the dagger from piercing the
Miscellany 471


--- PAGE 485 ---
skin. (A person killed with kindness is just
as dead.)
4863. Bíabáńṣ/eacutedotbelowgègéìjà,kámútiológbò
kúrò;ọbalọbańj/eacutedotbelow.
If people cast lots to determine the best
ﬁghter, a cat should be set aside; a king is
a king. (The cat is undisputed king where
wrestling is concerned.)
4864. Bíabápọnomi,tódànù,tíagbèòf/oacutedotbelow,à
túnòmírànpọn.
If one draws water and it is spilled but the
gourd is unbroken, one reﬁlls the gourd. (As
long as one has a capacity to act, temporary
setbacks are of little consequence.)
4865. Bíabásọidàsíl/egravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelowmẹwàá,ibipẹlẹbẹ
niyódàdél/egravedotbelow.
If one throws a sword down ten times, it will
come to rest on its side. (However long one
worries a case, the facts will not change.)
4866. Bíabáyọipinlójú,ojúlaﬁńhàn.
If one removes secreted matter from the eye,
one shows it to the eye. (One discusses an
oﬀense with the oﬀender, not other people.
This is a variant of 4892.)
4867. Bíakòríọk/ogravedotbelow,aòlèdéÈkó.
Without a boat, one cannot get to Lagos.
40
(Without the means, the end is out of
reach.)
4868. Bíakòṣeàṣenù,aòlèṣeàṣejẹ.
If one has never labored for nought, one
does not gain from one’s labor. (Disappoint-
ment comes before fulﬁllment.)
4869. Bíaf/eacutedotbelowf/eacutedotbelowbáńf/eacutedotbelow,koríkoamáajó.
If the wind blows, the grass dances. (Certain
orders cannot be ignored.)
40. Before the construction of bridges, boats were
of course the only means of getting to Lagos Island.
4870. Bíàgbàlagbà-ábáńtioríjẹàkèré,
k/oacutedotbelowmọdémánìírètíatijẹníb/egravedotbelow.
If an elder begins eating a frog from its head,
a youth should not hope to have any share
of it. (One can expect no help from a per-
son whose actions reveal his or her own
desperation.)
4871. Bíagb/oacutedotbelownbámáaṣorò,akìdíbọl/egravedotbelow;bí
idà-ábámáaṣorò,aki/egravedotbelowkùbọàk/ogravedotbelow.
When the wasp is about to ﬁght, it dips its
tail in the ground; when a sword is about
to ﬁght, it dips its hilt into the scabbard.
(Before engaging in a demanding task, one
makes the proper preparations. Also, mo-
mentous events are presaged by warning
signs.)
4872. Bíajábáńwọagbádáiná,tíàm/ogravedotbelowt/eacutedotbelowkùn
ńw/egravedotbelowwù/egravedotbelowj/egravedotbelow,tíológìnníńsánàkísàjìnnìm/oacutedotbelowdìí,
ẹgb/eacutedotbelowapẹranjẹníńṣe.
If the dog wears a garment of ﬁre, and the
leopard wears a dress of blood, while the
cat ties a tattered rag around its waist, it is
nevertheless a member of the clan of carni-
vores. (Innate quality, not clothing, is what
matters.)
4873. Bíàjànàkújẹtíkòyó,ìgb/eacutedotbelowlojúótì.
If the elephant eats and is not full, the shame
belongs to the forest. (To the person unable
to fulﬁll his or her obligations belongs the
shame, not to the disappointed person.)
4874. Bíalágb/egravedotbelowdẹ-/eacutedotbelowbáńlurinlójúkan,ojú
àmìlówàníb/egravedotbelow.
If a blacksmith keeps hitting the iron on the
same spot, it is because there is a mark or
blemish there. (There is a reason for every
action.)
4875. Bíalápatà-ábápaẹran,alágbàtàabù
úníàjàn.
When a butcher kills an animal, meat
hawkers cut it up for sale. (Each person does
h i so rh e rb i tw h e ni ti sh i so rh e rt u r n . )
472 truisms


--- PAGE 486 ---
4876. Bías/oacutedotbelowbáp/eacutedotbelowlápò,ábu.
If a cloth remains too long in the sack, it
goes moldy. (If a person stays long enough
in one place, he or she acquires the traits of
that place.)
4877. Bíayébájá,kòṣééso.
Once life has snapped, it cannot be mended.
(A lost life is irretrievable.)
4878. Bíeégúnòbáṣeohuntótóbi,at/oacutedotbelowkùn-
unr/egravedotbelowkìítúuwò.
If a masquerader has not done something
unprecedented, his attendant does not open
his mask for inspection. (Only extraordinary
actions call for extraordinary reactions.)
4879. Bíẹránbábal/egravedotbelow,ojúayánọdẹ.
When an animal falls to the ground, the
hunter’s eyes lose their wildness. (At the end
of the chase, ennui sets in.)
4880. Bíigíbádá,igiayẹrí;bíèèyánbákú,a
kuèèyànṣàà-ṣààníl/egravedotbelow;bíẹnioríẹníbákú,ẹni
il/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelowadiẹnioríẹní.
If a tree breaks, other trees make way; if a
person dies, other people will remain; if the
person on the mat dies, the person on the
bare ﬂoor becomes the person on the mat.
(As one generation passes, another genera-
tion succeeds it; life goes on regardless.)
4881. Bíil/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowgbeòṣìkà,tíkògbeolóòót/oacutedotbelow,oore
asúniṣe.
If the earth succors the wicked but not the
good person, one tires of good deeds. (If the
wicked prosper while good people ﬂounder,
one is discouraged about doing good.)
4882. Bíinábájólóko,màjàlàafòwásílé.
When there is a ﬁre in the forest, the soot
ﬂies home. (Events that happen afar send
their news back home.)
4883. Bíinákòbáláwonínú,kìígunòkè
odò.
If a ﬁre is not endowed with mysterious
powers, it does not jump rivers. (When
matters take unprecedented turns, they are
driven by unusual forces.)
4884. Bíinúẹnìkanòbàj/eacutedotbelow,inúẹnìkankìí
dùn.
If one person does not become sad, another
person does not become happy. (One per-
son’s sadness is another person’s happiness.)
4885. Bíkòbánídìí,obìnrinkìíj/eacutedotbelowKúmólú.
If there is no unusual circumstance, a
woman is not named Kúmólú.
41 (Unusual
circumstances necessitate unusual actions.)
4886. Bíkòbásílójú,kìíkànsáyà.
If it is not visible to the eyes, it does not
weigh on the mind. (What the eyes do not
see does not cause terror.)
4887. Bíkòbásíohuntóṣe/egravedotbelowṣ/eacutedotbelow,/egravedotbelowṣ/eacutedotbelowkìíṣ/eacutedotbelow.
If the ﬁst is not provoked, the ﬁst does not
ﬁght. (For every quarrel there must be some
reason.)
4888. Bíkòsíbótirí,ìr/egravedotbelowkìíṣ/eacutedotbelownítan.
Were things not as they were, the cricket’s
thigh would not have snapped. (Unavoid-
able adversity caused a calamity.)
4889. Bík/ogravedotbelown-n/ogravedotbelown-ǹ-góbáṣeméjìalàlújá.
If k/ogravedotbelownn/ogravedotbelownǹgódrums number two, they will
encompass the whole town.
42 (Two of a cer-
tain type of person would be too much for a
town.)
4890. Bíkúkúrúògb/oacutedotbelown,èyígbọgbọrọńk/oacutedotbelow?
If the short person is unwise, how about the
tall person? (A group cannot be uniformly
stupid.)
41. This name, meaning ‘‘Death has taken the
headman,’’ is usually restricted to males.
42. K/ogravedotbelownn/ogravedotbelownǹgódrums are part of thedùndúndrum
ensemble.
Miscellany 473


--- PAGE 487 ---
4891. Bíogúnbálọ,ogúnáb/ogravedotbelow;bíkòṣeb/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelow,
ìbòsíìgárálàńké.
If twenty go, twenty should return; other-
wise, one raises an alarm that one has been
defrauded. (Welching is not a good practice
in dealing with others.)
4892. Bíojúbáṣ/ogravedotbelowbùnojúlàáﬁí hàn;bíabá
yọpinlójú,àﬁhanojú.
If the eyes produce ﬁlth, one shows it to the
eyes; if one takes secreted matter out of the
eyes, one shows it to the eyes. (It is with the
perpetrator of an oﬀense that one discusses
it. This is a variant of 4866.)
4893. Bíòkúbákúláyé,àkàlàam/ogravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowrun.
When the dead dies on earth, the ground
hornbill knows in heaven. (A momentous
event cannot be kept quiet.)
4894. Bíológìnníbálọsájòtób/ogravedotbelow,inúèkútéa
bàj/eacutedotbelow.
If the cat goes on a journey and returns, the
mouse becomes sad. (The oppressed always
bemoan their oppressor’s good fortune.)
4895. BíolÓrò-ómájá,owóoúnjẹolówó-or/egravedotbelow
lódínkù.
If the secret cult impounds a dog, it is
the owner’s food expense that is lessened.
(There is a bright side to every misfortune.)
4896. BíOníreseòfíngbám/oacutedotbelow,èyítótifínòlè
parun.
If Onírese stops carving calabashes, those he
has carved will not perish. (Whatever one
has accomplished cannot be undone, even
after one has lost the capacity to accomplish
more.)
4897. Bíoṣù-úbálé,gbogboojúníńríi.
When the moon appears, all eyes see it.
(A public event cannot be hidden from
people.)
4898. Bíòyìnbóbámáalọl/oacutedotbelowgbà,abaọgbà
j/eacutedotbelow.
When a white man prepares to take his leave
from a yard, he ruins it. (The white man
on taking his leave from a place creates a
shambles. See the following entry.)
4899. Bíòyìnbóbámáalọnílùú,aṣusága.
When a white man prepares to leave a town,
he defecates in the chair. (The white man
on departing a place creates a mess to leave
behind. See the previous entry.)
4900. Bíọbaòkú,ọbaòjẹ.
If a king does not die, a king is not crowned.
( T h e r ei sac e r t a i no r d e rt oe v e n t s ,a n de v e r y
event has its purpose.)
4901. Bí/ogravedotbelowbẹòbámú,òunìp/oacutedotbelownrinniyóm/ogravedotbelow.
If a knife is not sharp, both it and the honing
stone will know. (The solution of a prob-
lem is between the person involved and the
person who will help to solve it.)
4902. Bíọdúnbáburú,èṣílàgb/egravedotbelowńyìn.
If a year is bad, the farmer speaks well of the
previous year. (Present hardships make one
appreciate past comforts.)
4903. Bíọk/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowreòkun,bóre/ogravedotbelowsà,aforílé
èbúté.
After a boat has plied the oceans and plied
the lagoon, it returns to harbor. (After much
traveling, one returns home in the end.)
4904. Bí/ogravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowbálẹ,ìgbòrò-or/egravedotbelowágbójú.
If a lazy person engages in his lazy ways, his
farm will be neglected. (The aﬀairs of a lazy
person will not prosper.)
4905. BíỌl/oacutedotbelowrúnbápánilórí,aﬁirùngb/ogravedotbelown
dípò-or/egravedotbelow.
If God makes one bald, he gives one a beard
a sc o m p e n s a t i o n .( T h e r ei sab r i g h ts i d et o
every misfortune.)
474 truisms


--- PAGE 488 ---
4906. Bí/ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowèèyàn-ánbákúròl/eacutedotbelowgb/eacutedotbelow,/ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowa
dánilárayá.
If many people leave a company, many
people cheer one up. (The departure of
many people from a company should not
stop the rest from pursuing their aims.)
4907. Bíyótiríniyórìí;alágb/egravedotbelowdẹòlègbé
ọmọowúmì.
Whatever threatens to happen will have to
happen; the blacksmith cannot swallow his
hammer. (Come what may, one will not do
what one has no intention of doing.)
4908. Bíbàlóbà;kòìt/iacuteigravebàj/eacutedotbelow.
It has only settled; it is not yet ruined. (The
damage is still salvageable.)
43
4909. Bìríbìrílayéńyí;ìgbàkanòloiléayé
gbó.
Round and round the earth turns; one sea-
son does not mark the end of the world.
(The times are always changing.)
4910. B/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowkìnníòunọl/oacutedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowẹgb/eacutedotbelowra;/ogravedotbelowbùnòun
aṣiwèrè/ogravedotbelowkan-ùn;/ogravedotbelowkánjúàòunolèdéédéni
w/oacutedotbelownjásí.
The dandy and the wealthy person are equal;
the ﬁlthy person and the imbecile are alike;
the covetous person and the thief amount
to the same thing. (Being fashionable is as
desirable as being wealthy; ﬁlthiness is com-
parable to imbecility; covetousness is kin to
thievery.)
4911. Bùtù-bútú/ogravedotbelownàÌjèṣàlọmọdéﬁńṣeré;bí
kòk/oacutedotbelowmọnírírìnẹs/egravedotbelow,ak/oacutedotbelowmọníyíyan.
It is in the ﬁne sand on the road to Iléṣà that
the child is playing; if it does not teach the
child how to walk, it will teach him how to
stride. (Nobody comes out of an encounter
43. The construction takes advantage of the simi-
larity of two unrelated words:bà(to alight or settle)
and bàj/eacutedotbelow(to spoil).
with a diﬃcult force without having learned
some lesson.)
D
4912. Dàbímotidàlayéńf/eacutedotbelow.
Become-as-I-am is what the world wants.
(People always want others to share their
misfortunes. Compare 3318.)
4913. Dan-dankìísél/egravedotbelow.
A necessity cannot be ignored. (Whatever
must be done cannot be left undone.)
4914. Dì/eacutedotbelowǹdìlòpin-insinimá.
‘‘The end’’ marks the end of a ﬁlm show.
(When a thing or a relationship is over, it is
over.)
4915. Dídùnlàḿbáláfáráoyin.
One ﬁnds only sweetness in a honeycomb.
( Ac e r t a i np e r s o n ’ sa ﬀ a i r sw i l la l w a y sb e
characterized by pleasantness.)
4916. Dí/egravedotbelow-dí/egravedotbelowlàḿmọàpẹrẹ.
Portents make themselves known only
gradually. (From little things one learns the
true nature of someone or something.)
4917. Dín-dín-dínlàḿbólú;dín-dín-dínlà
ḿbáw/ogravedotbelow;dín-dín-dínlàḿbáolóòṣàtòuntèkó
orí-ir/egravedotbelow.
Robust as ever is how one ﬁnds the queen
t e r m i t e ;f r e s ha se v e ri sh o wo n ec o m e su p o n
skin complexion; healthy as ever is how one
ﬁnds the cult worshiper complete with a par-
r o t ’ st a i lf e a t h e ri nh i sh a i r .( T h i sp e r s o n ’ s
lot will always be good health.)
44
44. Such proverbs as this ﬁnd their usual application
in prayer contexts.
Miscellany 475


--- PAGE 489 ---
E
4918. Ebikìíwọnúk/oacutedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowmíràn-ánw/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelow.
Hunger does not enter into a person and
leave room for other matters. (A hungry
person is a distracted person. Compare
3759.)
4919. Ebiníńpanibákan-náà;/ogravedotbelowrànkìídunni
bákan-náà.
Hunger aﬀects people the same way, but
disasters do not hurt people the same way.
(Diﬀerent people have diﬀerent vulnerabili-
ties.)
4920. Eégúnníòúnf/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowjó;òjò-óníòúnf/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow;
ọmọ-/oacutedotbelowníòúnf/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowṣebẹbẹ.
The masquerader says he wants to dance; the
rain says it wants to fall; and the child says
he wants to perform wonders. (Conﬂicting
desires pose a diﬃcult problem.)
45
4921. Eégúntíḿb/eacutedotbelowọmọlóríkìíd/eacutedotbelowrùba
ọmo-ọtir/egravedotbelow.
The masquerader that beheads people does
not pose a threat to his own child.
46 (People
who are uncompromisingly strict with the
children of others are usually permissive
with their own.)
4922. Èèm/ogravedotbelowlukutup/eacutedotbelowb/eacutedotbelow;ìyàwólóyúnóbíajá.
Unspeakable abomination: the bride be-
comes pregnant and gives birth to a puppy.
(The occurrence under reference is such
as the world has never seen before. The
following entry is a variant.)
4923. Èèm/ogravedotbelowlukutup/eacutedotbelowb/eacutedotbelow;ìyàwólóyúntán/ogravedotbelowna
ògbaọkọ.
45. Masqueraders cannot dance in the rain. The
wonder the child wants to perform is to lavish money
on the dancing masquerader.
46. The executioner was traditionally a masquer-
ader.
Unspeakable abomination: the wife becomes
pregnant, and the doorway cannot accom-
modate the husband. (The person with a
problem shows no adverse eﬀects, but the
bystander does. Compare the preceding
entry.)
4924. Èèm/ogravedotbelowlukutup/eacutedotbelowb/eacutedotbelow,sòbìyàÀjàyí,èyító
dáal/eacutedotbelows/egravedotbelowtóńroóléhín.
Unspeakable abomination: Àjàyí’s guinea
worm, which attacks his foot and causes
his teeth to ache. (It is a strange aﬄiction
whose eﬀects are wholly at variance with
experience.)
4925. Èèm/ogravedotbelow-ọkílèyí?Ẹniab/eacutedotbelowlórígénijẹ.
What sort of abomination is this? The per-
son one has beheaded bites one. (Unnatural
events defy explanation.)
4926. Èésúòlérè;oyeadálàńkó.
Pooled contributions earn no proﬁt; one
winds up with only how much one contrib-
uted.
47 (Certain pursuits or obligations are
necessary or expedient but thankless.)
4927. Èèyànbíahunníńheahun;èèyànbí
aṣọkìíj/eacutedotbelowkókùtà.
Only tortoiselike people ﬁnd tortoises; it
is people who are attracted to particular
cloths that save them from being unsalable.
(Everything has its champions. Compare the
following entry and 3389.)
4928. Èèyànbíìgbínníńheìgbín;èèyánbí
ahunníńheahun.
Only tortoiselike people ﬁnd tortoises; only
snaillike people ﬁnd snails. (People with
like temperaments are inevitably drawn
together. Compare the preceding entry and
3389.)
47. This refers to a mutual saving systems; see
note 2 to 2899.
476 truisms


--- PAGE 490 ---
4929. Èèyànbúburúp/ogravedotbelowójùgb/eacutedotbelow;ẹnireréw/oacutedotbelown
juojúlọ.
E v i lp e o p l ea r ea sc o m m o na sf e c e s ;g o o d
people are dearer than eyes. (Evil people are
a dime a dozen; good people are a rarity.)
4930. Èèyànyin-niyin-nik/eacutedotbelownióṣeòmíràn.
People’s unstinted praise encourages one to
perform further feats. (To be praised is to be
urged on to further accomplishments.)
4931. Ehorotójẹṣu,tódùnmọ,atúnpadà
wá.
The rabbit that eats yams and enjoys them
will return for more. (People remember
good experiences and seek their repetition.)
4932. Eku-kékukìírùnboríasín.
No rat surpassesasín[a vicious rat with a
pointed snout and strong smell] in stink.
(Certain people are unique, or unsurpass-
able, in certain ways.)
4933. Èpèńròkótójà.
Curses delay a while before taking eﬀect.
(Retribution may not be swift, but that does
not mean that it will never come.)
4934. Erínwósílù-úàìl/oacutedotbelowbẹ.
An elephant collapses in a town without
knives. (An unmanageable problem has
arisen.)
4935. Erukugbágbáọmọìyá/ogravedotbelowdá;ìrìw/ogravedotbeloww/ogravedotbelow
ọmọìyáòjò.
Billowing dust, sibling of drought; shower-
ing sprinkle, sibling of rain. (Certain phe-
nomena are symbols of other realities; cer-
tain people have qualities that recall those of
legendary people.)
4936. Èwolósànnínúu‘‘Ódiìjẹsàn-ántí
ọm/oacutedotbelowtińṣu,’’àti‘‘Ódiìjẹsàn-ántíọmọòtilè
ṣu’’?
Which can one say is the better statement:
‘‘It has been nine days now that the child
has been having the runs’’ or ‘‘It has been
nine days now that the child has been unable
to shit’’? (An indication that one has been
presented with a form of Hobson’s choice.)
4937. Ewúr/eacutedotbelowwoalápatàbíikókú.
The goat eyes the butcher as though it would
kill him with looks. (If one’s adversary is
too formidable, one is reduced to ineﬀectual
gestures.)
Ẹ
4938. Ẹtipéyórìí,nígbàtíọmọolèńgun
ìbaka?
What do you expect, when the scion of a
thief rides a camel? (If a person lives con-
spicuously beyond his or her means, one
may legitimately suspect some hanky-
panky.)
4939. /Egravedotbelowb/egravedotbelowlàḿbẹṢàngó;obìnrinkìíwọ
ṣòkòtò.
One’s only option before Ṣango is to plead;
it is taboo for a woman to wear trousers.
(Certain things are irrevocable and must
be accommodated, like the prohibition of
trousers for women).
4940. /Egravedotbelowbìtìtíyópaerè,ojú-ur/egravedotbelowáp/oacutedotbelown.
T h et r a pt h a tw i l lk i l lap y t h o nw i l lg r o w
r e di nt h ee y e s .
48 (Whoever attempts the
near-impossible will labor greatly.)
4941. /Egravedotbelowdáníkómátoríòundá;ológùn-ṣẹṣ/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelow
níkómátoríòunṣ/egravedotbelow;ọkàabàbàáníkómá
toríòunbàj/eacutedotbelow.
/Egravedotbelowdá says that it must not break in his time;
ológùn-ṣẹṣ/egravedotbelowsays it must not occur in its
time; guinea corn says it must not spoil in
48. The expression translated as ‘‘grow red in the
eyes’’ is an idiom for suﬀering.
Miscellany 477


--- PAGE 491 ---
its time. (Evil will not occur during a certain
person’s watch.)49
4942. /Egravedotbelowdáòlàròpin.
A human being does not have a write-oﬀ
point. (Never write anyone oﬀ.)
4943. /Egravedotbelowgúnòb/eacutedotbelows/egravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelow.
Thorns do not make friends with the soles
o ft h ef e e t .( C e r t a i np e o p l ea r eb yc o n s t i t u -
tion incompatible with others, just as certain
actions are unsuitable for certain situations.)
4944. /Egravedotbelowgbìnkìíjọ/egravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelow;opókìíjọàtọw/oacutedotbelowf/eacutedotbelow.
What one plants is not like what one grafts;
an inherited wife is not like one married by
choice. (Something thrust on one is never
the same as something acquired of one’s free
will.)
4945. /Egravedotbelowjákìíjákópé.
A fragment, after being broken oﬀ, cannot
be reattached perfectly. (Once something
has been damaged, it can no longer return
to its pristine state.)
4946. /Egravedotbelowj/egravedotbelowahunòkúnnil/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow.
The blood of the tortoise does not ﬁll one’s
palm. (There is very little one can expect
from a miser.)
50
4947. Ẹj/oacutedotbelowniàlèḿbániròbíyókani.
When a concubine begins to argue with one,
it is a sure sign that she intends to expose
49. This incantation/proverb displays the Yoruba
belief in a mystical connection between objects and
forces embedded in or suggested by their names. The
second syllable of /Egravedotbelowdá (dá) means ‘‘break’’; the last
syllable in ológùn-ṣẹṣ/egravedotbelow(ṣ/egravedotbelow) means ‘‘occur’’ (as inṣẹl/egravedotbelow);
and the last syllable inbàbàis the ﬁrst in the expres-
sion bàj/eacutedotbelow,which means ‘‘spoil.’’Ológùn-ṣẹṣ/egravedotbelowis the tree
Erithrinasenegalensis (Papilonaceae); see Abraham 470.
50. Since ahunmeans both ‘‘tortoise’’ and ‘‘miser,’’
the proverb works on both the literal and ﬁgurative
levels, because a butchered tortoise gives oﬀ little blood.
one. (When one’s accomplice in a crime be-
gins to be unfriendly and contentious, one
should look out.)
4948. Ẹkàngbarigidíwọl/egravedotbelow;/ogravedotbelowgbágáráwọléó
kuàtiyọ.
An enormous root has bored into the
ground; the heated iron borer has entered
[the trunk], and pulling it out becomes a
problem. (A person, or thing, is so well
established that there is no dislodging him,
her, or it.)
51
4949. /Egravedotbelowmú(ni)baál/egravedotbelowàgb/egravedotbelowdẹ.
Pliers [are] chief of the smithy. (A certain
object or person is more to be reckoned with
than others in a certain context.)
52
4950. ẸníbábáÌj/egravedotbelowbúṣorò-óbáỌl/oacutedotbelowrunṣe.
Whoever makes a pact with an Ìj/egravedotbelowbú person
makes a pact with God. (No relationship
is more auspicious than one with an Ìj/egravedotbelowbú
person.)
53
4951. Ẹníbáríṣel/ogravedotbelowtáayé.
Whoever ﬁnds success is the enemy of
humankind. (People always begrudge suc-
cessful people their good fortune.)
4952. Ẹníbárìnjìnnàáﬁodóìbúl/egravedotbelowjẹun.
Whoever travels far will eat food pounded
in a horizontal mortar. (Whoever looks well
beyond his or her immediate environment
will be exposed to unusual habits; the more
one travels, the more one learns.)
51. The proverb is commonly applied by a woman
in a polygamous situation to warn her co-wives of the
futility of trying to get rid of her.
52. The proverb often takes the form of an exclama-
tion without the verb:/Egravedotbelowmú,baál/egravedotbelowàgb/egravedotbelowde!(Pliers, chief
of the smithy!).
53. This is an obvious coinage by an Ìj/egravedotbelowbú person,
and variants of it can be found naming other Yoruba
groups.
478 truisms


--- PAGE 492 ---
4953. Ẹníbátàjòwáníńpur/oacutedotbelowfáráilé.
It is the person who has just returned from
a journey that tells tall tales to those who
stayed at home. (A person with wide ex-
periences has the advantage of those with
narrow ones.)
4954. Ẹníﬁ/egravedotbelowwùfábukéw/ogravedotbelowlóníkóròdekó
mátètèdé.
Whoever gave the humpback a garment to
wear is to blame for his going on an outing
from which he will be long in returning.
(The person who suddenly comes into the
sort of fortune he or she never dreamed of is
sure to be ostentatious in showing it oﬀ.)
4955. Ẹnífúnnil/oacutedotbelowmọ-/oacutedotbelowparíoore.
W h o e v e rg i v e so n eac h i l d[ t om a r r y ]h a s
gone the limit in conferring favors. (There
is no greater favor a person can do than to
give another his daughter in marriage. One
should acknowledge extraordinary gestures.
See 2653.)
4956. Ẹníṣu-úlègbàgbé;ẹnitók óoòníí
gbàgbé.
The person who defecates may forget; the
person who cleans the feces oﬀ will not
forget. (A person who oﬀends may soon for-
get, but the person wronged will not soon
forget.)
4957. Ẹnitíkògb/oacutedotbelowtẹnu/egravedotbelowgàlóńní/egravedotbelowgà
ńpàtótó.
It is a person who does not understand
w h a tt h ew e a v e rb i r di ss a y i n gw h os a y si ti s
chattering. (Unless one is privy to people’s
thoughts, one does not know why they do
what they do.)
4958. Ẹnití/ogravedotbelowràn-ándùn,akìíﬁ/ogravedotbelowrànl/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelow.
The person most aggrieved is not the one to
ask for mediation in the case. (A partisan is
not a good judge.)
4959. ẸnitíṢàngóbátiojú-ur/egravedotbelowwọl/egravedotbelowònííbú
Ọyalékèém/oacutedotbelow.
Whoever witnesses Ṣango enter the ground
[i.e., sees lightning strike] will never again
say that Ọya lies.
54 (Once one has seen the
feat a person can perform, one stops being a
skeptic.)
4960. Ẹnitíyókọigbalóko,ìrìnẹs/egravedotbelow-ẹr/egravedotbelowlà
ńwò.
The person who vows to make two hundred
heaps on the farm: one should pay attention
to how he walks. (How a person behaves re-
veals more about his or her capabilities than
what the person says.)
4961. Ẹnitíyóp/egravedotbelowgànòrìṣàniyópèéàfínkò
fíntó;óf/eacutedotbelowkóbólárani?
It is a person who wishes to scorn the gods
who will say that the albino is not bleached
enough; would the person prefer that the
albino have no skin? (It is silly to ﬁnd fault
with perfection.)
55
4962. Ẹnitóbíarẹwà-ábíìyọnu.
Whoever gives birth to a beautiful girl gives
birth to trouble. (A beautiful girl will even-
tually cause her parents a great deal of un-
ease or disturbance. This is a variant of the
next entry.)
54. According to legend, Ṣango, king of /Ogravedotbelowy/oacutedotbelow,
hanged himself when his people turned against him.
T h eo n l yw i t n e s sw a sỌ y a ,h i sw i f e .A st h ep e o p l ew e r e
lamenting the dead king’s fate, lightning struck, and
they heard his voice saying he had ascended to heaven
and harnessed the power of lightning. In order to enjoy
his protection they were to broadcast the newsỌba
kòso (the king did not hang); whoever said otherwise
would be struck by lightning. Thereafter, his followers
made certain that if anyone said Ṣàngo did hang, his or
her house was secretly torched.
55. The òrìṣàhere is Ọbàtálá (Òrìṣà Ńlá), the fash-
ioner of human beings, believed to create albinos and
people who are deformed as a way of demonstrating his
freedom to fashion as he pleases.
Miscellany 479


--- PAGE 493 ---
4963. Ẹnitóf/eacutedotbelowarẹwà-áf/eacutedotbelowìyọnu;gbogboayé
níḿbáwọntan.
Whoever marries a beautiful woman mar-
ries trouble; the whole wide world [of men]
claims kinship with him. (Whoever mar-
ries a beautiful woman will have the whole
world of scheming men to fend oﬀ. See the
preceding entry.)
4964. Ẹnitómọèyítíyógb/egravedotbelowhìn/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowlàńpè
lágbà.
Only the person who knows the last word
i nam a t t e rd e s e r v e st h et i t l eo fe l d e r .( A n
elder earns his status by his eﬀectiveness in
settling disputes.)
4965. Ẹnitósọpéòkútaamáadàgbàòpur/oacutedotbelow;
ẹnitósọpéòkútakìídàgbàòpur/oacutedotbelow.
The person who says that rocks age does not
lie; the person who says that rocks do not
age does not lie. (Two people can see the
same situation in diﬀerent but equally valid
ways.)
56
4966. Ẹnitówáyédáràn.
Whoever comes into the world comes into
trouble. (Life is a pain.)
4967. Ẹnitóyínbọnsíahoro,ótim/ogravedotbelowpéalámù
lòunóòrípaníb/egravedotbelow.
The person who shoots a gun into a de-
serted house knows that he will kill only
lizards therein. (A person who engages in a
pointless gesture is reconciled to emptiness.)
4968. ẸnuniIfáwà.
The Ifá oracle is in the mouth. (There is no
oracle as powerful as the word the mouth
pronounces.)
4969. Ẹnuoníhìnniìhìn-íntińdùn.
It is in the mouth of the person who has
56. Aging may be taken to mean enduring for more
than one moment in time, but it may also mean passage
through the biological process that culminates in death.
the news that the news is interesting. (One
should not take the news out of the mouth
of the bearer.)
4970. Ẹranọbalóﬁṣuọbajẹ.
It is the king’s goat that has eaten the king’s
yams. (The oﬀender and the oﬀended are
virtually one and the same; there is no need
for punishment. Compare 3187.)
4971. Ẹránkú,/egravedotbelowr/egravedotbelowk/eacutedotbelowy/ogravedotbelow.
An animal dies; the cheeks rejoice. (A per-
son’s misfortune is another person’s for-
tune.)
4972. /Egravedotbelowrínmú/egravedotbelowr/egravedotbelowk/eacutedotbelowdùn;ẹkúnbaẹnuj/eacutedotbelow.
Laughter sweetens the cheeks; crying dis-
ﬁgures the mouth. (Laughter is more agree-
able than crying.)
4973. /EgravedotbelowrìndínlógúnàgbọnòṣeédánÍfá.
Sixteen coconuts are useless for casting [con-
sulting] Ifá. (Everything has its limitations
as well as its uses.)
57
4974. Ẹrùàgbàkìíníòṣùká;baba,ẹkúẹrù
àgbà.
An elder’s load is without the luxury of a
carrying pad; elders, we acknowledge the
load you bear. (Elders bear a great many
diﬃcult and thankless responsibilities.)
4975. Ẹṣinkìíkọeréàsárelé.
A horse never refuses a homeward gallop.
(Nobody refuses an exertion that has a great
reward at its conclusion.)
4976. Ẹṣínríogunjó;/ogravedotbelowk/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowríoguny/ogravedotbelow.
The horse sees war and dances; the spear
sees war and rejoices. (The most distasteful
of tasks have their enthusiasts.)
57. Ifá divination is done with kola-nut pieces;
coconuts are useless for the purpose.
480 truisms


--- PAGE 494 ---
4977. /Egravedotbelowt/eacutedotbelowawoni/egravedotbelowt/eacutedotbelow/ogravedotbelowgb/egravedotbelowrì.
The disgrace of the initiated is the disgrace
of the novice. (When one member of the
g r o u pi sd i s g r a c e d ,e v e r ym e m b e ri sd i s -
graced.)
4978. Ẹwìrìníńf/eacutedotbelownálágb/egravedotbelowdẹ.
It is the bellows that fans the furnace at the
smithy. (Diﬃcult tasks demand the proper
tools.)
4979. /Egravedotbeloww/ogravedotbelownkìíjákópé.
A chain once broken is no longer whole.
(Lost innocence can never be retrieved.)
4980. Ẹyẹkìífòkóforísọigi.
A bird in its ﬂight does not collide with a
tree. (One does not blunder while doing
what is second nature.)
4981. Ẹyinníńdiàkùkọ.
It is an egg that becomes a cock. (Great
things and great people start small. Com-
pare 5127.)
F
4982. ‘‘Fiojúkànmí’’ànakìíṣelásán;bíkò
f/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowgbaowó,óf/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowsọnǹkan.
A parent-in-law’s ‘‘Come see me brieﬂy’’
is not for nothing; if he or she is not after
money, there must be something to discuss.
(People seldom do things for others without
having ulterior motives.)
4983. Fiòníkú,ﬁ/ogravedotbelowlají,ọj/oacutedotbelowkanníńkútán.
Die one day, return to life the next; one day
the dying will be for good. (Intermittent
maladies eventually become permanent.)
4984. Fioorelọ/ogravedotbelowsìn,ﬁibilọ/ogravedotbelowsìn;àtiooreàti
ìkà/ogravedotbelowkankìígbé.
Show kindness to a ward, show wickedness
to a ward; kindness or wickedness, neither
goes unrewarded. (One is eventually re-
w a r d e di nk i n df o rt h ew a yo n et r e a t so n e ’ s
dependents.)
4985. Fiọmúf/oacutedotbelowmọ,ﬁọmọf/oacutedotbelowmú;bíọm/oacutedotbelowbáti
muọmú,kòbùṣe?
Take the breast to the child, take the child to
the breast; as long as the child is nursed, is
that not all that matters? (There is no point
in arguing over triﬂes.)
4986. Fíf/eacutedotbelowniyiyìnoṣù;méjì-ir/egravedotbelowkìílélójú
/ogravedotbelowrun.
Adulation for the moon is a mark of admi-
ration for it; there are never two of them in
the sky. (People or things that are peerless
d e s e r v et ob es oa c k n o w l e d g e d . )
4987. Fífòniìṣeẹyẹ;ògúnnágbígb/ogravedotbelownniòwò
olókùnrùn.
The bird’s habit is to ﬂy; fetching glowing
faggots is the trade of the invalid.
58 (Dif-
ferent people and situations have diﬀerent
preoccupations and requirements.)
4988. Fìlàòdùnbí-ikám/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowdé;ṣòkòtòòdùn
bí-ikàm/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbeloww/ogravedotbelow.
A hat is of little use if one does not know
how to wear it well; pants are of little use if
one does not know how to wear them well.
(Having assets is one thing; knowing how
to use them eﬀectively is another. Compare
the Gèlèòdùn sequence at 4227, 4228, and
4229.)
4989. Fìrífìríòjọkolombo;ìhòòhòòjọawọ.
Vaguely is not like clearly; nakedness is not
like leather. (It is better to be clear about
something than to be vague, better to be
clothed in leather than to be naked.)
58. Ògúnnágbígb/ogravedotbelown,literally ‘‘faggot shaking,’’
refers here to an invalid’s gathering of glowing coals, or
making a ﬁre, to warm himself or herself.
Miscellany 481


--- PAGE 495 ---
4990. Funfunlẹyẹńṣu,kìíṣudúdú.
White is the color of bird’s droppings, never
black. (Certain things one can rely on to
happen in certain set ways.)
4991. Funfunniiyìeyín;ógúnrégéniiyì
ọrùn;ọmúṣìkí-ṣìkíniiyìobìnrin.
Whiteness is the pride of the teeth; straight-
ness is the pride of the neck; ﬁrm, pointed
breasts are the pride of a woman. (There
is a proper and ideal form for everything.
Compare 2723.)
G
4992. Gààríolóóy/ogravedotbelow;ótiládùnt/eacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelow,àgbéréni
ṣúgàńgbé.
Sifted cassava grits are sweet by them-
selves; sugar is simply strutting for nothing.
(Natural endowments need no validation
or acknowledgment by detractors; and, the
self-suﬃcient person needs no help from
others.)
4993. Gùdù-guduòṣééb/eacutedotbelowèlùb/oacutedotbelow.
Poisonous yam is nothing to make yam ﬂour
with. (A certain object or person is of no use
to anyone.)
4994. Gùdù-guduòṣéésè;ókọàwàsunjẹ.
Poisonous yam cannot be cooked for food; it
d e ﬁ e sb e i n gr o a s t e dt oe a t .( Ac e r t a i nt h i n g
or person is of no use to anyone.)
4995. Gùdù-gudu-úﬁojújọèṣúrú,b/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelownikò
ṣééjẹ.
Poisonous yam looks likeèṣúrúyam, yet it
is not edible.
59 (What looks inviting is often
quite deadly.)
59. Èṣúrúyam is Dioscoreadumetorum(Abraham
324); gùdù-guduis a variety.
Gb
4996. ‘‘Gbaakọṣu’’ni‘‘Gbaewùrà’’;gbàl/eacutedotbelownu
/ogravedotbelowf/oacutedotbelown-/ogravedotbelownnigbàl/eacutedotbelownuagánrán.
‘‘Have a prime-quality yam’’ equals ‘‘Have
aw a t e ry a m ’ ’ ;
60 snatching something out of
a rat’s mouth is no diﬀerent from snatching
something from the mouth of a green par-
rot. (All gift giving is of a kind; all property
husbanding is of a kind.)
4997. ‘‘Gbàl/eacutedotbelownuasínnigbàl/eacutedotbelownuèkúté.
Taking something from a malodorous rat’s
mouth is the same as taking something
from a mouse’s mouth. (All inappropriate
behavior is of a kind.)
4998. Gba-n-gba-ádẹkùn,kedereéb/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowwò:
/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowìk/ogravedotbelowk/ogravedotbelowòsíníb/egravedotbelow.
A leopard is trapped in open space; clear
sight gets a good look at it; the matter does
not admit of secrets. (Once a secret is leaked,
it can no longer be hidden.)
61
4999. Gbéoyúnlọkóogb/oacutedotbelowmọb/ogravedotbelow.
Leave with a pregnancy and return with
a baby. (However long the journey, the
traveler eventually returns home.)
62
5000. Gbogboohuntíabáńṣelónìí,ìtànni
l/oacutedotbelowla.
Whatever one does today is a story tomor-
60. Water yam isDioscoreaalata.
61. Gbangba(open space) and kedere(clear sight)
are here personiﬁed as the agents that have caught
the leopard in the open. A leopard thus caught is easy
prey to any hunter. The proverb refers to the tradi-
tional custom of burying the dead within the family
compound.
62. This proverb is usually addressed to people who
cause some oﬀense as they depart a place; it would re-
mind such people that however long their return may
be delayed, they will return, and the consequence of
their behavior will be waiting.
482 truisms


--- PAGE 496 ---
row. (Whatever the event, however grandi-
ose or earthshaking, it eventually passes into
memory.)
5001. Gbogboohuntíokóbáńṣe,òbòní
ńgbàá.
Whatever eﬀort the penis might put forth, it
is the vagina that reaps the reward. (A prayer
or incantation that a person be the beneﬁ-
ciary of his her eﬀorts, and even of those of
others.)
5002. ‘‘Gb/oacutedotbelowmọwákími,’’owóníńnáni.
‘‘Come and visit me with your new baby’’
is a costly invitation. (A person who makes
expensive propositions should be prepared
to bear the cost.)
63
H
5003. Háa,háa,háa,ẹranIléyátán.
Share it out, share it out, share it out; that
way nothing is left of theIdelFitr sacriﬁcial
animal.
64 (Too many claims soon deplete the
most plentiful store.)
5004. Há-ń-hál/ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowﬁgajualámùlọ.
Only by bloating itself does the toad come
to be taller than the lizard. (There is really
nothing to choose among certain rivals.)
5005. Híhólàńhótọolèl/eacutedotbelowhìn.
It is with clamorous insults that a crowd pur-
sues a thief. (A person who disgraces himself
or herself deserves public humiliation.)
63. When mothers are invited by friends and rela-
tives to bring their babies to visit, it is customary for the
hosts to make gifts to the babies and, indirectly, to the
mothers.
64. IdelFitr is a Muslim festival the celebration
of which calls for killing and feasting on rams. Each
person who kills an animal is expected to send a little
of the meat to relatives and friends.
5006. Hùnhùnhùninúẹl/eacutedotbelowd/egravedotbelowinúẹl/eacutedotbelowd/egravedotbelowní
ńgbé.
The [meaning of the] grunting of a pig does
not go beyond the pig. (The ranting and
raving of a worthless person are not worth
one’s attention.)
I
5007. Ìbàj/eacutedotbelowìk/ogravedotbelowk/ogravedotbelow,gba-n-gbanilójúOlúwa.
Wickedness perpetrated in secret is open
knowledge to God. (No secret wickedness
can be hidden from God.)
5008. Ibiabápèlóríníńhurun.
It is the place named the head that grows
hair. (People and objects should live up to
expectations.)
5009. IbitíGà/mgravebàrítińjẹobìb/ogravedotbelowkótópọn
léhín,/ogravedotbelownájìn.
The time the Hausa person began chewing
kola such that all his or her teeth are now
red is far in the past. (Present conditions had
their origins long ago.)
5010. Ibitíótòròòmuagbè;ibitómuagbè-é
léwu.
The place where the water is clear is not deep
enough for the gourd; the place where the
water is deep enough, though, is dangerous.
(There is no boon without its dangers.)
5011. Ibitíọkápẹbusílońjẹ/egravedotbelowḿb/ogravedotbelowwábáa.
Wherever the viper makes its lair, there its
food will come to ﬁnd it. (Whatever is des-
t i n e dt oc o m eo n e ’ sw a yw i l ld os ow i t h o u t
one’s lifting a ﬁnger.)
5012. Ibitíọmọńrèlọmọòm/ogravedotbelow,ọm/oacutedotbelowmọibitó
tiwá.
What the child does not know is where he
or she is headed; the child knows where
Miscellany 483


--- PAGE 497 ---
he or she came from. (The future may be a
mystery, but the past is not.)
5013. Ibìkanṣoṣok/oacutedotbelowlatińrí/ogravedotbelowrun.
It is not only at one location that one can see
the sky. (There are few opportunities that do
not have alternatives.)
5014. IbikíbitíabáAlágbaànìgbàlẹ/egravedotbelow.
Wherever one ﬁnds the chief priest of the
egúngùncult, there his secret grove is. (A
person’s authority attaches to his or her
person, not to the insignia.)
65
5015. Ìbọkúbọlọmọdéḿbọkórikóto;ìgbàkú-
gbàníńgbàá.
Children’s manner of sacriﬁcing to their
guardian spirit is nonchalant, and its way
of heeding their worship is also nonchalant.
(How one approaches others determines
how they respond.)
5016. Ìbù-ùbúlàńtuòkun;odò-odòlàńtu
/ogravedotbelowsà;ibitíabáf/eacutedotbelowlàńtu/Ogravedotbelowyán.
One rows in the ocean along the shore;
in the [Lagos] lagoon one rows down the
channel; as for the /Ogravedotbelowyán river, one rows as
one pleases. (Each situation has its peculiar
diﬃculties and demands, which must be
accommodated.)
5017. Ìdálùúniìṣeìlú;eégúnníḿgbaowóòde
lÓṣogbo.
The customs of a town are established on
the establishment of the town; at Òṣogbo,
tax collecting is the duty of masqueraders.
(Diﬀerent people have diﬀerent responsibili-
ties.)
5018. Ìdífunfunòníran,àﬁbíàgb/egravedotbelowtóbáﬁti/egravedotbelow
yíeèp/egravedotbelow.
65. The Alágbaàcan perform the rites required of
him anywhere, although properly they belong in the
secret grove.
A white buttock is not a natural condition;
for a farmer it happens when he rubs his
buttocks in the dirt. (One should not mis-
take temporary setbacks or aﬄictions for
permanent conditions.)
5019. Ìdínikúìgbín;orínikúahun.
The rear end is the death of the snail;
66 the
front end is the death of the tortoise. (Each
person is vulnerable in a diﬀerent way.
Compare 360.)
5020. Ìdìkudìlàńdiẹrùikùn.
Indiﬀerently is one’s manner of tying the
load destined for the belly. (One does not
need to worry overmuch about details where
matters never exposed to public scrutiny are
concerned.)
5021. Ìd/ogravedotbelowtíòmátà;woléwolélẹj/oacutedotbelowbáwí.
Dirt does not matter; only the sanitary
inspector fusses.
67 (The subject under dis-
cussion is not of great import.)
5022. Ifáńláníńyaolúwa/egravedotbelowlápò.
It is an extraordinary [useless] Ifá that rips
the owner’s sack. (It is a strange charm that
ruins the owner instead of beneﬁting him or
her.)
5023. Ìgbàiyánòjọìgbàìyàn;yíyólàńyó
nígbàiyán,rírùlàńrùnígbàìyàn.
The days of pounded yam are diﬀerent from
the days of famine; one enjoys a full stom-
ach on the days of pounded yam, while one
grows lean during the days of famine. (Life
is made up of diﬀerent seasons.)
5024. Ìgbàkìíyípadàkéwúr/eacutedotbelowbímàlúù.
Times cannot so change that a goat will give
66. Snails are usually killed by cracking the bases of
their shells and letting out the ﬂuid.
67. Ìd/ogravedotbelowtíòmátàis a parody in Yoruba of ‘‘It doesn’t
matter,’’ the Yoruba rendition stating that for the white
man, dirt does not matter.
484 truisms


--- PAGE 498 ---
birth to a calf. (Certain things in life are
immutable.)
5025. Ìgbàlaṣọ,ìgbàl/egravedotbelowwù,ìgbàlòdèrée-kókò
nÍlọrin.
The season prescribes cloth; the season
prescribes clothes; the season determines
the presence of the Senegal dove in Ìlọrin.
(Everything in its proper time or season.)
68
5026. Ìgbàòlọbíòréré.
Time does not go on endlessly. (Life is short.
Compare 5207.)
5027. Ìgbàtíìlúbáńdùnjù,àm/ogravedotbelowpéyótùú.
When a town becomes too happy a place,
one should know that it is on the verge of
breaking up. (Excess of even good things
brings disaster.)
5028. Ìgb/egravedotbelowhìnlaláyòńta.
It is at the end of the game that the real
champion shines. (Early advantages do not
ensure ﬁnal victory.)
5029. Ìgb/egravedotbelowhìnwáayéòníìm/ogravedotbelow;ódáfúnẹnití
òìt/iacuteigravekú.
The manner of life’s end is unknown; the
oracle is directed at those who have not
died. (Said as consolation to people suﬀer-
ing misfortune or reverses; it says fortunes
may change for the better.)
5030. Ìgb/eacutedotbelowk/egravedotbelowléèèyàn,asánni.
Trust placed in humans is misplaced. (One
should be wary about trusting people.)
5031. Igiìbàj/eacutedotbelowlayéńsárégùn.
It is the tree of defamation that the world
hurries to climb. (People are ever more eager
68. The Senegal dove or laughing dove (Stigmato-
peliasenegalensis)i st oÌ l ọ r i na st h es w a l l o wi st o
Capistrano (Abraham 449).
to seek the ruination of others than to seek
their elevation.)
5032. Igitíabátorí/egravedotbelowgbodì,óyẹkóṣená
fúnniyá.
The tree on account of which one makes
enemies should at least kindle ﬁre for one to
warm oneself. (One deserves some recom-
pense for one’s sacriﬁces.)
5033. Igitíaf/egravedotbelowhìntìtíògbanidúró,bówó
lunikòlèpani.
A tree that one leans on but that cannot
support one’s weight, if it falls on you it will
not crush you. (A person whose support is
ineﬀectual cannot do one any ill by his or
her opposition. Compare 2076.)
5034. Igitíbabaẹníbál/oacutedotbelow,akìífàátu,bíi
t/egravedotbelowg/eacutedotbelowk/oacutedotbelow.
A tree that one’s father plants one does not
uproot, but that does not apply to cassava.
(One must treat tradition and patrimony
with reverence, but one should know when
exceptions are called for.)
69
5035. Igitíyópanil/oacutedotbelowdúnnìí,kìíṣebòtuj/egravedotbelow
/egravedotbelowhìnkùléẹni.
The tree that will kill one this year will not
be the Jatropha plant in one’s back yard.
70 (A
person of absolute insigniﬁcance in relation
to one cannot be one’s eﬀective adversary.)
5036. Igitóhùlójúẹnikìídápani.
A tree that sprouts while one is alive can-
not fall and crush one. (Upstarts whose
beginnings one knows cannot have supreme
power over one.)
69. Cassava (manioc) is food, but one would be
foolish to apply to it the general rule regarding preserv-
ing one’s heritage.
70. Bòtuj/egravedotbelow(làpálàpá)i saf r a g i l ep l a n tw i t hs t e m s
made up of substantial ‘‘marrows’’ inside very thin,
hard stalks that are not even practical as whips.
Miscellany 485


--- PAGE 499 ---
5037. Igúnnugúnkìíkúséwe.
The vulture never dies young. (A wish or
prayer that a person may live long.)71
5038. Igúnnugúnkìíṣeẹyẹ‘‘Gbàjẹ.’’ The vul-
t u r ei sn o taf o w li nr e f e r e n c et ow h i c ho n e
says, ‘‘Take and eat this.’’ (Not all things are
available for exploitation.)
72
5039. Igbóńlalatinríẹyẹ-k/eacutedotbelowyẹ.
It is in a huge forest that one ﬁnds all sorts
of birds. (Multitude oﬀers variety.)
5040. Igbóńlaníḿmuẹnimuorí.
It is a huge forest that swallows a person, in-
cluding the person’s head. (It is a great task
that makes great demands on one.)
5041. Ìháhátóhás/oacutedotbelowrùn/ogravedotbelowpẹ,oríaraa/egravedotbelowlóﬁ
ńrùú.
The pericarp of the palm fruit that is wedged
atop the palm tree is a burden that the palm
tree itself must bear. (Whatever ill will one
wishes others recoils on oneself.)
5042. Ìhìnọjàlàḿgb/oacutedotbelownájà.
It is the report one hears about a market that
i n d u c e so n et ot r a d ei ni t .( Ap e r s o n ’ so ra
thing’s reputation determines how people
will act toward it.)
5043. Ìhóodòóboìhóigbaèèyànm/oacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelow.
The roar of a river drowns the roar of two
hundred people. (One illustrious person
makes a greater impression than a multitude
of worthless people.)
5044. Ìjàkìílọlásánkóníjàmáfarapa.
A ﬁght does not end without those involved
showing some mark from it. (The aftermath
o faﬁ g h to rq u a r r e li sn e v e rl i k et h et i m e
before the ﬁght or quarrel.)
71. Because vultures are bald, they all look aged.
72. It is taboo to eat a vulture.
5045. Ìjàníńj/eacutedotbelow‘‘Ìlúḿpè/oacutedotbelow’’;gbogbowọnló
lórúkọ.
It is when there is a quarrel that the message
says, ‘‘The town demands your presence’’;
everybody [in the town] has a name. (When
communication with acquaintances becomes
cryptic, something is amiss.)
5046. Ìjàòbímọkór/ogravedotbelow.
A ﬁght or quarrel never fathers a child that
is docile. (The aftermath of a ﬁght or quarrel
is always troublesome.)
5047. Ìjátánlókoàrop/ogravedotbelow;/egravedotbelowgb/oacutedotbelowntẹIfá,àbúrò-ó
gbéyàwó.
There is no more cause for a ﬁght on the
communal farm; the elder brother has taken
up Ifá divination, and the younger has gone
to get married. (The principals in a feud
are too preoccupied with other pressing
problems to carry on the feud.)
5048. Ìjàgb/ogravedotbelownl/eacutedotbelowhìnẹnitíòkú;ẹníkúb/oacutedotbelowl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow
aápọn.
Constant worries are the lot of the person
who has not died; only those who have died
a r ef r e ef r o mw o r r i e s .( O n l yd e a t hs a v e s
humans from the need to worry.)
5049. Ìjà/mgravebáṣolè,onílétají.
A great disaster befalls the burglar: the
homeowner wakes up unexpectedly. (Said
of an evildoer who is beset with his or her
comeuppance.)
5050. Ìjẹniìsu.
As one eats, so one excretes [or what you eat
is what you excrete]. (One reaps what one
sows.)
5051. Ìj/egravedotbelowbúkìíj/eacutedotbelowÒjó.
The Ìj/egravedotbelowbú never bear the name Òjó. (Certain
things one must never do.)
486 truisms


--- PAGE 500 ---
5052. Ìkàìbálàabàlúj/eacutedotbelow;ẹrúìbájọbaèèyàn
ìbákùkan.
Were the wicked to prosper, they would
ruin the town; were a slave to be made king,
there would be no one left in the town. (To
put the aﬀairs of a community in the hands
of wicked or careless people is to destroy the
community.)
5053. Ìkaakàlàḿbáọmọríigbá.
Face up is the way one always ﬁnds the cala-
bash lid. (Some things are ordained to be
c e r t a i nw a y sa l w a y s . )
5054. Ìkórítam/eacutedotbelowta/ogravedotbelownàÈṣù.
The point where three roads meet: Èṣù’s
pathway. (Evil colonizes the place it ﬁnds
hospitable.)
73
5055. Ìkórítam/eacutedotbelowtatíńdààmúàlejò.
The fork in the road throws a stranger into
a quandary. (Those who know not the se-
crets of a process have no way to solve its
puzzles.)
5056. Ìkótíòj/eacutedotbelownǹkanl/eacutedotbelowrùìyàwó.
A hairpin does not add much to the luggage
o fab r i d e .( Al i t t l ec h o r ei so fn oc o n s e -
quence in addition to an immense task.)
5057. Ìk/ogravedotbelowk/ogravedotbelowayéyájuìk/ogravedotbelowk/ogravedotbelow/ogravedotbelowrunlọ.
The obscurity of this earth is far better than
the obscurity of heaven. (Not knowing what
is what in this life is better than not knowing
what is in store for one in heaven.)
5058. Ikúẹgb/egravedotbelowrúnkanòpayér/eacutedotbelow;bíèèyánṣe
ńkúlàwọnmìírànńwásáyé.
The death of any one thousand people will
not obliterate the world; as some people
die, so others come to life. (Humankind will
survive the most deadly disasters.)
73. This exclamation could be used when some
inexplicable evil has befallen someone.
5059. Ikúẹjaníḿmúẹjam/ogravedotbelowlú;ẹjaÒgùnìbá
ṣedéAk/egravedotbelowsán?
It is the death of the ﬁsh that makes it know
the town; what else would have brought a
ﬁsh from the Ògùn river to Ak/egravedotbelowsán market?
(A mishap is likely to bring other mishaps in
its wake.)
5060. Ikúkìíjẹunẹnikópani;àrùnkìíjẹun
ẹnikóṣeni.
Death does not eat one’s food and then kill
one; disease does not eat one’s food and
then aﬄict one. (Those who enter into cove-
nants are obliged to fulﬁll their part of the
bargain.)
5061. Ikúòj/eacutedotbelowk/eacutedotbelowniólọsógun;ìfàòj/eacutedotbelowk/eacutedotbelownió
foyèsíl/egravedotbelow.
Death keeps one from going to war; spoils
keep one from giving up one’s chieftaincy.
(Thoughts of the advantages of a position
make one reluctant to contemplate giving
it up.)
5062. Ikúpaolówó;odò-ógbéìw/ogravedotbelowfà;ṣ/ogravedotbelownp/ogravedotbelown-
n/oacutedotbelownpaonígb/ogravedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow;ẹnitómọoyeowóṣ/egravedotbelow
ḿbùṣe.
Death killed the lender; a river carried oﬀ
the pawn; the guarantor died of smallpox;
there is hardly anyone left who knows the
amount of the debt. (Said of a matter that
occurred so long ago that hardly anyone
remains who remembers the circumstances.)
5063. Ikútíyópanikìípenilórúkọ.
The death that will kill a person does not
call the person by name. (Disasters do not
announce their approach.)
5064. Ikúwọnúahoroṣákálá.
Death enters an abandoned home in vain.
(A person who has lost everything has noth-
ing else to lose.)
Miscellany 487


--- PAGE 501 ---
5065. Ikunníḿbáẹkúnwá;k/egravedotbelowl/egravedotbelowb/egravedotbelowníḿbá
‘‘tù/egravedotbelow’’wá.
Mucus is what accompanies crying; phlegm
is what accompanies a cough. (Each aﬄic-
tion has its particular misery.)
5066. Ikúnńwá/ogravedotbelownààtilọ,w/oacutedotbelownníẹrúàna/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelow
sá;àwòdìǹreÌbarà/egravedotbelowfúùfù-útaánídìípá;ó
níiṣ/eacutedotbelowkúkúyá.
T h es q u i r r e li sw a i t i n gf o ra ne x c u s et og e t
away and is told that its parents-in-law’s
slave has escaped; the eagle prepares to
depart for Ìbarà, and the breeze lifts its tail
feathers; time, it says, to get going. (A per-
son straining to do a certain thing is grateful
for any excuse oﬀered him or her.)
5067. Iléniadìẹńyaòpìpì;ìbáṣeàparò,ọmọ
aráyéamúujẹ.
It is in the household that a featherless
chicken is shunned; were it a partridge,
humans would have killed it for food. (One
very often does not appreciate the value of
what one has.)
74
5068. Iléọbatójó,ẹwàlóbùsíi.
The conﬂagration that destroyed the king’s
palace only makes it more palatial.
75 (There
are blessings hidden in every disaster.)
5069. Ilétíaﬁit/oacutedotbelowmọ,ìrìniyówo.
A house built with saliva will be demolished
by the dew. (Ventures based on shaky foun-
dations will not withstand even the ﬂimsiest
of tests.)
5070. Ilétíagbáèèyànlétíw/ogravedotbelow,bóp/eacutedotbelowtítíaó
gbàáèèyànlétíjádeníb/egravedotbelow.
74. Òpìpìis a chicken that has lost its feathers and
therefore is not considered proper to eat. The partridge
does not have many more feathers than theòpìpì,but it
is not shunned for that reason, just because it is not a
home dweller.
75. The palace will be rebuilt on a grander scale.
A home one is able to enter only after one
has slapped someone in the ears: sooner or
later one will have to slap someone in the
ears in order to get out of it. (A transaction
that has a fractious beginning will end in a
fractious way.)
5071. Il/egravedotbelowìjà/mgravebákìíṣu.
The day of disaster is never done. (Disaster
can befall anyone anytime.)
5072. Ìlútíaòti rímúríníḿmúimúẹnitó
àká.
It is in a town where no one has ever seen
a nose that one’s nose seems as capacious
as a granary. (A person seeing an ordinary
thing for the ﬁrst time always overestimates
its importance or signiﬁcance.)
5073. Ìmàdòìbáṣebíẹl/eacutedotbelowd/egravedotbelowabàlúj/eacutedotbelow;ẹrúìbá
jọbaèèyànkìbákùkan.
Were the warthog to enter the town, it
would ruin the town; were a slave to become
king, there would be no citizens left. (Trust-
ing matters to the hands of an unﬁt person
guarantees disaster.)
5074. Ìmàdòkìídéodòkótòrò.
A warthog does not arrive at the stream and
leave it unmuddied. (A boorish person’s
intervention in a matter always muddies the
water.)
5075. Inádil/egravedotbelowl/eacutedotbelowhìnasunṣujẹ.
The ﬁre earns some rest after the person
roasting yams to eat is done. (Peace descends
after the departure of a troublemaker.)
5076. Inájíógbéaṣọepomú;oòrúnjíó
gb/eacutedotbelowwù/ogravedotbelowṣ/egravedotbelowrìṣ/egravedotbelowrìbọrùn;òṣùpájíógbáw/ogravedotbelow-ọ
yìnyín.
Fire wakes up and takes up a cloth of palm
oil; the sun rises and puts on a dazzling
dress; the moon rises and dons a skin of
hailstones. (Each phenomenon has its spe-
488 truisms


--- PAGE 502 ---
cial qualities. Or, comment in praise of an
exceptional person.)
5077. Inájólókokòjóerùp/egravedotbelowil/egravedotbelow;/ogravedotbelowràntíńṣeni
òṣolùkùẹni.
Fire consumes the forest but not the earth;
what plagues one does not plague one’s
friends. (Nobody shares one’s fate.)
5078. Ináoríòjóaṣọ;àbàtàrẹẹrẹògbọk/ogravedotbelow.
Fire-of-the-head [head lice] cannot burn
one’s clothing; ﬂoating mud will not accom-
modate [or support] a boat. (Each task or
occasion has its speciﬁc requirements.)
5079. Ìpínàìṣ/egravedotbelow,ìpínàìròníńpaaláròká.
The destiny of the innocent, the destiny of
the person who thought no ill, will be the
death of the person who spreads evil reports
about another person.
76 (The evil that one
does to innocent people will rebound on
one.)
5080. Ìpọn-/oacutedotbelownríkúkioríb/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelow.
The wooden spoon sees death and plunges
into it. (Comment on the death-defying
behavior of an intrepid person.)
5081. Ìrìkékeréníńdiodò;ìrìwàwàníńdi
òjò;b/oacutedotbelowmọdéméje-ébákọoúnjẹal/eacutedotbelow,adìjà
àgbàlagbà.
Tiny dewdrops soon become a river, and
heavy dews soon become rain; if seven
children refuse their dinner, a ﬁght ensues
among adults. (Seemingly unimportant
matters soon mushroom into unmanageable
problems.)
5082. Ìríríníḿmúnigb/oacutedotbelown.
It is experience that makes one wise. (Ex-
perience is the best teacher.)
76. Ìpínhere refers to the mystical guardian spirit
each person has that directs and regulates his or her
fate.
5083. Irúkan-ùn,ọb/egravedotbelowiwọ.
All of a kind, stews made with brimstone
tree leaves.77 (Said of people who have no
real individual identities outside of the
group.)
5084. Ìs/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelownìgbèsì.
How one speaks is how one receives a re-
sponse. (People respond in kind to the way
one addresses or behaves toward them.)
5085. Ìṣeèèyànnìṣeẹranko.
As animals behave, so do humans. (One
may learn much about humans by watching
animals.)
5086. Ìṣetíaﬁheàdálókoigbóniyóṣe sọnù
lókoẹgàn.
What caused one to ﬁnd a cutlass in the
forest will cause one to misplace it in the
wilderness. (Easy come, easy go.)
5087. Iṣ/eacutedotbelowḿbẹnílé,iṣ/eacutedotbelowḿbẹlóko:ìw/ogravedotbelowfà/ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelow.
‘‘There is work at home, and there is work
on the farm,’’ said the frog that was pawned.
(No matter where one goes, there is work to
be done.)
5088. Ìṣ/eacutedotbelowòdún,ìyàòfọhùnkámọẹnitíìyà
ńdùnlára.
Destitution does not make a sound, and
suﬀering does not speak to let people know
who is plagued by suﬀering. (One cannot
tell from just looking who is in the grip of
suﬀering.)
5089. Isúparadàódiyán,àgbàdóparadàó
d/egravedotbelowkọ.
Yam changes its state and becomes pounded
yam; corn changes its state and becomes
steamed corn meal. (People and things can
change for the better.)
77. The medicinal decoction made from these leaves
is quite bitter.
Miscellany 489


--- PAGE 503 ---
5090. Ìtì/ogravedotbelowg/egravedotbelowd/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowb/oacutedotbelowl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow-ọgb/eacutedotbelownàgb/eacutedotbelownà.
The banana trunk is safe from the carpenter.
(One is safe from those who have no use for
whatever one has.)
5091. Iwájúiwájúlàḿbá/ogravedotbelownà.
One always ﬁnds that the road is ahead of
one [one can never walk past it]. (Said as a
prayer that a person may never fall behind
his or her peers, or as a boast that one will
ever be ahead of one’s peers.)
5092. Iwájúiwájul/ogravedotbelowpá/egravedotbelowbìtìńrésí.
The /egravedotbelowbìtìsnare always springs forward when
tripped. (Used in the context of a prayer to
wish someone continuous progress.)
5093. Iwájúlalákànńfàsí.
Forward is the direction in which the crab
c r a w l s .( Aw i s ht h a tap e r s o n ’ sf o r t u n e sw i l l
always improve.)
5094. Ìw/ogravedotbelowfàtógunẹṣinlọsódò,owóníńgun
owó.
The pawn who rides the horse to the stream:
money is riding on money. (Said to indicate
that the people referred to, though seem-
ingly diﬀerent, are really indistinguishable.)
5095. Ìw/ogravedotbelowsílokoetílé;ìyàlokoẹgànńjẹ.
A farm hard by the town brings insults; a
farm far away in the wilds suﬀers neglect.
(Every pursuit has its drawbacks.)
5096. Ìyàméjìkìíjẹòkú;bíkòbáráṣọbora,
aríl/egravedotbelowbora.
Two misfortunes will not befall a corpse; if it
lacks a shroud, it will not lack earth to cover
itself. (If one’s ﬁrst option fails, there will
always be a fall-back alternative.)
5097. ÌyátóbíAlárálóbíAjerò,lósìbí
/OgravedotbelowràngúnÌlá.
The mother who gave birth to the Alárá
[king of Ará] gave birth to the Ajerò [king
of Ìjerò] and the /Ogravedotbelowràngún of Ìlà.
78 (All refer-
ents are of a kind. Compare the following
two entries.)
5098. Ìyátóbíaṣọlóbí/egravedotbelowwù.
The mother who gave birth to the cloth
also gave birth to the shirt. (Two or more
seemingly diﬀerent things are essentially the
same. Compare the preceding and following
entries.)
5099. Ìyáaṣòkòtòlóbíbàǹt/eacutedotbelow.
The mother of the trousers also gave birth to
the loincloth. (Though apparently diﬀerent,
the two entities are virtually indistinguish-
able. Compare the preceding two entries.)
5100. Iyánogúnọdúnamáajónil/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelow.
Twenty-year-old pounded yams can still
scald one’s ﬁngers. (One can still remember
favors or injuries twenty years after they
were done.)
5101. Ìyàwóﬁàparòdáilá;ọk/oacutedotbelowjẹiyánàìjẹkù.
The wife cooks a partridge stew, and the
husband eats the pounded yam without
leaving a morsel. (It is diﬃcult to restrain
oneself in the face of something powerfully
appealing.)
5102. Iyìlọbáﬁoríbíb/eacutedotbelowṣe;ọbakìímu/egravedotbelowj/egravedotbelow.
A king derives only awe from beheading
people; the king does not drink blood. (One
does certain things out of duty and not from
desire.)
79
78. These are all related sovereigns in Yorubaland.
79. Oríbíb/eacutedotbelowmeans both ‘‘beheading’’ and military-
style salute. Taking the second meaning, the proverb
would suggest that the respect other people show to
a person does not materially enrich the person, and
therefore that he or she would not miss it if it were
withheld.
490 truisms


--- PAGE 504 ---
J
5103. Jẹkínjẹkìípaayò.
You win and I win does not make for de-
feat in a game. (When both sides are evenly
matched, there will be no winner; coopera-
tion makes for harmony.)
5104. Jẹkínjẹníḿmúayòdùn.
You win and I win is what makes a game
exciting. (Sharing alike makes for a harmo-
nious relationship.)
5105. Jìgìjìgìòṣééfàtu.
A ﬁrmly rooted plant cannot be uprooted.
(Whatever is based on a sound foundation
will not be easily dismantled.)
K
5106. Kákúníkékerékáfẹṣinṣeìr/egravedotbelowl/egravedotbelowẹni,ó
sànjukádàgbàkúláìníadìẹìrènà.
To die young and have a horse sacriﬁced to
ease one’s passage to the beyond is better
than to reach old age before dying but with
not even a chicken sacriﬁced to ease one’s
passage. (Better to die young and prosperous
than to die old and destitute.)
5107. Káọw/oacutedotbelowfúnmikínkáẹs/egravedotbelowfúnẹ.
Move your hands out of the way for me,
and I will move my legs out of the way for
you. (Consideration earns consideration in
return.)
5108. Kàkàkíewéàgbọnr/ogravedotbelow,pípeleníńpele
síi.
The coconut palm’s leaves instead of wilting
only become even stiﬀer. (The opposite of
what one has been hoping for is what keeps
happening.)
5109. Kán-un-kàn-unìlùìgbàgb/oacutedotbelow.
Bereft of rhythm and bereft of coherence
is the sound of Christians drumming. (The
matter or person referred to lacks any sense
of coherence.)
80
5110. Keese-keeselẹrí,kààsà-kààsàḿb/ogravedotbelow
l/eacutedotbelowhìn;kààsà-kààsàbabakeese-keese.
Something evil is all you have seen, but be-
hind it comes something extremely evil;
Kààsà-kààsà is the father of all keese-keese.
(What people are complaining about does
n o tc o m p a r ei nt e r r o rt ow h a ti si nt h e
oﬃng.)
5111. Kékerénìmàlétińk/oacutedotbelowmọláás/ogravedotbelow.
It is from youth that the Muslim teaches a
child how to engage in disputes. (People de-
velop problem characteristics from youth.)
81
5112. Kìíp/eacutedotbelowtítíkíejiọdúnmár/ogravedotbelow.
No matter how long it takes, the annual
rain will eventually fall. (What is ordained
to happen eventually will, however long it
might take.)
5113. Kìíṣetítíayéni/Ogravedotbelowrúnmìlàònííjẹ
àgbàdom/oacutedotbelow.
It is not forever that /Ogravedotbelowrúnmìlà will abstain
from eating corn. (Even though one is en-
joying plenty, lean times may come around.)
5114. Kíil/egravedotbelowtópaòṣìkà,ohunreregbogboáti
bàj/eacutedotbelow.
Before Earth kills the wicked, a great many
good things will have been ruined. (God’s
justice may eventually prevail, but by then a
lot of evil will have been done.)
82
80. Christian music, or Western music in gen-
eral, made little sense to the Yoruba when they ﬁrst
encountered it.
81. This proverb bears witness to the non-Muslim
Yoruba belief that Muslims are obstinate.
82. The Yoruba often advise people to leave the
wicked, especially if they are powerful, to the good
Earth to punish; Earth, they believe, will not permit the
wicked to prosper.
Miscellany 491


--- PAGE 505 ---
5115. Kíniàńjẹtíkìítan?Kínióńkùsíl/egravedotbelowtí
kìíd/ogravedotbelowla?
What does one eat that one does not even-
tually ﬁnish? What does one leave aside that
does not keep until the morrow? (A per-
son who knows no thrift deprives himself
or herself of a future; the person who puts
something aside today will have something
to use in the future.)
5116. Kíniàǹfàníorógbó?Apaákòláw/eacutedotbelow;a
jẹ/eacutedotbelowóńkorò;aníkáﬁgi/egravedotbelowdáná,Ṣàngóníọmọ
ìyáòunníńṣe.
Of what use is the bitter kola? One splits
it, but it lacks naturally separated lobes;
o n ee a t si ta n di ti sb i t t e r ;o n ea t t e m p t st o
use its wood for ﬁre, and Ṣàngo says both
[he and the tree] were born of the same
mother.
83 (Why should one put oneself out
for something or someone from which or
whom one can expect no appreciation or
reward?)
5117. Kí/ogravedotbelowrànólèsúọl/oacutedotbelowrànlaﬁńsọpéaòrí
irúèyírí;kòsíirúohuntíojúòrírí.
It is only so that the oﬀender might know
the enormity of the oﬀense that one says
one has never seen the likes of it before;
there is nothing the likes of which the eyes
have never seen. (There is nothing a person
does that others have not done before, even
though one might say the contrary in order
to regulate people’s behavior.)
5118. Kíjìpákìíṣeawọ.
Durable hand-woven cloth is not leather.
(One should not overestimate the quality of
one’s possessions or make too much of one’s
position.)
5119. Kòsíẹnitómọbíomíṣeńdénúàgbọn.
Nobody knows how water gets into the
83. One would not want to oﬀend Ṣango, the god of
thunder and lightning, in any way.
coconut. (No one knows the mysteries of
nature.)
5120. Kòsí‘‘Fisíl/egravedotbelow’’m/oacutedotbelow;gbogboayédi‘‘Múu
re!’’T h e r ei sn om o r e‘ ‘ L e th i mo rh e rb e ’ ’ ;
a l lo fl i f ei sn o w‘ ‘ H o l dh i mo rh e rt i g h t ! ’ ’
(The world no longer knows mercy.)
5121. Kòsíobìnrin/ogravedotbelowf/eacutedotbelow;bóṣeakúwárápá,
owóni.
No woman is available free; even if she has
epilepsy, she costs money. (One must have
the means if one means to take a wife.)
5122. Kòsíohuntíańjẹtíkòtán,àﬁọlá
Ọl/oacutedotbelowrun.
There is nothing one eats that is never ﬁn-
ished except the grace of God. (One should
never forget that whatever material things
one has will eventually be gone.)
5123. Kòsíohuntíònítàn.
There is nothing without a history. (Every
phenomenon, as well as every condition, has
its explanation.)
5124. Kòsíohuntíowópatíkòkú.
There is nothing money kills that does not
die. (Money accomplishes all.)
5125. Kòsíorinkantóboríaráyé.
There is no song that surpasses ‘‘People of
this world.’’ (Said when all that needs to be
said has been said. Also, there is nothing one
needs to be more wary of than people.)
5126. Kòtóiṣ/eacutedotbelowikú;arẹwàlóńpa.
One cannot put it [anything] past death; it
kills beautiful people. (Even beautiful people
are not beyond the notice of death.)
5127. Kòkòròníńdilabalábá.
It is an insect that becomes the butterﬂy.
(The youth of today will be the elders of
tomorrow. Compare 4981.)
492 truisms


--- PAGE 506 ---
5128. Kòsíǹkanòunnǹkanníńjọńrìn.
There-is-no-problem always travels in the
company of problem. (Even when there is
no problem, problems are never far away.)
5129. Kòtónil/eacutedotbelowrùtíńtanilórí.
A-thing-that-is-not-a-big-enough-load-for-
one hurts one’s head nevertheless. (Said
of an insigniﬁcant thing that nevertheless
constitutes a persistent nuisance.)
5130. K/ogravedotbelowl/ogravedotbelowk/ogravedotbelowl/ogravedotbelowtíńgbéadìẹòj/eacutedotbelowkámọolè.
The fox that steals chickens prevents one
from knowing about the thief. (Said of cir-
cumstances in which oﬀenders are able to
hide behind fortuitous occurrences.)
5131. K/ogravedotbelowl/ogravedotbelowk/ogravedotbelowl/ogravedotbelowtíńgbeadìẹòsanrabíigún.
The fox that steals chickens is not as fat as
the vulture. (A criminal has not proﬁted
visibly from his or her crimes.)
L
5132. Lójú/ogravedotbelowtá,bíkíìdál/egravedotbelowdi/ogravedotbelowrunni.
For one’s enemy, the wish is that one’s jour-
ney would lead to heaven. (One’s enemies
never wish one well.)
M
5133. Mogbójúwoewéìgbá,ngòríèyítógba
àkàṣùníb/egravedotbelow.
I looked up at the leaves of the acacia tree,
but I did not see any that would do for
wrapping corn meal. (However precious a
thing might be, if it will not serve one’s end,
it is of little value.)
N
5134. Nǹkankìídùnkotúnp/ogravedotbelow.
A thing is never both pleasant and plentiful.
(One cannot have things all ways.)
O
5135. Òbáàsíniyùnẹgbàá,kóosíns/egravedotbelowgip/egravedotbelowlú,
atawẹẹrẹnilójúabúni.
Even if you wore coral beads and tubular
beads in addition, to a detractor they are
just like red peppers. (Nothing one does
impresses detractors.)
5136. Ókùd/egravedotbelowd/egravedotbelowkákóiwìwọAk/egravedotbelowsán,ọbatíà
óyìn-ínt/eacutedotbelowrígbaṣọ.
We were just about to enter Ak/egravedotbelowsán market
with our praise-singing performance when
the king we would honor gave up the ghost.
(One’s gifts or services may be too late to be
of any use to the recipient.)
5137. Obìnrinkìíj/eacutedotbelowÒjó.
No woman ever bears the name Òjó. (There
are certain things a person may not do,
simply because of who he or she is.)
84
5138. Obínrinkìíníinákítorogún/egravedotbelowmájòó.
A woman’s having ﬁre does not stop her co-
wife’s from burning. (One’s ﬁerceness does
not stop one’s rivals from being ﬁerce also.)
5139. Obìnrínp/ogravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowjà,gbogbowọnlól/oacutedotbelowkọ.
Women are plentiful at the market, but all of
them have husbands. (There are few things
out there that have not been spoken for.)
5140. Òbírílọk/ogravedotbelowńdà;yíyílayéńyí.
It is all of a sudden that a boat capsizes;
turning is what the world does. (Nobody can
predict the future.)
84. Òjó is invariably a male name.
Miscellany 493


--- PAGE 507 ---
5141. Ogúnọdúnkìíṣetítíláé.
Twenty years hence is not the same as the
inﬁnite future. (The furthest day arrives in
time. Compare the entry that follows.)
5142. Ogúnọdúnḿb/ogravedotbelowwák/ogravedotbelowla.
Twenty years hence will soon become
tomorrow. (No matter how distant, the
future sooner or later arrives. Compare the
preceding entry.)
5143. Ohunẹlẹg/eacutedotbelowkìígbèébàj/eacutedotbelow.
An excessively delicate thing is easy to ruin.
(One cannot be too careful with delicate
matters.)
5144. Ohunẹy/eacutedotbelowńjẹlókolẹyẹńgbéfò.
Whatever the bird eats on the farm is what
it takes with it in ﬂight. (One always devotes
great attention to protecting what is dear to
one.)
5145. Ohunńlá-ńlátóròkè,ìl/egravedotbelowníḿb/ogravedotbelow.
The mighty thing that rose into the heavens
will wind up back on earth. (However long
the diversion, a matter eventually winds up
before the tribunal charged with adjudicat-
ing it.)
5146. Ohuntíabánílàńnáání;ọmọàgb/egravedotbelow
ńnááníewùrà;ọmọaṣ/eacutedotbelowgitàńnááníèpoigi;
ọmọalápatàńnáání/egravedotbelowd/ogravedotbelowẹran;ọmọọdẹ
ńnááníẹrangbígbẹ.
Whatever one has [in abundance] is what
one disparages; the child of the farmer dis-
parages the water yam; the ﬁrewood seller
attaches little value to the bark of ﬁrewood;
the child of the butcher belittles cow liver;
the son of the hunter disdains dried bush
meat. (One never attaches much value to
articles one has in plenty.)
5147. Ohuntíkòìdél/egravedotbelowyótàn-án;èyítótidé
tánnìyẹn.
Whatever is in the oﬃng will end in time;
that applies only to what has already arrived.
(One can know the nature of only those
things one has experienced.)
5148. Ohuntóbádunnilàńjagunmúlógun.
Whatever one craves most painfully is what
one takes as booty in a war. (One’s greatest
need is always uppermost in one’s preoccu-
pation.)
5149. Ohuntóbáwuniníńp/ogravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowẹni;ológún
ẹrúkú,aṣọ/egravedotbelow/eacutedotbelowku/ogravedotbelowkanṣoṣo.
Whatever one most values will be the most
abundant component of one’s wealth; the
owner of twelve slaves dies and leaves only
one garment. (One spends one’s wealth on
whatever one most likes.)
5150. Ohuntówàl/eacutedotbelowhìn/egravedotbelowfà-ájuèjelọ.
What comes after six is a lot more than
seven. (People seldom realize how serious
the consequences of their actions could be.)
5151. Òjòàk/oacutedotbelowr/ogravedotbelowkìír/ogravedotbelowl/oacutedotbelowsàn-án;ejidúnkìí
pal/egravedotbelowlóru.
T h eﬁ r s tr a i nn e v e rf a l l si nt h ea f t e r n o o n ;
the annual downpour does not soak the
soil in the middle of the night. (There is a
proper time for everything.)
5152. Òjòiwájúkìípaahun;òjò/egravedotbelowhìnkìípa
ìgbín;l/eacutedotbelowhìnl/eacutedotbelowhìnlọl/oacutedotbelowbẹńso.
The rain ahead does not beat the tortoise;
the rain behind does not soak the snail; ever
to the rear does theolobegrow its fruits.
(Incantation to ward oﬀ evil.)
5153. Òjòlọkọàgbàdo.
Rain is the lord of the corn. (Without one’s
source of sustenance one is nothing.)
5154. Òjòòb/eacutedotbelownìkanṣ/ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelow,ẹniejírílejińpa.
T h er a i np l a y sf a v o r i t e sw i t hn oo n e ;w h o m -
ever the rain ﬁnds, it drenches. (Misfortune
is not selective.)
494 truisms


--- PAGE 508 ---
5155. Òjòpagbòdògìrów/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow-w/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow.
The rain pounds the gbòdògì,producing a
loud noise.85 (Certain behaviors by others
force comments out of the mouths of even
normally recalcitrant people.)
5156. Òjòtór/ogravedotbelowlásìkòníńj/eacutedotbelowejidún.
It is rain that falls at its proper time that is
known as the annual heavy rain. (Windfalls
that come when one cannot take advantage
of them are of no value.)
5157. Òjò-ók/ogravedotbelowòjòòr/ogravedotbelowm/oacutedotbelow;Ọl/oacutedotbelowrun-únﬁt/egravedotbelow/egravedotbelows/oacutedotbelow
léàgbàdolóko.
The rains become adamant and stop fall-
ing; God has inﬂicted t/egravedotbelow/egravedotbelows/oacutedotbelowon the corn in
the ﬁelds.
86 (Adverse conditions make it
impossible for people to thrive.)
5158. Ojoojúm/oacutedotbelowk/oacutedotbelowlobìnrinńríńǹkanoṣù.
It is not every day that a woman sees her
monthly thing [i.e., menstruation]. (Not
every day is Christmas. The next entry is a
variant.)
5159. Ojoojúm/oacutedotbelowk/oacutedotbelowlobìnrinńríọkọ/egravedotbelow.
It is not every day that a woman sees her
husband.
87 (Compare the preceding entry.)
5160. Ojúkìím/oacutedotbelowkéjiòwúr/ogravedotbelowmár/ogravedotbelow.
A day does not dawn without formation of
the morning dew. (A prayer that one might
always ﬁnd blessing, just as the morning is
always blessed with the dew.)
5161. Ojúkìípaojújẹ.
An eye does not kill an[other] eye for food.
(Staring eyes pose no danger. Compare the
following entry.)
85. Gbòdògìis a plant with broad leaves,Sarco-
phrynium(Marantaceae); see Abraham 246.
86. T/egravedotbelow/egravedotbelows/oacutedotbelowis a juju that causes an adulterer to lose
his erection as soon as he penetrates a woman.
87. In polygamous settings the wives take turns to
‘‘see’’ the husband.
5162. Ojúkòkòròkìípaojúkòkòròjẹ.
An envious eye cannot kill an envious eye
for food. (One person’s envy can’t stare
down another person’s. This is a variant of
of the preceding entry.)
5163. Ojúòl/eacutedotbelowj/egravedotbelow,ominíńsun.
T h ee y e sh a v en ob l o o d ;t h e yo n l yo o z e
tears. (One can seldom tell from mere
appearance what another person’s inner
state is.)
5164. Ojúológbòòun/egravedotbelowgún;àm/ogravedotbelowt/eacutedotbelowkùnòun
ẹkùn;/ogravedotbelowkánjúwàòunolè;déédéniw/oacutedotbelown.
The scarlet love-bean plant and thorns, the
àm/ogravedotbelowt/eacutedotbelowkùnbig cat and the leopard, greed and
thievery: they are equivalents.
88 (A greedy
person is no diﬀerent from a thief.)
5165. Ojútíaﬁatab/ogravedotbelow;màjò-màjò-ótánníb/egravedotbelow.
T h ee y e si n t ow h i c hp e p p e rh a sb e e nt h r o w n :
there one ﬁnds the ultimate in frantic jump-
ing about. (Where one ﬁnds the greatest
disaster, one will also ﬁnd the greatest
lamentation.)
5166. Òkìtìbààbàníńp/egravedotbelowkunòpópó.
It is usually a large hill that marks the end of
a straight avenue. (Nothing goes on forever.)
5167. Òkòtíabásọságbọnlàgbọnńsọsíni.
The stone one throws at a coconut palm is
the same as the coconut palm throws back.
(One’s evil deeds are likely to recoil on one.)
5168. Òkúẹj/oacutedotbelowlọl/oacutedotbelowjàńdá.
It is a dead case that the ruler adjudicates.
89
88. Ojúológbò is Abrusprecatorius (Papilonaceae;
Abraham 463); àmòt/eacutedotbelowkùnis always identiﬁed as a type
of leopard.
89. Ọl/oacutedotbelowjàmeans literally ‘‘owner of the market’’ but
is also another designation for the ruler of a commu-
nity, because the market is usually outside his palace.
In his role as ruler he adjudicates and resolves disputes
among his subjects.
Miscellany 495


--- PAGE 509 ---
(A matter that has come before a concilia-
tory body is no longer urgent.)
5169. Òkúòlèsinbaba.
A dead person cannot serve the patriarch.
(One cannot expect service from a corpse.)
5170. Olèlọmọolèńfìwàjọ.
A thief ’s child takes after him. (One takes
after one’s parents.)
5171. Olèníḿmọẹs/egravedotbelowolè-ét/ogravedotbelowlóríàpáta.
Only a thief can ﬁnd the tracks of a thief on
a rock. (It takes a thief to catch a thief.)
5172. Olèńpolèlólè;ìkàńpèkàníkà.
The thief calls another thief a thief; a wicked
person calls another wicked person wicked.
(The pot is calling the kettle black.)
5173. Olè-étaohunl/oacutedotbelowp/ogravedotbelow;ewúr/eacutedotbelowm/eacutedotbelowtaẹgb/egravedotbelowta;
àgùntànm/eacutedotbelowfàẹgb/egravedotbelowfà.
A thief sells everything cheap: three goats
for 600 cowries; six sheep for 1,200 cowries.
(A person who did not work for something
is never reluctant to discard it for little or
nothing.)
90
5174. Olóòlàkìíw/ogravedotbelowlúkómáfọw/oacutedotbelowkan/egravedotbelowj/egravedotbelow.
A circumciser does not enter a town and not
get his ﬁngers bloody. (One cannot avoid
the fallout of one’s profession.)
5175. Omi,baáléàlejò.
Water: the lord and master of the visitor.
(Water is the ultimate thing with which one
welcomes a visitor.)
5176. Omititúndé,ẹjatitúnw/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelow.
A new stream arrives, and new ﬁsh enter
into it. (Each era brings its own fashion.)
90. In the conversion of the traditional monetary
system to British currency, 300 cowries equaled one
penny.
5177. Ònílóbo/ogravedotbelowlalójú.
It is today that obscures tomorrow. (Tomor-
row arrives before one knows it.)
5178. Oníbàj/eacutedotbelowòw/oacutedotbelown;aw/oacutedotbelowngógóbíatúnniṣe;
atúnniṣeòp/ogravedotbelowbíabanij/eacutedotbelow.
Detractors are not scarce; nothing is more
diﬃcult to ﬁnd than reputation menders;
reputation menders are far fewer than de-
tractors. (Most people are more interested
in running others down than in building
them up.)
5179. Onígbàjám/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowf/eacutedotbelow/eacutedotbelowkirit/eacutedotbelowl/egravedotbelow.
The itinerant barber always intended to get
on the road. (One needs little goading to do
what one wanted to do anyway.)
5180. Oògùntíaòbáfowóṣe,/egravedotbelowhìnàdìròní
ńgbé.
Medicine on which one spent no money
usually winds up behind the cooking hearth.
(One seldom places any value on things that
come easy and cheap.)
5181. Oorunòmọikú.
Sleep does not know death. (A sleeping
person does not know when death comes.)
5182. Oríkìíburúkómál/ogravedotbelow/oacutedotbelowrùn.
A head is never so unfortunate that it does
not have a neck.
91 ( N om a t t e rh o wb a do n e ’ s
situation, there will be some redeeming
factor.)
5183. Orí-iTáyéyàt/ogravedotbelowsítiK/eacutedotbelowhìndé.
Táyé’s destiny is diﬀerent from K/eacutedotbelowhìndé’s.
92
(No two people, however close or similar,
have identical destinies.)
91. The Yoruba use the conceptoríbíburú or orí
burúkú,literally ‘‘bad head,’’ for ill luck.
92. Táyé is the name automatically given to the
ﬁrstborn of twins and K/eacutedotbelowhìndé to the second.
496 truisms


--- PAGE 510 ---
5184. Òrìṣàkìígbaméjìl/oacutedotbeloww/oacutedotbelowìm/eacutedotbelowl/eacutedotbelow;bóbá
gbaapáafúnunl/eacutedotbelownu.
The gods do not deprive the shirker of two
gifts; if they take his arms, they endow him
with a mouth. (People whose arms are feeble
always have overactive mouths.)
5185. Oríṣìírísìí/ogravedotbelowbẹlàńríníj/oacutedotbelowikúerin.
One sees all sorts of knives on the day an
elephant dies. (Extraordinary events prompt
extraordinary behavior.)
5186. Orúkọẹniniìjánuẹni.
One’s name is one’s bridle. (The means of
controlling people, or getting their attention,
is their names.)
5187. Òtìpíìjí,a-wúwo-bí-àtẹ-ìbànúj/eacutedotbelow.
Huge baboon, as heavy as a tray of sadness.
(Sadness is a heavy burden to bear.)
5188. Òwelẹṣin/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow;bí/ogravedotbelowr/ogravedotbelow-/oacutedotbelowbásọnù,òwela
ﬁńwáa.
Proverbs are the horses of communication;
if communication is lost, proverbs are what
one uses to ﬁnd it. (Eﬀective discourse is
impossible without resort to proverbs.)
5189. Owóobì;obìowó.
Money, kola nut; kola nut, money. (Money
and kola nuts are equal in importance.)
93
5190. Òwòtíàdábám/ogravedotbelowníńkáàdáléhín.
The trade the cutlass knows is the one that
knocks out its teeth. (The dangers to which
one is most vulnerable are those attached to
one’s profession. Compare 3918, 4542, and
4544.)
5191. Owótíòlèdáninígbèsèòlèlani.
Money that is not enough to make one a
debtor is not enough to make one prosper
either. (Insigniﬁcant amounts of money, or
93. Equal where hospitality is concerned.
of anything else, cannot much aﬀect one,
one way or another.)
5192. Òwúr/ogravedotbelowlatiḿmọbíal/eacutedotbelowyótisannisí.
It is from the morning that one knows how
good one’s night will be. (From youth one
can tell how pleasant one’s old age will be.)
Ọ
5193. Ọbam/eacutedotbelowwàá,ìgbàm/eacutedotbelowwàá.
Ten kings, ten eras. (Each generation has its
peculiar fashions and tastes.)
5194. Ọbẹtódùnkìíp/eacutedotbelowníṣasùn.
A delicious stew does not last long in the
pot. (Desirable commodities are soon
used up.)
5195. Ọdọọdúnlàńríyemẹtì.
It is annually that one seesyemẹtì.
94 (A
prayer that good fortune will annually be
ap e r s o n ’ sl o t ,j u s ta st h eyemẹtìinsect is
seen annually. Compare the following three
variants.)
5196. Ọdọọdúnl/egravedotbelowwàńwà.
It is annually that black-eyed beans are
available. (May good fortune be ours each
year. See the preceding and following two
entries.)
5197. Ọdọọdúnniṣákúwéńrúwe;ọdọọdún
lewúrońyọewé.
It is every year that thesákúwéplant sprouts
leaves; it is yearly that the bitterleaf plant
sprouts leaves. (A wish that a desired an-
nual event will never fail to occur. See the
preceding two and following entries.)
5198. Ọdọọdúnnìrèkéńso.
The sugarcane ﬂourishes annually. (Prayer
94. Yemẹtìis an insect found on the cotton plant.
Miscellany 497


--- PAGE 511 ---
for perennial good fortune. See the preced-
ing three entries.)
5199. /Ogravedotbelowgáńtà,/ogravedotbelowgáńrà.
The master is selling; the master is buying.
(It takes a buyer and a seller to make a deal.)
5200. Ọjàojú-usánmàlókè,àwọnẹyẹni
yóna.
The market holding in the sky aloft is for
the birds alone to ply. (Only people with the
requisite qualiﬁcations can engage in certain
trades.)
5201. /Ogravedotbelowjáosùnníńﬁ-íhànpéabíọmọtitun.
It is a camwood-stained baby strap that
announces that one has a newborn baby.
(Some events are announced by their ac-
companying behavior.)
5202. ỌjàÒyìngbòòm/ogravedotbelowp/eacutedotbelownìkanòwá.
Òyìngbò market does not know [or care]
that someone is absent.
95 (An insigniﬁcant
person will not be missed in an assembly.
The following entry is a variant.)
5203. Ọjàọbaòm/ogravedotbelowpéẹnìkanòwá.
The king’s market does not know that a
person is absent. (An individual’s input,
if withheld, will not disrupt the project of
the community. The preceding entry is a
variant.)
5204. Ọj/oacutedotbelowkanòjò-óborí/ogravedotbelowdá.
The rain of one day conquers the drought.
(However long the deprivation, relief is
welcome when it comes.)
5205. Ọj/oacutedotbelowkìípẹtítíkómápèé;ọj/oacutedotbelowkìíjìnnà
jìnnàkómákò.
The day is never so distant that it does not
arrive; the future is never so far that it does
95. Òyìngbò is an area on the Lagos mainland
where a large market once thrived.
not arrive. (A thousand days are soon over.
Compare the following two variants.)
5206. Ọj/oacutedotbelowkìírííriìkómápèé.
A day is never so distant that it does not
arrive. (The furthest future soon becomes
the present. See the preceding and following
entries.)
5207. Ọj/oacutedotbelowkìít/oacutedotbelowlọbiòréré.
Days do not go on straight like an avenue.
(Life is not without curves. This is a variant
of the preceding two entries.)
5208. Ọj/oacutedotbelowtíatábáb/oacutedotbelowsójúníḿbaẹwàojúj/eacutedotbelow;
ọj/oacutedotbelowtínabáfojúba/egravedotbelowtùni/egravedotbelowtùńgbà.
The day pepper enters the eye is the day
it ruins the beauty of the eye; the day ﬁre
catches a glimpse of gunpowder is the day
the gunpowder does its bidding. (‘‘No’’ is not
an option as a response to the inevitable.)
5209. Ọj/oacutedotbelowtíọm/oacutedotbelowbáﬁojúkanayélojú/egravedotbelowńlà.
The day a child ﬁrst glimpses [comes into]
the world is the day its eyes open. (The
business of living begins on the day one is
born.)
5210. /Ogravedotbelowkákáráreiléòkokoro.
Destitution goes to the home of distress.
( T r o u b l e sp i l eo nt r o u b l e . )
5211. /Ogravedotbelowkanṣoṣoẹkùn,óbaigbaọdẹj/eacutedotbelow.
One single leopard sows confusion among
two hundred hunters. (A formidable prob-
lem deﬁes the eﬀorts of many experts.)
5212. /Ogravedotbelowk/oacutedotbelowléòmúuràjò.
The person who builds a house does not
travel with it. (Even though one owns a
h o u s e ,o n ew i l ls t i l lh a v et ob eal o d g e ri f
one travels.)
5213. Ọmogeńreléọkọp/egravedotbelowlú-umájèlé,alárẹnà-
ar/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowmúapódání,ọkọìyàwódi/egravedotbelowbìtìsíl/egravedotbelow;ká
wáwoirúọmọtíwọnóbìí.
498 truisms


--- PAGE 512 ---
A young woman leaves for her groom’s
home carrying poisons; her intermediary
carries a quiver, and the husband awaits
them with a snare; let us see what sort of
children they will produce. (One can predict
the outcome of a collaborative venture from
the nature of those involved.)
5214. Ọmọẹjalẹjáńjẹsanra.
It is the children of ﬁshes that ﬁshes eat and
grow fat upon. (It is the nature of things that
people who prosper do so at the expense of
other people.)
5215. Ọmọkékerélaﬁńṣeoògunògbójú.
It is a small child that serves as an ingredient
for a charm for bravery. (Even small things
can eﬀect large consequences.)
5216. Ọmọdékékerékìíṣeàk/oacutedotbelowpaikú.
A small child is not death’s ﬁrst victim.
(Children have been dying since the begin-
ning of time.)
5217. Ọm/oacutedotbelowyẹ-/eacutedotbelowtirìnhòòhòd/oacutedotbelowja;aṣọòbá
Ọm/oacutedotbelowyẹ.
Ọm/oacutedotbelowyẹ has arrived at the market naked;
clothes are too late for Ọm/oacutedotbelowyẹ.
96 (Matters
past remedy are past care.)
5218. /OgravedotbelowpẹÌjàyèlàbábiníìhìnogunÒgún-
m/oacutedotbelowlá.
It is the palm tree of Ìjàyè that one should
ask about the battle with Ògúnm/oacutedotbelowlá. (Said
of a disaster that leaves no survivors.)
97
5219. /Ogravedotbelowp/ogravedotbelowlọp/ogravedotbelowòjòlótir/ogravedotbelowtíl/egravedotbelow-/eacutedotbelowtiﬁmu.
A great deal of rain has fallen, which the
96. Ọm/oacutedotbelowyẹ is the shortened form of the name
Ọm/oacutedotbelowyẹni, which means ‘‘a child [that] bestows deco-
rum [propriety, or what one desires] on one.’’
97. Ògúnm/oacutedotbelowlá was an Ibadan general in the war that
city waged against Ìjàyè in 1860–62, in which Ìjàyè was
defeated and destroyed.
earth has soaked up. (Much more has hap-
pened than one could ever recount.)
5220. /Ogravedotbelowrándé;/ogravedotbelowtáy/ogravedotbelow.
Problems arrive; enemies rejoice. (One’s
enemies rejoice at one’s misfortune.)
5221. /Ogravedotbelowránìhùùhùníńdunaládìẹ.
It is the matter of the down feathers that
troubles the owner of the fowl. (Delicate
tasks are far more taxing than routine
ones.)
98
5222. /Ogravedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowẹniníńbánipil/egravedotbelowọr/ogravedotbelow;aráiléẹniní
ńkófà-ar/egravedotbelow.
Friends help one lay the foundation for
wealth; one’s relatives reap the beneﬁt.
(Friends are in some regards more valuable
than kin.)
5223. Ọw/oacutedotbelowkìíṣìnàẹnu.
The hand never misses the way to the
mouth. (Actions that are second nature will
not go awry.)
5224. Ọw/oacutedotbelowtów/egravedotbelow,il/egravedotbelowlóﬁnù.
The hand that he washed, he had to wipe
on the ground. (Said of people frustrated in
their expectations.)
99
P
5225. Palaku-n-gọpalaku-n-gọ:ìpàk/oacutedotbelowigúnbí
/egravedotbelowrúàáké;b/eacutedotbelow/egravedotbelownikòṣéélagi.
Protruding, protruding: the occiput of the
vulture seems like an axe’s handle, yet one
cannot split wood with it. (Said of a thing
98. The down feathers are more trouble because
they are more diﬃcult to remove than the main feathers
when the fowl is being plucked for cooking.
99. Since etiquette demands that one wash one’s
hands before sitting down to a meal, the person in
question was apparently expecting to be invited to eat.
Miscellany 499


--- PAGE 513 ---
that may look impressive but is really use-
less.)
5226. Pani-panikìíj/eacutedotbelowkámúidàkọjánípàk/oacutedotbelow
òun.
The murderer would never let people carry-
ing swords pass behind him. (The evildoer is
always afraid of his shadow.)
5227. P/eacutedotbelowtẹ-p/egravedotbelowtẹlàḿbáibalùw/egravedotbelow.
Ever in a muddy state is how one ﬁnds the
bath place. (Said to invoke a ﬁlthy fate on a
person.)
R
5228. R/eacutedotbelowr/eacutedotbelowrún.
Ad e l i c a t et h i n gh a sd i s i n t e g r a t e d .( Ap r o b -
lem has arisen.)
Ṣ
5229. Ṣàn-ǹ-gbátúsépo.
The bean cake has disintegrated in the oil.
(A misfortune has occurred.)
T
5230. Talógb/oacutedotbelowikúẹbọra?Ẹnìkankìígb/oacutedotbelowikú
Olódùmarè.
Whoever heard of the death of a spirit? No
one ever hears of the death of the Almighty.
(God endures forever; this is also a wish for
longevity.)
5231. Tàlùb/ogravedotbelowniiyèkanaf/oacutedotbelowjú.
Tàlùb/ogravedotbelow is the blood sibling of the blind.
(Said of things that are always to be found in
the company of one another.)
100
5232. Tibitirelàf/ogravedotbelownńr/ogravedotbelow.
The fruit of the baobab tree drops with-
out regard for good or foul weather. (A
prayer that a pregnant woman might deliver
without hardship.)
5233. Tòjòt/egravedotbelowrùn,omikìígbẹníhòakàn.
Be it the rainy season or the dry, the crab’s
hole is never short of water. (A wish that
one may never be short of the good things
of life, whatever the season. The following is
a variant.)
5234. Tòjòt/egravedotbelowrùn,omikìíw/oacutedotbelownọmọoníròjo-
ròjo.
Whether in the rainy season or in the dry,
the oníròjoròjochild never lacks water. (A
prayer for unceasing blessings. Compare the
foregoing entry.)
W
5235. Wúńdíá:abọkọjọjọ.
The unmarried woman: one whose hus-
bands are legion. (The potential husbands of
an unmarried woman are uncountable.)
100. Tàlùb/ogravedotbelow is an insect that ﬂies into people’s eyes,
but the word can also mean a walking stick.
500 truisms


--- PAGE 514 ---
References
Abiodun, Rowland. Preface.AHistoryofArtinAfrica. By Monica Blackmun Visonà et al.
New York: Abrams, 2000. 10–13.
Abraham, R. C. DictionaryofModernYoruba. London: U of London P, 1958.
Abrahams, Roger. ‘‘Proverbs and Proverbial Expressions.’’FolkloreandFolklife:AnIntro-
duction.Ed. Richard M. Dorson. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1972. 117–27.
Adé/egravedotbelowkọ, Adélékè.Proverbs,T extuality,andNativisminAfricanLiterature. Gainesville: UP
of Florida, 1998.
Ajayi, J. F. Ade, and Robert S. Smith. Y orubaW arfareinthe19thCentury.London: Cam-
bridge UP, 1964 (in association with the Institute of African Studies, U of Ibadan).
A p p e r s o n ,G .L .EnglishProverbsandProverbialPhrases:AHistoricalDictionary. London:
J. M. Dent, 1929. Reprinted by Gale Research Company, Detroit, 1969.
Atanda, J. Adebowale. ‘‘The Yoruba People: Their Origin, Culture and Civilization.’’The
Yoruba:History,CultureandLanguage. J. F. Odunjo Memorial Lectures Ser. 5. Ibadan:
Ibadan UP, 1996. 3–34.
Babalola, S. A. TheContentandFormofY orubaIjala. Oxford: Clarendon, 1966.
Bamgbose, A. ‘‘The Assimilated Low Tone in Yoruba.’’Lingua16.1 (1966): 1–13.
/threeemdash.AGrammarofY oruba.West African Language Monographs 5. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge UP, 1966.
Bascom, William. ‘‘Four Functions of Folklore.’’TheStudyofFolklore. Ed. Alan Dundes.
Englewood Cliﬀs nj: Prentice, 1965. 279–98.
/threeemdash.TheY orubaofSouthwesternNigeria.New York: Holt, 1969.
Boadi, Lawrence A. ‘‘The Language of the Proverb in Akan.’’AfricanFolklore. Ed. Richard
D o r s o n .N e wY o r k :A n c h o r ,1 9 7 2 .1 8 3 – 9 1 .
Brunvand, Jan Harold.TheStudyofAmericanFolklore:AnIntroduction. New York: Norton,
1978.
‘‘The Dangers of Proverbial Philosophy.’’Spectator87.3,828 (1901): 694.
Dundes, Alan. ‘‘On the Structure of the Proverb.’’TheWisdomofMany:EssaysontheProv-
erb.Ed. Wolfgang Mieder and Alan Dundes, 43–64. New York: Garland, 1981.
/threeemdash. ‘‘Some Yoruba Wellerisms, Dialogue Proverbs, and Tongue-Twisters.’’Folklore75
(1964): 113–20.
Eagleton, Terry.LiteraryTheory:AnIntroduction. Minneapolis: U of Minnesota P, 1983.
Firth, Raymond. ‘‘Proverbs in Native Life, with Special Reference to Those of the Maori.’’
Folklore37 (1926): 134–53, 245–70.
Greenway, John.LiteratureamongthePrimitives. Hatboro pa: Folklore Associates, 1964.
Gyekye, Kwame.AnEssayonAfricanPhilosophicalThought:TheAkanConceptualScheme.
Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1987.
Hallen, Barry. TheGood,theBad,andtheBeautiful:DiscourseaboutValuesinYorubaCul-
ture.Bloomington: Indiana UP, 2000.


--- PAGE 515 ---
Hallgren, Roland. TheGoodThingsinLife:AStudyoftheTraditionalReligiousCultureof
theYorubaPeople. Lund Studies in African and Asian Religions 2. Lund, Swed.: Plus
Ultra, 1991.
Hodgkin,Thomas. NigerianPerspectives:AnHistoricalAnthology. London: Oxford UP, 1975.
Hulme, Edward F.ProverbLore. 1902. Detroit: Gale, 1968.
Johnson, S. TheHistoryoftheY orubas.Lagos: CMS, 1921.
Ladipo, Duro. ỌbaKòSo (The king did not hang). Opera. Transcribed and translated by
R. G. Armstrong, Robert L. Awujoola, and Val Olayemi from a tape recording by
R. Curt Wittig. Ibadan: Institute of African Studies, U of Ibadan. 60.
Lerner, Gerder. TheCreationofPatriarchy. New York: Oxford UP, 1986.
Mbembe, Achille. ‘‘Ways of Seeing: Beyond the New Nativism.’’AfricanStudiesReview 44.2
(2001): 1–14.
Messenger, John. ‘‘The Role of Proverbs in a Nigerian Judicial System.’’SouthwesternJour-
nalofAnthropology 15 (1959): 64–73.
Mieder,Wolfgang. ‘‘Modern Paremiology: In Retrospect and Prospect.’’EmbracingtheBao-
babTree:TheAfricanProverbinthe21stCentury. Comp. Willem Saayman. CD-ROM,
1996.
/threeemdash.ThePrentice-HallEncyclopediaofWorldProverbs. New York: MJF, 1986.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. TheGenealogyofMorals.TheBirthofTragedyandtheGenealogyof
Morals.Trans. Francis Golﬃng. Garden Cityny: Doubleday Anchor, 1956.
Nussbaum, Stan, ed. TheWisdomofAfricanProverbs:Collections,Studies,Bibliographies.
CD-ROM. Vers. 1.2. Colorado Springsco: Global Mapping International, June 1998.
Oduyoye, Dupe. ‘‘Traditional African Proverbs and African Christian Identity.’’TheWis-
domofAfricanProverbs. Ed. John S. Pobee. CD-ROM, 1996.
Ojoade, J. Olowo. ‘‘African Proverbs on Proverbs.’’FolkloreForum 10.3 (1977): 20–23.
Okpewho, Isidore. AfricanOralLiterature. Bloomington: Indiana UP, 1992.
Olatunji, Olatunde O.FeaturesofYorubaOralPoetry. Ibadan: Ibadan UP, 1984.
Owomoyela, Oyekan.AKìí:YorubaProscriptiveandPrescriptiveProverbs. Lanham md:U P
of America, 1988.
/threeemdash. ‘‘The Sociology of Sex and Crudity in Yoruba Proverbs.’’Proverbium20 (1972): 751–
58.
Pachocinski, Ryszard. ProverbsofAfrica:HumanNatureintheNigerianOralTradition. St.
Paul mn:P W P A ,1 9 9 6 .
Raji-Oyelade, Aderemi. ‘‘Postproverbials inYoruba Culture: A Playful Blasphemy.’’Research
inAfricanLiteratures 30.1 (1999): 74–82.
Spectator.London: The Spectator, 1901.
Taylor, Archer. ‘‘Problems in the Study of Proverbs.’’JournalofAmericanFolklore 47.183
(1934): 1–21.
/threeemdash. ‘‘The Wisdom of Many and the Wit of One.’’TheWisdomofMany:Essaysonthe
Proverb.Ed. Wolfgang Mieder and Alan Dundes. New York: Garland, 1981. 3–9.
Turner, Victor. ‘‘Liminality and the Performative Genres.’’Rite,Drama,Festival,Spectacle:
RehearsalstowardaTheoryofCulturalPerformance. Ed. John J. MacAloon. Philadel-
phia: ISHI, 1984.
Wiredu, Kwasi.PhilosophyandanAfricanCulture. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1980.
Yankah, Kwesi. SpeakingfortheChief:OkyeameandthePoliticsofAkanRoyalOratory.
Bloomington: Indiana UP, 1995.
502 references

