=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: ZionistCoverup.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 142
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:21:12.684089
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
by 
 
Edwin M. Wright 
 
 
 
 
Originally prepared for and by request of 
The Harry S. Truman Library 
Independence, Missouri 
 
 
 
 
Publication of this study has been made possible by contributions of the 
El Bireh Community of Palestine, now United States Citizens living in 
C!eveland and Youngstown, Ohio. 
 
 
 
THE NORTHEAST OHIO COMMITTEE 
ON MIDDLE EAST UNDERSTANDING, INC. 
Post Office Box  16094 
Cleveland, Ohio 44116 
 
 
 
Copyright 1975


--- PAGE 2 ---
PRICE $2.00        November 1975 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
FOREWORD ……………………………………………………………………………………………..     i 
COMPETENCE OF THE AUTHOR ……………………………………………………………….     vi 
THE ZIONIST CONNECTION  ………………………………………………………………        1 
DEFINITION OF TERMS - AN ABSOLUTE NECESSITY …………………………………………..…    2  
THE ZIONIST DOGMA…………………………………………………… ……………………..………..       5  
Born of European persecution     6 
"All Jews to Israel"    12 
Expulsion of the Palestinians   16 
Need for an Imperial Sponsor   21 
TRUMAN'S DECISION TO SUPPORT ZIONISM ……………………………………………….………  23 
Zionist threats  25; Jacobson's tearful re quest  26; U. S. Intelligence leaks  30, 
U.S. Jews 'taxed' without representation  34;  HST' s call for Zionist tolerance of Palestinians  37; 
UST's disregard for State Department ‘experts'  38; Election year politicking 38. 
THE WORLD ZIONIST ORGANIZATION (WZO) …..…………………………………………………. 39 
Zionist terrorism rewarded  40;   Capturing the Jewish communities  41; 
Zionism and anti-Semitism  41;   Efforts to stifle freedom of expression  43. 
ZIONIST TECHNIQUES  ………………………………………………………………………… 45  
Control the sources of power 45;   Ventriloquism 46; Distor tion  47;   Use of the Bible as Divine Authority  53; 
'Creative journalism' 57;   HST wooes Zionist s by attacking State Department officers 62. 
ZIONISTS AND THE PRESIDENCY ………………………………………………………………. 63  
ZIONISM, AN ECHO OF BIBIICAL THEMES AND MODELS …………………………………. 66 
Ezra and fear of assimilation  67;   Esther and the manipulation of a foreign Power 70 
Ahasuerus and the U.S. Government  74;  Hadassah and Colonialism 78; 
Hadassah and Colonialism  78,   Jos hua, 'Lebensraum' and Terrorism 82; 
Love of Zion and hatred for non-Zionists  88; U.S. Op en Society threatens the survival of Judaism  89; 
Israel's expansionism to the Biblical boundaries 92.  
LIBERAL JUDAISM VS POWER POIITICS ……………………………………………………… 99 
Nixon's delusions 96;     Americans and misconceptions of the Arabs 98; 
Israel dictates to U.S. Jewry - the question of dual loyalty  100;  
A Zionist columnist recommends atomic war against Kuwait  101; Rabin advo cates seizing Arab oil fields 102;                                    
The Best Congress money can buy 103; A ca ndid Jew is branded 'traitor' 105;    
U.S. supports Israel's most intransigents expansionists  106.  
APPENDICES 
1.  Map of Biblical Israel  …. 108   7.  Dr. Shahak’s “My Opinion’  ………...  121 
2.  Letter to a Zionist lobbyist 109   8.  ROWAN ON MIDEAST PEACE  ….  122 
3, 4  Correspondence   ……..  111   9.  Short Bibliography  …………….……  123 
5, 6  Friedman’s attack  ……. 114  10.  Letter from HST Library  …………...  125


--- PAGE 3 ---
It has been the Zionist objective to impose a view of the Arabs on the world which suits 
Israel's national interests; as a result the Arabs are the victims of the best (adverse) image-
making in history. It could scarcely be otherwise considering the disparity of the weapons in the 
opponent's hands.  Compared to the westernized Zionist publicists, the Arabs are much less 
sophisticated and less versed in propaganda techniques. - - In addition Arab policies and 
propaganda lend themselves to clever exploitation by an Israeli intelligence service and 
propaganda machine that is the envy of even the major western nations.  
 
Harold B. Attin  
"A Mask for My Adversary"  
ISSUES Autumn 1966 page 32  
 
 
 
 
FOREWORD  
 
Any staff member of what is called a "Political" section of the Department of State 
receives a steady stream of documents passing across his desk marked, "Confidential," "Secret" 
or "Top Secret.”  As he enters upon his service, he takes an oath of office which prohibits him 
from discussing, outside of his official duties, any of the comments of this "sensitive" material.  
The result is that what comes in or goes out of the Department remains a closed book as far as 
the public is concerned - for 25 years.  Then a selection is made of a few of the more significant 
documents and is published by the


--- PAGE 4 ---
ii  
 
Department of State in the series, "Foreign Relations of the United States.”  
(FRUS).  
I entered the Department of State in February, 1946, and retired in December, 1966.  But 
it was not until 1971 when Vol. V appeared that the public had the opportunity to get a "look-in" 
on what went on in the Near East-Africa Division (NEA) in 1946/47.  During that interim, the 
officers in the NEA section became the "whipping boys" for the Zionists.  The latter had a field 
day lasting 25 years - to which no officer could reply. During that period, the Zionist propaganda 
machine used distortions, misquotations, fabricated falsehoods and used political pressures to 
smear and besmirch the reputation and effectiveness of the "experts" in the NEA section which 
dealt with the Zionist/Palestinian issue.  What kind of people they were, what they did or thought 
remained blank.  
 
It is now mid-1975 and therefore possible to read some of the documents dating to 
1946/47.  It is therefore necessary for the interested public to make an honest and intelligent 
judgment of the competence of these officers, to learn something about the way they were treated 
by the Zionist pressure machine and what they had to endure.  From President Harry S. Truman's 
two-volume Memoirs, it is possible to glean how the Zionists treated him - they threatened him, 
they put him under the most intense pressure he ever experienced and eventually he wilted and 
granted to the Zionists what they wanted.  It is also possible to see what their propaganda line 
was:  A Zionist Jewish State in Palestine would bring progress, justice and peace to the Middle 
East. The presence of such a Jewish State would bring enlightenment to the benighted Arabs - an 
echo of Theodore Herzl's Messianic vision that, "We (the Jewish race) should


--- PAGE 5 ---
iii  
 
 
form a part of a wall of Defense for Europe in Asia, an outpost of civilization against Barbarism" 
- the Zionist theme-song for the past 80 years.  
The Zionist megalomania has persisted.  British Zionists trumpeted their great service to 
Great Britain, humanity and progress while they were undermining Britain's position in the 
Middle East, planning to evict the Palestinians from their homes and establish a racially pure 
Jewish State - as testified by Elizabeth Monroe in her book Britain's Moment in the Middle  
East.  In the United States, Zionists coined the phrase, "What is good for Israel, is good for the 
U.S.A."  This propaganda theme reached a pinnacle of imagination, delusion and nonsense when 
I. L. Kenan, the Chief Propagandist of the Israeli Lobby, testified before the Committee on 
Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives (July 22-30, 1970 - page 81) as follows:  
"Israel's existence is a priori protection for American oil interests in the Persian 
Gulf - in Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and Bahrain - and Iran"  
 
With children, imagination often merges into prevarication.  With Zionists the line between 
the two is quite invisible.  The amazing fact is that supposedly responsible Congressmen are 
mesmerized by such delusions.  Five years later, in 1975, Israel is demanding that, as the price 
for withdrawing from Egypt's Abu Rudais oil fields, the U.S.A. must guarantee - and pay for 
Israel's future oil needs - forever.  And the U.S.A. will probably agree to this as a small part of 
the costs of having encouraged Israel's Zionist expansion for the past generation.  
 
The purposes of the Zionist propaganda machine were manifold.  
(1) To capture the key positions in the U.S. government with special emphasis


--- PAGE 6 ---
iv    
on Congress and White House, so as to have access to U.S. arms, Finances and Political support 
for the success of Zionist ambitions.  (2) At the same time to discredit and negate the influence 
of the so-called "Arabists" in the State Department and keep them effectively muzzled.  (3) To 
infiltrate the mass media and Labor organizations with Zionist slogans, clichés and articles and 
use them as channels for Zionist propaganda.  (4) To defame the Arabs as unreliable, barbarians, 
men of violence and enemies so as to build a wall of suspicions between the Arabs and the 
United States and  (5) As Herzl had stated, "to capture the Jewish nation" - those elements in the 
Diaspora, to loyally serve the interests of a Jewish state.  
Mr. Loy Henderson, Director of NEA, on November 24, 1947, sent a Memorandum to 
Acting Secretary Robert Lovett to pass on to President Truman.  In it is this passage,  
“It seems to me and all the members of my office acquainted with the Middle East, that the 
policy we are following in New York, (at the United Nations, where the U.S. Delegation was 
favoring the establishment of a Zionist Jewish State on territory overwhelmingly Arab) is 
contrary to the interests of the United States and will eventually involve us in international 
difficulties of so grave a nature that the reaction throughout the world, as well as in this country, 
will be very strong. --We are incurring long-term Arab hostility - the Arabs are losing confidence 
in the friendship and integrity of the USA. -- (It will encourage) Soviet penetration into 
important areas as yet free from Soviet domination" and as vast quantities of petroleum were 
being discovered in Arab lands, it was essential that normal and mutually advantageous relations 
with the Arab world should be preserved.  
 
Before these memoranda could get to the Oval Office in the White House, they had to pass 
through the screening of Sam Rosenman, Political Advisor to the President, and David (Nyhus) 
Niles, Appointments Secretary, both


--- PAGE 7 ---
v 
 
crypto-Zionists.  One of these memoranda was returned unopened with a notation, "President 
Truman already knows your views and doesn't need this."  That President Truman's attitude 
toward the NEA had been poisoned is evident from his remarks in his Memoirs that he could not 
trust his advisors in the State Department because they were, "anti-Semitic."  Being low on the 
totem pole in this group, I can testify that I have never worked with a more honest or 
conscientious group of men, who when they were asked their opinion gave it honestly - and were 
insulted for their loyalty.  
In October, 1973, with the Fourth Arab-Israeli War and an Arab Oil Embargo, the Zionist 
propaganda bubble burst.  It is a painful time for all.  The Arabs hope that with U.S. awareness 
of the facts of life - rather than being hypnotized by Zionist fiction, they can recover their 
territories captured by Israel in 1967.  For the U.S.A. it is a time of "reassessment" of the "special 
relationship" with Israel.  For Israel - after 28 years of Messianic delirium - it is time to face 
reality, i.e., that Israel cannot dominate the Arab world if it is to survive.  The United States must 
now pay attention to its larger interests and not sacrifice them before the altar of Zionist dreams 
and propaganda.  In other words, Zionist manipulation of the U.S. political institutions is coming 
to an end.  The United Kingdom was an early victim of the Zionist dogmas, then the Palestinians 
and the Arabs paid a high price because they resisted Zionist domination.  Next is the turn of the 
United States.  By subservience to the Zionist lobby, encouraging and fueling dreams of a 
Greater Israel which can, as General George Brown stated, boast that it can "take care of 
Congress” the U.S.A. has been guilty of partaking in the Zionist megalomania.  I believe


--- PAGE 8 ---
vi 
 
it is safe to suggest that the a nger of the Zionists will be turned against the U.S.A. – its last 
“friend.”  The final victim of Zionism will be those Jews who were mesmerized by its unreal and 
emotional illusions.  This is already taking place. 
 This personal narrative is a r ecord of one such target of Zionism who survived.  It is 
written in the hope that it may afford a glimpse into the experience and opinions of one who saw, 
firsthand, the machinery of manipulation at work.  
 
COMPETENCE OF THE AUTHOR 
 Dr. Edwin M. Wright was born of missionary parents in  Tabriz, Iran, in 1897.  He 
received an A.B. from Wooster, College in 1918, a B/D. from McCormick Theological Seminary 
in 1921, and an A.M. from Columbia University  in 1921.  In that same year he began a 
remarkably varied career focused on the Middle Ea st, going to Iran for three years of work in 
refugee rehabilitation.  From 1925 to 1937, he worked as an educator in Iran, for the last two of 
those years as principal of Avicenna High School in Hamadan.  Between 1938 and 1941 he was 
a fellow of the American Council of Learned So cieties and lecturer in  history at Columbia 
University.  With O.S.S. in 1941, Dr. Wright se rved in the U.S. Army  Middle East Command 
and on the General Staff , with the rank of Lieutenant Colonel, from 1942 to 1945. 
 After the war, he joined the Department of State, holding several positions in the Bureau 
of Near East, South Asian and African Affairs.  While


--- PAGE 9 ---
vii  
 
there he organized Turkish, Persian and Arabic broadcasts on the Voice of America.  
From 1955 to 1966 he was Assistant Dean of the Foreign Service  
Institute and Professor of International Relations.  His brilliance as a teacher is known 
throughout this country.  He has repeatedly lectured at The Johns Hopkins University School of 
Advanced International Studies, the National Army and Navy War Colleges, the Naval and 
Military Academies and innumerable other Government schools and private universities.  He has 
been decorated with the Legion of Merit and honored with the Department of State's Superior 
Merit Award.  In 1958 Wooster College awarded him an honorary L. H. D.  He is the author of 
numerous scholarly articles, and is an outstanding linguist, with native fluency in Farsi and 
Azerbaijani Turkish, a scholar's command of Arabic and a conversational facility in Armenian.  
Dr. Wright has served on the Middle East Institute Board of Governors since 1946, including 
terms as Director of the Institute, Chairman of the Board, and President.  He is a member 
emeritus of the Board.  
 
______________________ 
The above statement was prepared by the Middle East Institute of 1761 N. Street, N.W., 
Washington, D.C., at the time of establishing a Dodge-Wright Fellowship Fund in October, 
1971.


--- PAGE 10 ---
THE ZIONIST CONNECTION  
 
I first visited Palestine very briefly in 1921.  Then in 1929, 1 spent three weeks in the 
area.  In 1941 1 began government service in Research for the War Department and in October, 
1942, 1 was sent to Iran in Intelligence (G-2) with the Persian Gulf Command.  Colonel Wallace 
McLenahan, Chief of G-2 in the United States Armed Forces in the Middle East (USAFIME) 
with headquarters in Cairo, arranged my transfer to USAFIME in May, 1943.  Palestine was 
included in that command and for a full year in 1944, 1 was G-2 Palestine with my office in Tel 
Aviv.  My baptism into the emotional atmosphere of the Arab-Zionist conflict was total - and 
discouraging.  I could sense two antagonists reaching for each others jugular - with no design to 
compromise on either side - Jewish nationalism called Zionism - and Arab nationalism called 
“Arruba.”  Jewish nationalism can be summed up in the quote from Dr. Israel Eldad, the fanatic 
follower of Herzl:  
 
"Israel is the Jews land - not a land of Jews.  It may have, at one time, been a land 
of Arabs but it was never an Arab land.  Israel was the Jews land even when no 
Jews resided in it.  It was never the Arabs land, even when virtually all its 
inhabitants were Arab.  Israel belongs to four million Russian Jews despite the 
fact that they were not born here.  It is the land of nine million other Jews 
throughout the world, even if they have no present plans to live in it."(1)  
 
 
The Palestinian dogma was a very simple one.  Their ancestors had lived in Palestine many 
centuries.  The Zionists wanted to drive them out and bring Jews in to take their place.  They 
would not agree to this but would resist.  
________________ 
(1)  Dr. Israel Eldad, The Times of Israel, August 29, 1969


--- PAGE 11 ---
2  
 
 
For three years I listened to both sides repeat these themes in one form another. AU the 
elements of tragedy were there in large doses. With the end of the War, I was transferred back to 
Washington.  
Upon return to the U.S.A. in November, 1945, 1 served as the Middle Fast Specialist on 
the General Staff of the Department of Defense (with the rank of Lt. Colonel) in the Pentagon 
during the periods of General Marshall's and Eisenhower's incumbency as Chief of Staff.  In 
February, 1946, I joined the Staff of the Department of State as Special Assistant to Loy 
Henderson, Director of Near Fast-African Affairs.  I served in various positions throughout the 
period Harry S. Truman was President of the U.S.A.  
 
DEFINITION OF TERMS: AN ABSOLUTE NECESSITY  
As Aristotle remarked - there can be no genuine communication without definition of 
terms.  This lack of definition of the terms "Jew," "Arab, " 'Islam," and "Zionism " have 
bedeviled all discussion of the issues involved.  Ever since 1948, the State of Israel has been 
locked in a bitter dispute over the question, "What is a Jew?"  The term "Zionism" is still more 
nebulous and undefinable.  The term "Arab" herein used is the simplest of all - anyone whose 
home language is Arabic.  It has nothing to do with race, religion, nor ancestry, and Arabic 
speaking nations and people spread from Morocco to the frontiers of Iran.  The term "Muslim" 
refers to those who claim to follow the traditions of Muhammad - though the term is very loosely 
used - and modern Muslims living in non-Muslim societies tend to ignore the traditional “life-
style."


--- PAGE 12 ---
3  
 
Zionism involves a whole spectrum of meanings.  To the Palestinians who were born in 
Palestine but largely driven out by Jews and Israelis in 1948-1967 and their lands confiscated, 
the word Zionism reminds them of Violence, Injustice, Arrogance, Foreign Imperialism, and the 
Enemy.  The very name Palestine is anathema to many Zionists.  Mrs. Golda Meir in 1970 
denied there had ever been a Palestinian community, and General Dayan in his "Five No-es" 
included "No" to a Palestinian State - Ever.  One can sense the bitterness between the 
Conquerors (the Israelis) and the Conquered (the Palestinians) in such terms.  Rabbi Zvi Halevy 
Ha Cohen Cook claims the word Palestine should never have existed.  The Hebrew God 
promised Abraham that through his progeny from Sarah, the land was an eternal and inalienable 
grant to God's Chosen People.  Therefore, inasmuch as the Chosen People never lost title to the 
land and never gave permission for the Arabs to enter, the latter are not there 'by right" and all 
should be expelled.  
To fortify his argument, he quotes from the Hebrew Torah and the Talmud(2) (Exodus 6:8 
and 32:13 and Talmud Tractate Avode Zara 53b).  Such statements are common in Zionist 
dogmas and constantly keep surfacing in the political arena in Israel by leading officials of the 
Israeli government.  (See the Middle East International, March, 1974, page 12 ff., and my 
pamphlet Zionism.(3)  
________________ 
(2) The Torah is the First Five Books of the Bible traditionally called the Five Books of 
Moses. The Talmud is a series of Teachings, commentaries and interpretations of the Torah 
while Jews were in Exile.  
(3) Published by The Northern Ohio Committee on Middle East Understanding, P.O. Box 
16094, Cleveland, Ohio  44116.


--- PAGE 13 ---
4  
 
 
Norman Podhoretz in an article in the New York Times Magazine, following the October 
6-25, 1973, Fourth Arab-Israeli War, states that the events of that war made all Jews become 
Zionist.  Winston Churchill referred to himself as a Zionist, and there was an odd type of Gentile 
Zionism that appeared in political circles in Great Britain which produced the Balfour 
Declaration.  The word Zionism, therefore, is like an Alice in Wonderland term - it means 
exactly what anyone wants it to mean, and that destroys any genuine effort at discussion or 
intelligent communication.  
There is, however, a way out of this dilemma.  In 1896, Theodore Herzl wrote a book 
The Jewish State (in German - Der Judenstaat , and in 1897, a Conference established "The 
World Zionist Organization."  In 1952-53, the State of Israel, now a recognized political nation, 
entered into an elaborate "Treaty" or Covenant with the W.Z.O.  The best readily available 
analysis of this Covenant was published in the George Washington Law Journal, Volume 32, 
June, 1964, entitled “The Zionist-Israel Juridical Claims to Constitute 'The Jewish People' 
Nationality Entity and to Confer Membership In It, Appraisal in International Law" - William 
"Tom" Mallison, author.  
Furthermore, subsequently there have been periodic meetings of the World Zionist 
Organization in Israel which reflect THE OFFICIAL body of discussion.  They, plus statements 
from the Presidents of Israel, the Prime Ministers, actions of the Knesset, which is the legislative 
authority in Israel, give insights into what is meant by the term Zionist.  Based on such 
documents, I shall try to define Zionism, but I am certain any Zionist will denounce the


--- PAGE 14 ---
5  
effort, arguing that Alice in Wonderland is after all correct, and Zionism means what they, 
individually, insist it means.  
 
THE ZIONIST DOGMA  
A study of Zionist documents and the actions of the Israeli Government gives the clues to 
The Zionist Dogma, which is recorded in the theories and practises of Herzl, Weizmann,  
Ben-Gurion, Meir and other Zionist leaders.  
One.  The Gentile world is by nature anti-Semitic and will eventually either destroy or 
assimilate the Jewish people.  
Two.  It is imperative ALL Jews leave their homes in Exile and return to an exclusive 
Jewish State in Eretz Israel - the Land of Israel - restoring the ancient Kingdom of David and 
Solomon within its Biblical boundaries, euphemistically called, “The Jewish Homeland.”  
Three.  To protect the purity of the Jewish race - the Chosen People called "Ha Kehilla 
Ha Kadosha" - all non-Jews must be expelled or if they refuse, they must live under laws and a 
psychological conditioning that will create a wall of separation between "the sacred community" 
and the Goyim - a phrase taken from the Torah, loaded with disdain and contempt.  
Four.  Inasmuch as the scattered Jewish community lacks political unity and power, 
some Foreign Power must be persuaded to adopt the Zionist program.  Here the End (a large 
Sovereign Exclusive Jewish State) justifies the Means.  No Foreign Power will accept the above 
Zionist dogmas so it will be necessary to camouflage the Zionist goals and methods of 
propagation by humanitarian and emotional slogans.  This will involve manipulation, 
propaganda, promises and threats, misinformation and deceit.  Those Jews in high positions and 
influence in foreign states must be captured to become Zionist agents and thus further the Zionist 
program.  Otherwise, as Herzl states, they are anti-Semitic and will be assimilated.  Here the 
story of Esther is the Biblical model.  
 
These themes will be elaborated in the following pages.  
However they will not appear in the above order or pattern.  This is a narrative of 
experiences which grew out of my close contact with Zionists and Zionism over many years as 
an officer in the U.S. Army in the Middle


--- PAGE 15 ---
6 
 
East and later as a member of the staff of the Department of State under President Truman and 
his successors.  Events do not come in neat packages.  One senses a whole gamut of theories, 
ideas and practices in a single event.  They are inextricable elements fused into a single incident. 
 A few of the basic sources for these dogmas are Theodore Herzl’s book and the two 
volumes of his diaries.  Sokolow and Weizmann published further volumes on their efforts to get 
some outside power to support the Zionist movement.  Leonard Stein’s book The Balfour 
Declaration(4) is extremely valuable.  Neville Barbour’s Nisi Dominus describes how the Zionists 
influenced the U.K. government in administering the Mandate.  These are but a sample of the 
literary output.  Zionists and their associates – and opponents – have poured out a mass of 
material – Sic et Non – contradicting one another.  It is all highly emotional, often bordering on 
the neurotic, so anyone approaching the subject must be aware of the reactions, which are likely 
to be vituperative – as I know too well from long experience.  Nevertheless, the effort must be 
made.  
 
One.  The Zionist dogma developed out of the European, especially the Russian experience of 
the Jews.  The persecution of Jews intensified after Tsar Alexander II was killed in 1881 by 
anarchists.  In the plot were three Jews.  Alexander III then initiated the infamous May Laws of 
1882.  Russian Jews began to flee Russia.  As they entered France, Western Europe and the 
U.K., it became apparent that these Russian Jews knew little, if anything, of “Western Culture,” 
and efforts were made to limit or prohibit the entry of large  
 
                                                           
(4)  Issued in the U.K. in November,1917.


--- PAGE 16 ---
7  
 
numbers.  It was the Balfour government in the United Kingdom in 1904-05 which passed the 
Alien Laws to keep Russian Jews out.  The Dreyfus Affair in 1894 in France was the scandal of 
the century.  The United States, however, needed cheap Labor, and in order to weaken the power 
of the growing labor unions, the "Elite" in U.S. industry favored open immigration into the 
U.S.A.  These were the conditions within which Zionism was born. It is understandable that 
there is a deep memory of persecution amounting to a paranoiac view of Gentile society in 
Zionist dogma.  The dogma then starts with a belief that the Gentile world is hostile to Judaism – 
and Jews.  Even if Jews go where no Jews ever existed before, the Jews as a "Superior" people 
will come into competition with non-Jews and anti-Semitism will be generated.  Anti-Semitism 
is an incurable disease of Gentile society and will emerge wherever Jews go.  I need not go into 
the long and intricate history of the emergency of Zionism, for it has been done by others.  One 
of the excellent studies from the anti-Zionist point of view is that of Moshe Menuhin.  Originally 
a Zionist in Palestine, he became thoroughly disillusioned by his studies in the Gymnasia Herzlia 
and in his book The Decadence of Judaism in our Times
(5), he vividly described the process of 
"conditioning" through which young people went to make fervent Zionists of them.  His book is 
the result of personal experience, meticulous scholarship and mature analysis.  His description of 
Zionism begins on page 21.  He distinguished between Judaism as a moral system and Zionism 
which he  
 
 
                                                           
(5) An Exposition Banner Book, 1965.


--- PAGE 17 ---
8  
 
terms “Jewish” political nationalism.  The latter, being a drive for power, ignores morality.  
 Theodore H. White in his book Breach of Fa ith: the Fall of Richard Nixon traces the 
corruption of Nixon’s career to his early years in California when a new style of politics was 
being born – controlled by professional manipulators.  The plan was to reach suburban middle 
class America – not by facts or face to face meetings, but by manipulative techniques.  This had 
been perfected by Tammany Hall a generation earlier in New York. The techniques were based 
on the theory that the best kind of campaign is to attack viciously and if no obvious enemy really 
exists, one must be manufactured.  Issues are to be simple and few and must confront the public 
with passionate emotional slogans.  The Priests of this cult could, for a fee, deliver a tailor-made 
campaign for any purpose or occasion.  PR – Public Relations is the name of this game.  It 
required large sums of money, creation of false images, beating the opponent to the punch by 
well-timed leaks – often quite false but which had their effect before they could be exposed.  
Also necessary was a corps of “Advance Men” who appeared a few days ahead of the candidate 
to sell the Cause.  
 An elaborate cover-up was necessary to hi de any embarrassing set of facts.  Cover-up 
was not a sin – the sin was not winning.  In such a campaign, there is no conflict between ends 
and means.  The end is to win.  Deception, lying, secret intelligence gathering, innuendo and 
accusations are essential tools.  Events not only can be, but must be managed by clever 
propaganda.  This statement accurately describes Zionist campaigns in the U.S.A.  Herzl failed


--- PAGE 18 ---
9  
 
 
to win over a foreign power because he was too crude and blunt.  No foreign power was going to 
be conned into his scheme.  Weizmann was more prudent and pragmatic - and more successful.  
He did not demand everything at once.  In 1917, he unwillingly agreed to a Jewish National 
Home in Palestine provided it did not in any way prejudice the civil and religious rights of the 
non-Jewish community.  But having got that much, in 1922, he increased his demands.  
“Palestine was to be as Jewish as England is English and as France is French" was the new 
slogan. That is a clear statement non-Jews would enjoy no civil rights - for non-English or non-
French peoples have no civil rights in England or France.  
 
By 1942, the U.K.-Zionist honeymoon was over and Jewish assassins were killing British 
officers in Palestine - or Egypt.  The Zionist campaign went into high gear in the U.S.A. with the 
Biltmore program - all Palestine was to become a Jewish State won by war.  Uri Avneri 
describes the songs that were being sung in Palestine by the Zealots - in whose shadow he grew 
up.  
 
"We have returned, Young and Powerful  
      We have returned, We the Mighty  
To conquer our Homeland, In a storm of War,  
      To redeem our land, with a lofty hand,  
With blood and fire, Judea fell  
      With blood and fire, Judea shall rise."  
 
(From Ha Olam Hazeh February 5, 1975.)  
 
 
But in the U.S.A. the Zionist theme was that a return of all the Jews was a humanitarian cause 
and because they had suffered, they would treat the Arabs


--- PAGE 19 ---
10  
 
 
well.  Mr. Truman was told the establishment of a Jewish state would be a peaceful solution.  
 
Whether Truman really swallowed this propaganda may be doubted.  Another item has 
just surfaced.  President Truman wrote in a letter to Eleanor Roosevelt - a true believer in Zionist 
propaganda - as follows:  
 
"The action of some of our Zionists -- will eventually prejudice what they are 
trying to get done. I very much fear the Jews are like all other underdogs.  When they get 
on top, they are just as intolerant and as cruel as the people were to them, when they were 
underneath."  
 
This is quoted in an article by Amos Elon about Prime Minster Rabin in the New York Times, 
May 4, 1975.  In spite of such doubts, under pressure and threats, Truman gave in to the Zionists.  
 
The campaign of manipulation of U.S. political institutions was successful.  How was it 
done?  
 
Hitler had proven himself to be Evil Incarnate.  Anyone who criticized Zionism was to be 
likened to Hitler.  Truman was threatened, Loy Henderson was crucified and the “Arabists” in 
the State Department were to be muzzled or ousted.  An article by Joseph Kraft in the New York 
Times Magazine of November 7, 1971, describes the difficulties under which "Those Arabists in 
the State Department" labored.  Even the most lowly man on the Totem Pole was watched and 
constantly harassed by demands that I be ousted from the State Department.  In the campaign of 
creating an enemy, anyone who suggested there might be a Palestinian point of view was 
denounced as a Hitler, an anti-Semitic, with suggestions there was some sinister connection 
involved.  Huge sums were spent to have Senators and Congressmen speak to Jewish groups at


--- PAGE 20 ---
11  
 
 
which fees were up to $3,000 per speech(6) - all eulogizing Israel - with usually an insult thrown 
in for the Arabs.  A vast cover-up program misinformed the U.S. public from knowing what 
happened to the Palestinians.  As an illustration, when F. M. Abba Eban spoke at the United 
Nations following the outbreak of the Six Day War in June, 1967, he breathlessly announced that 
Israel had detected Egyptian planes headed for Israel on the morning of June 5 and therefore 
Israel had launched a counter-attack against Egypt.  Exactly five years later, Israel published the 
Cabinet decision to launch the attack against Egypt - and the date was June 4.  Israel and its 
Zionist agents were Masters of the Art of Political Manipulation and the justification of these lies 
and vicious attacks was - they were successful in fooling the Public, so it was no sin.  
 
Two other facts have just surfaced about the operations in the White House in 1946 - and 
following.  David Niles was a member of the "Kitchen-Cabinet" for minority interests.  A note 
he wrote to Mr. Truman stated the Arabs were hopelessly divided and quite incapable of united 
action.  Furthermore more than half of them were followers of Mahatma Ghandi and believed in 
the principle of non-violence.  Another Jewish Advisor in the White House was Sam Rosenman. 
In April, 1975, Evan Wilson, who had long served on the Palestinian desk and been U.S. Consul-
General in Jerusalem, visited the Truman Library in Independence and there discovered that all 
the Near East-Africa most secret documents had been routed to Sam Rosenman and commented  
 
 
 
                                                           
(6)  A partial list of these is published in Middle East International, August, 1975, p. 13.


--- PAGE 21 ---
12  
 
 
on most critically - without the State Department ever being informed. Truman was obviously 
effectively manipulated by these two Jewish stalwarts who stood at the Portals of Power, thus 
effectively influencing the input into the Oval office.  (Evan Wilson's letter is in the Appendix 
#3.)  
Two.  The dogma that all Jews should return to Eretz Israel.  
Because in Herzl's lexicon, Jews were superior to non-Jews, when a Jewish State with 
Jewish institutions had been established, it was essential that all Jews emigrate - rather than to 
continue to live in an anti-Semitic foreign hostile culture of inferiors (the Goyim).  So he 
anticipated a mass return of Jews.  Those few who might choose to remain behind were therefore 
in reality anti-Semitic themselves because they preferred such a state to their own – they were 
really self-haters.  This dogma, while often repeated as a ritual, has not appealed to Jews living in 
affluent or open societies.  Israel offers every inducement, but such countries as the U.S.A., 
Great Britain, Holland or France have contributed very few Jews to the "Return."  Tourism is 
almost a religious pilgrimage, but though millions have visited Eretz Israel, millions have also 
returned to the Gentile world where they feel quite at home.  They seem to feel they are better off 
in an "alien" culture that is open, than in a militant, partially theocratic Israel - the world's largest 
Ghetto sounded by angry neighbors because their land has been taken from them.  Many are 
living in wretched refugee camps - determined to return to their own homes.  In the first bloom 
of enthusiasm, many Oriental (Sephardic) Jews went to Israel but found that there was a vast 
cultural gap among Jews and they were discriminated against in every phase of life - they were 
the Inferiors.  They, in 1975, number


--- PAGE 22 ---
13  
 
 
nearly 60% of Israel's Jews.  Next a great campaign was launched to use the U.S. government in 
tying in Israel's plan for Russian Jewish emigration to the U.S.-U.S.S.R. Trade deal.  Senator 
Henry Jackson went so far as to make a public announcement that the Soviet Union had agreed 
to allow 60,000 Jews a year to migrate to Israel - which was a straight lie as several days before 
the U.S. S. R. had notified the U.S.A. the linkage of Jewish emigration to a U. S.S. R.-U.S.A.   
Trade deal was cause for denying the deal.  
By mid-1975, the dogma was undergoing further erosion.  Since the October, 1973, War, 
confidence in the Israeli government has had a disastrous decline.  Criticism and bitter attacks 
forced the Meir government to resign.  Disillusionment and gloom have taken the place of the 
illusory euphoria of recent years.  Israel's international support has disappeared, with the U.S.A. 
in deep trouble internally and yet having to fund Israel's exorbitant demands for $2, 500, 000, 
000 a year - while Israel refuses to withdraw from conquered Arab lands - with a Fifth War and a 
Second Oil Embargo waiting in the wings to move forward at any time and take the center of the 
stage.  Under these circumstances, with inflation, insecurity, recriminations, realizations that no 
magic manipulation will make the Palestinians disappear, the trend of immigration has reversed.  
More Israelis are leaving than entering Israel.  Yet dogmas die hard and Ben-Gurion's famous 
slogan is still repeated,  
"The land of Israel will redeem the Jews, the Jews will redeem the land, then the Jews 
win go forth to redeem the Nations."  
 
This Messianic Vision making the Jews central to the whole purpose of history is one of the 
minor arrogancies which mark the Zionist dogma.  It is little


--- PAGE 23 ---
14  
 
 
wonder that other cultures and nations have a negative reaction to this exaggerated egoism 
which, of course, has a Biblical basis.  
A second part of the dogma is the phrase Eretz Israel - the land of Israel.  Yet no one 
knows what the boundaries of that land have been - or are today.  The Jewish Empire reached its 
greatest expansion under King David - which included the city of Damascus.  The writers of the 
Torah, who lived centuries after David, tried to recall what the boundaries of David's Kingdom 
had been - and to give them Divine authority, they attributed these boundaries to Divine Will.  In  
Genesis 15:18 the Lord God gave a land-grant extending from the River of Egypt (probably the 
Wadi el Arish) to the Euphrates to the Patriarch Abraham.  Other references are found in Joshua 
13, II Sam. 8:5-6 which mentions Damascus, and Numbers 34.  
Any intelligent student of history knows these passages reflect what is called the  
“P-Code" written by priests around 500-325 B.C., and are a hopelessly muddled effort on the 
part of these priests to recall the boundaries captured by David around 975 B.C., but of such 
myths are dogmas generated and modern politics bedeviled.  In time, the Zionist dogma was 
boiled down to three simple phrases - as all dogmas must be - in order to be the emotional 
triggers to bring about action. They are: 
AMENU   ARTZENU   MOLADATENU 
Our People or Nation  Our Land    Our Inheritance  
  
These dogmas were drummed into the memory of children by the Synagogue, Zionist 
education, and in Israel - the Gymnasia Herzlia, a Tel Aviv High School.  It indoctrinated a 
whole generation of future leaders with this


--- PAGE 24 ---
15  
 
 
"conditioned reflex."  It should be clearly understood that Artzenu is a slogan culled from the 
Torah.  The Arz referred to is that dictated by the Hebrew Tribal God JHWH to Moses, 
conquered in part by Joshua, but fulfilled in the Kingdom of David.  So Herzl refers to "the re-
establishment of the Kingdom of David and Solomon."  Any look at a historical map will find 
the northern boundary of Israel as it existed around 975 B.C. started at the Mediterranean Sea 
near modern Tripoli and extended inland to the "entrances of Hamath" this including most of 
Lebanon and two-thirds of modern Syria as a part of the Jewish Moladatenu - Our Divinely 
Ordained Inheritance.  In 1971 General Moshe Dayan, Minister of Defense, in addressing a 
Zionist Pioneer group, outlined the task that lay ahead.  He pointed out that the first generation of 
pioneers established the boundaries of 1948.  "Our generation reached the borders of 1967, but 
the end is not yet.  The next generation will extend our borders, perhaps to Central Syria."  When 
Chaim Weizmann, Ben-Gurion, Levi Eshkol, Golda Meir and other Israeli spokesmen use the 
term "Our Homeland, " they know they are referring to the Divinely Ordained Israel of David's 
conquest.  They are careful, however, NEVFR to say what those boundaries are!  It would shock 
Gentiles to find out what Zionism claims, so they depend upon the ignorance of their Gentile 
listeners who have some vague memory that in Sunday School they heard about God's promises, 
but have no information on what those promises were!!  
 
The ignorance of the Gentile about the Bible is Zionism's most effective tool for 
propaganda.  Why shouldn't the U.S.A. support what God promised?  If the Gentile ever gets 
wise that Eretz Israel includes most of Lebanon and


--- PAGE 25 ---
16  
 
two-thirds of Syria, including the city of Damascus, they will cease to support the idea of Eretz 
Israel.  Absolutely essential to the use of Zionist propaganda is a continuous ignorance of the 
Gentiles as to the meaning of Zionist terms. 
 Unfortunately for Zionism, in my case, I ha d studied Hebrew and took several courses at 
Columbia University under one of the really top authorities in Jewish history – Professor Salo 
Baron (1937-40), the author of a seven volume history of the Jews.  The Artzenu and 
Moladatenu of the Bible is indicated in the map found in the Appendix #1.  
Three.  The dogma of pretending the purity of the Jewish race by expelling or exterminating 
(cherem) the former inhabitants of the Holy Land. 
 Zionists love to quote the Torah as authority for their exclusive claim to Eretz Israel.  But 
the Torah is a double edged sword.   Zionists protest hysterically if other passages of the Torah 
are quoted to explain their present activities and goals.  It has become a meaningless ritual for the 
Orthodox and Fundamentalists to say the Bible is God’s Word – while many of them know very 
little about what it contains. 
 The Orthodox Jewish and Fundamentalist Christian dogmas about the Bible have not 
changed significantly since Medieval times.  Modern scholarship emerged in the Seventeenth 
Century when the Jewish mystic, scholar and humanist Baruch Spinoza wrote his Sic et Non.  
This book called attention to the numerous contradictions contained in the Scriptures.  Like 
putting together the pieces of a picture puzzle, western scholarship began an intense scrutiny of 
the Biblical texts.  Henry Rawlinson’s deciphering of the Besitun Inscription and the discovery


--- PAGE 26 ---
17  
 
 
of the ancient languages of the Sumerians, the Babylonian and Elamite cultures accelerated the 
process.  Then Archaeology came to the fore, thus making possible a totally new attitude in 
understanding the ancient world.  Such a wide gap has emerged between the Medieval School of 
thought and the modern western academic approach that a discussion between representatives of 
the two schools might follow this form:  
 
Rabbi X: 
The Hebrew G-D YHWH Elohim dictated the Hebrew Torah verbatim to Moses, who 
then reduced it to writing without error.  It, therefore, established an Eternal, Immutable 
and Infallible Constitution for the Jewish community and its relations to all other nations.  
 
 
Any Scholar of the "Western School": 
I would recommend your reading an excellent study by a competent Jewish scholar, 
Ernest Trattner, in his book Unravelling the Book of Books.  His theme is generally 
accepted throughout the academic world.  Hebrew did not become a written language till 
the time of the Hebrew monarchy under David.  The spread of the Hebrew Empire, 
especially under Solomon, brought the Hebrews in contact with highly literary neighbors 
such as Tyre, Sumer, Egypt and the Phoenicians.  Solomon emulated these other states by 
building a large Royal Temple and creating a new class of Priests.  They collected the 
earlier myths, legends and rituals and wrote the fragments of history which composed the 
earliest document now called "J" because it refers to the Hebrew God as "Jehova.”  It 
dates to about 950 B.C.  
 
A century later, after the establishment of a Northern Kingdom, with its capitol at 
Samaria, a group of Priests found the "J" document inadequate, so they rewrote it to 
conform to their national interests and produced a second version, now called "E" 
because the Northern name for God was Elohim.  The Northern Kingdom disappeared 
about 710 B.C.  So the "E” document dates to about 850 B.C.  
 
The Southern Kingdom of Judah became a vassal State to other nations and the Temple 
worship borrowed many foreign elements.  In 621 B.C. a group of Priests decided to 
bring in a series of reforms under the young King Josiah.  They produced Document "D" 
but as was the religious custom, they attributed it to Moses.  In 586 B.C. the Kingdom of 
Judah came to an end and the Babylonian captivity began.


--- PAGE 27 ---
18  
 
 
In 539 B.C. Cyrus the Great, the Persian, captured Babylon and under his successors, 
Darius and ArtaXerxes, a small number of Jews returned to Jerusalem, under Persian 
protection.  The group rebuilt a small Temple and developed a School of Scribes and 
Priests.  Between the years 500-350 B.C. this Priestly cult group gathered and rewrote all 
the former documents - attributing to Moses all the theocratic principles they wrote into 
the new version.  They added theories of racial purity emphasized in the Book of Ezra - a 
very late development - added rituals they desired, and inserted a series of Messianic 
predictions about a coming Messiah, who by a Divine miracle would raise the Jews to the 
pinnacle of world power, making all other nations slaves and servants to the future Israel.  
As an illustration of some of the passages, reference should be made to Isaiah 45 - where 
Cyrus is mentioned by name and 49:22-28, 52:1, etc.  
 
 
Efforts have been made by modern scholars to reconstruct the original "J," "E," "D" and 
"P" (for Priestly) documents.  Robert H. Pfeiffer made a valiant effort in his Introduction to the 
Old Testament but others feel the task is impossible.  David Daiches has tried to separate myth 
from reality in his Moses, the Man and His Vision.  But a review concludes, "Though the book's 
focus is on Moses, it's like learning about a stranger at a distance."  Moses belongs to the same 
cycle of stories as Odysseus or Hercules.  Those who take the story literally come up with the 
belief that the Hebrew God told Moses to exterminate the Caananites.  The Hebrew verb is 
"cherem" translated in the English as “utterly destroy.”  
 
This belief is expressed in an article by Menachim Barash, published in Yediot Aharonot 
on December 20, 1974, describing the activities of Rabbi Moshe Ben Zion Ushpizai, a graduate 
of the Ramat Gan Rabbinical School.  We are told the Rabbi is thoroughly versed in the Torah 
and the Talmudic material.  In his pamphlet, he draws analogies between the inhabitants of 
Caanan before Joshua conquered it - and the Palestinians of today.  His key


--- PAGE 28 ---
19  
 
text is Numbers 33:51-56 which is translated as “And Thou shalt Exterminate them, for if you 
allow any to remain they shall become pricks in your eyes and thorns in your sides.”  Other 
passages are in Deuteronomy 7:1-6 and 23-24, 20:12-17 and that bloodthirsty book telling of 
Joshua’s “holocaust.”  All that Hitler did was to adopt these concepts, but applied them to the 
relationship of Teutonic Aryan purity to the other inferior peoples of the earth.  The Hebrews, if 
one takes these passages literally, invented genocide as a national policy. 
 Herzl was going to expel the Palestinians by refusing them employment – using 
starvation as a tool.  The Zionist Elite simply annihilated any thoughts about the Palestinians by 
pretending they didn’t exist.  Amos Elon’s eloquent testimony to this blindness is well 
documented in his Israelis: Fathers and Sons.  Ben Gurion and his Staff of the Haganah made 
their plans in Plan Daleth partially described in John Davis’ book The Evasive Peace.  Walid 
Khalidi has published more detailed studies on Plan Daleth which had two main purposes – One.  
To capture as much land as possible in contiguous areas (thus violating the U.N. partition plan) 
and Two, to cleanse the land of its Palestinian inhabitants.  Thus Plan Daleth takes its model 
from the Joshua-David story.  Menachem Begin was anxious to prove his leadership by 
beginning the massacre at Deir Yassine, six weeks before the State of Israel was established and 
he boasted of the killing of the 254 men, women and children in his book The Revolt.  
 Herzl’s dogma about Jewish racial superiority and purity is alive in Israel as late as 1974.  
The Hebrew University newspaper interviewed General Aharon


--- PAGE 29 ---
20  
 
 
 
Davidi, former Israeli Paratroop Commander with the following result:  
 
 
Q.  "How do you propose to solve the Palestine problem?"  
 
A.  “In the most simple and humane way: a transfer of all Palestinians from their present   
places to the Arab countries.”  
 
Q.  "Will they want it?"  
 
A.  "Oh, yes, they will want it, they will accept it. - - if they don't have an alternative?"  
 
 
(This is quoted in the interview with Dr. Shahak printed in The Journal of Palestine Studies, 
Spring, 1975, page 7.)  That there is anti-Zionism in the Jewish communities is illustrated by this 
copy of the J. P. S. which records articles expressing the views of Nahum Chomsky, Israel 
Shahak, Maxime Rodinson, and the Anti-Zionist Left.  Dr. Shahak's article describes the witch  
hunt against him and the extreme form of dementia that seizes upon some of the Zionists when a 
prominent Israeli Jew does not bow down to worship the new idol - the State of Israel.  
 
To understand modern Israel, one must read Jewish history.  The Israelis believe they are 
reliving the past and there are endless references to the past in any Israeli newspaper.  But a part 
of that past that is practically unknown in the U.S.A. is what happened in 134 B.C. when the 
grandson of Judas Maccabeus, King John Hyrcan, established the Second Jewish Kingdom.  The 
record is found in the book of Flavius Josephus The Wars of the Jews.  
With the death of the last Seleucid Greek King, Antiochus Sidetes (The VII), John 
Hyrcan proclaimed himself King of the Jews.  Finding a lot of unemployed


--- PAGE 30 ---
21  
 
 
soldiers, he hired them as mercenary forces and began a reconquest of the Kingdom of David. 
Pretending to be an Orthodox Jew, he also ordered all the conquered peoples to choose between 
three options.  They could leave, or be converted to Judaism, or be killed. Some converted to 
Judaism to protect their properties.  Among them was a Hellenized Arab of the south who had 
adopted the name of Antipater.  Forced to become a Jew to save his property, he then became an  
official in the Hasmonean Kingdom, ruling the Sinai areas.  His son was Herod the Great, King 
of the Jews in the pre-Christian era.  It was this Herod who built the magnificent Temple, to 
show his loyalty to Judaism.  Thereby he manipulated Jewish sentiments - and also very 
successfully manipulated the Roman Empire.  He was half-Arab.  
Because I had studied Jewish history, I anticipated a war as soon as a Jewish State would 
be established in Palestine.  Plan "Daleth" was the third reenactment of Jewish history.  I was not 
alone, every one of Loy Henderson's staff put themselves on record - but President Truman 
chose to ignore their judgment.  And war came - four of them in fact.  
 
 
Four.  The dogma that it is imperative to have some -outside" power to serve Zionist  purposes.  
 
In the Torah and the Historical sections of the Sacred Scriptures, the Conquests over 
Pharoah and the Caananites, as well as the victories of David, were attributed to a "Totem.”  This 
was the Rod of Moses, which first appeared as a snake and had the magical power of becoming a 
snake from time to time. (Exodus 4:1-6). This magic wand gave Moses the Power of Life and 
Death over his enemies, killed off all the first born in Egypt in


--- PAGE 31 ---
22  
 
 
 
a single night, turned the Nile into blood, caused the water of the Sea of Reeds to part, allowing 
the Israelites to walk through on dry land, then to reverse its power to allow the waters to return 
and drown the Egyptian army.  It furthermore brought water from dry rocks and performed other 
marvels.  In Exodus 17, the rod when lifted up brought victory to the Hebrews, but when it was 
lowered, the Hebrews suffered.  The rod-serpent Totem was carried in the Ark of the Covenant 
and in time it was worshipped by the Hebrews as a God - so the later King Hezekiah had it 
destroyed as an idol would he (II Kings 18:14).  It is obvious that the writers of the Scriptures 
recognized Israel would never have been successful had it not been for this “outside” Power-
Celestial-Totem given by God.  What this story really does is to portray Moses as the Great 
Shaman of Primitive Hebrew mythology similar to all other great Folk Heroes of a primitive 
people.  
 
To the Jewish reader of these Miracle tales, it seemed more than human agencies were at 
work in the hero tale of the exodus from Egypt and the establishment of the Davidic Empire. 
Herzl was too intelligent a person to believe in these folk hero myths and legends.  In his secular 
"realism" he knew no "Jewish power" existed in the scattered Jewish communities.  The Power 
to realize his dream would be some Imperial State with ambitions to control the Middle East.  It 
would be the surrogate - the secular equivalent to the Rod of Moses.  The Imperial rivalry for the 
Middle East began with Napoleon's conquest of Egypt in 1798, intensified with the Russo-
British rivalry throughout the 19th Century, the desire for German Lebensraum and a place in the 
sun following 1870, the rise of Italy and its ambition in Ethiopia.  Herzl believed he could 
manipulate


--- PAGE 32 ---
23  
 
European Imperialism to do the fighting, the intrigue, and political negotiating necessary to 
establish Eretz Israel as an outpost of a colonial empire desiring a foothold controlling the Suez 
Canal and the trade routes to Hither Asia.   
 So one of the assumptions of Zionist dogma wa s that a Jewish State would be able to find 
an Imperial Power to support its dogmas – and in turn the Jewish State would serve the Imperial 
Master by acting as its Middle East control agent.  Herzl therefore approached the cynical Von 
Plehve in Russia, the Tzar, Kaiser Wilhelm, Victor Emmanuel in Italy, even the Pope and Great 
Britain.  None were foolish enough to accept the scheme proposed by Herzl.  Weizmann finally 
persuaded Great Britain in 1917 to issue the Balfour Declaration.  By 1947, the United Kingdom 
was thoroughly disgusted at the role it had assumed of trying to ram Zionism down the Arab 
throat, so the U.K. withdrew.  The Zionists, sensing a drift of power from the U.K. to the U.S.A., 
promptly jettisoned Weizmann as President of the World Zionist Organization and elected Rabbi 
Hillel Silver of Cleveland, who had excellent qualifications for manipulating the U.S. 
Government.  Richard Stevens in his U.S. Policy and the Zionists
 has put on the record how the 
Zionists persuaded to declare for a Jewish State in Palestine. 
 
PRESIDENT TRUMAN’S DECISION TO SUPPORT ZIONISM 
 The definitive documentation on the advice given to President Truman by his staff in the 
Department of State appeared in late 1971 in the 300 and more pages of Foreign Relations of the 
United States – 1946-47, Vol. V.  Also, Mr. Dean Acheson’s book Present at the Creation.  Then 
there are the


--- PAGE 33 ---
24  
 
 
two-volume Memoirs of President Truman himself.  A further less reliable source is the book by 
Margaret Truman.  It must be remembered the two books by father and daughter are partially 
self-serving efforts to justify decisions.  Acheson's book reveals that he disagreed with President 
Truman only on one issue - the Arab-Zionist claims and the Foreign Relations-U. S. A.  
(F.R.U.S.A.) substantiates why Acheson felt that way.  Here is where I can give some personal 
testimony.  
 
When the issue was discussed in Secretary Acheson's staff, Loy Henderson frequently 
took me in as "briefing" officer.  Gordon Merriam, an old acquaintance of mine from our days in 
Iran, was in charge of the Arab-Zionist "desk," but I was one of the more outspoken “veterans” 
of long life in the area.  I was also a recent returnee from four-and-a-half years in Military 
Intelligence.  I sat in - and spoke - at several of the top level State Department staff discussions.  
Furthermore, I was assigned as "resource" officer to assist Mr. John Hickerson, Staff Assistant to 
(Senator) Ambassador Austin at the United Nations.  
 
The corridors of the U.N. were crowded with Zionists, one of whom I had met in 
Palestine, Robert Nathan, a labor lawyer close to President Roosevelt, who threw his influence, 
talents, and political know-how into the scales to persuade doubtful delegations from U.N. 
members to vote for the establishment of a Jewish State.  Only members of delegations were 
allowed on the floor at the U.N. sessions, but Zionists asked various staff members for their 
cards and then used them to enter the floor and go down to particular delegations in their seats, to 
do their "thing."  I was asked for my card several times and refused to violate its use, but other 
staff members gave in to the


--- PAGE 34 ---
25  
 
pressure of “big names.”  Much of their story appeared in Alfred Lilienthal’s What Price Israel, 
but not all.  On wavering small countries from Latin America states, bribes were used or 
blackmail such as, “If you do not vote for a Jewish State, we will use our influence to deny any 
aid to your country in the future.”  So several small countries changed their votes, hoping to get 
the Zionist lobby to favor them in future negotiations.  In one of his memos for December 11, 
1947, President Truman reported that one Zionist impersonated him.  (F.R.U.S.A., page 1309.)  
 President Truman also records the “threats” he received from the “extreme Zionists,” but 
he does not designate them by name.  I can.  In one instance the men who threatened him were a 
committee of Zionists headed by Emmanuel Cellar (Democrat of New York), accompanied by 
Rabbi Steven Wise, who told him that Zionist had persuaded Dewey to support the Zionist 
policy, and unless Truman beat Dewey to the Zionist line, they would urge Jews to contribute to 
Dewey’s campaign and vote Republican.  Representative Cellar pounded on Truman’s table and 
ended – “and we’ll run you out of town.”  I was told this by one of the White House staff who 
witnessed the event – and who had served in Egypt with me, so I knew him well.  Now what is 
confusing is President Truman’s use of the word “extreme Zionists.”  Neither Cellar nor Rabbi 
Wise were “extreme Zionists” at all.  That term should be reserved for the Revisionists in 
Palestine – the sword rattling, strutting Vladimir Jabotinski and his followers later led by 
Menachim Begin.  Truman also refers to Weizmann as a wise and moderate Zionist – yet 
Weizmann believed in exiling all Arabs from all Palestine to make


--- PAGE 35 ---
26  
 
 
way for a purely exclusive Jewish state in all of Palestine(7)  One can only conclude from 
President Truman's Memoirs that he was quite uninformed about Zionism - its dogmas, goals or 
techniques.  
What adds to this impression is how both Truman and his daughter downplay the role of 
Eddie Jacobson as the Zionist connection in the unfolding of the story.  Truman says he could 
not resist Eddie Jacobson's tearful request to speak to Weizmann, so while he refused to listen to 
his State Department advisors, he did consult Weizmann.  Furthermore, in a memo of General  
Hildring, “The President said he personally agreed with Weizmann's views.”  (F.R.U.S.A., Vol. 
V, 1943-46, page 127.)  What Weizmann's views expressed to Truman were is completely 
unknown, but someone was being deceived.  Chaim Weizmann was in Washington as a 
representative of the Jewish Agency Executive, run by David Ben-Gurion and his "ministry" in 
Jerusalem.  For years they had been collecting money and arms (illegally) in the U.S.A. to defeat 
and drive the Arabs out of Palestine as soon as a Jewish State was established.  This is the only 
conclusion to be drawn from the writings of David Ben-Gurion himself, from the "inside" book 
by Leonard Slater, The Pledge, and John Davis's book, The Evasive Peace, which discusses from 
Zionist sources, Plan Daleth of the Haganah to effect a State cleansed of Arabs and with larger 
boundaries than those suggested in the U.N. partition plan.  
 
I cannot lay claim to clairvoyance nor have I any tape recordings of Zionist meetings, 
intrigues, or conspiracies.  My conclusion, after  
 
 
 
                                                           
(7)  For the sake of Public Relations, Weizmann also made statements of exactly the opposite nature.


--- PAGE 36 ---
27  
 
 
four-and-a-half years of intensive study of the Zionist movement was that it was “all things to all 
men” in its public relations propaganda.  To the United Kingdom. Zionism would support British 
imperialism, to the U.S.A., Zionism would bring modernity, prosperity, and democracy as “an 
oasis of democracy in a desert of tyranny.”  This was a favorite phrase of Vice President Barclay, 
who frequently spoke to Jewish audiences in the U.S.A. at $1,000 per speech.  
 What had happened was that Zionism had operated in the U.K. under false pretenses.  
During the period of the Mandate, the Jewish “Yishuv” in Palestine had gradually become the 
only coherent and militarily organized Zionist group.  It was the Jewish Agency Executive in 
Jerusalem that was really moulding Zionism into a State.  When conflicts of interest arose 
between Zionist leaders abroad, and the Jerusalem Executive, the latter simply went their own 
way but allowed the “foreign” spokesmen to play the role of public relations.  While I was in 
Palestine, an intense difficulty arose between Ben-Gurion and Weizmann.  Meanwhile, Ben-
Gurion cultivated American Zionists, especially such as Rabbi Hillel Silver, who could 
outpromise Weizmann.  The U.K. was weary of supporting Zionism, and that greatly limited 
Weizmann’s ability to promise future support.  Rabbi Hillel Silver was extremely ambitious, and 
it was commonly suggested he expected to be the first President of Israel in return for 
“capturing” U.S. support.  Ben-Gurion was in reality running the show in Jerusalem and had no 
intention of inviting a domineering, aggressive American Jew to play a role in the future of 
Israel.  So he used Silver to get American support, then elected Weizmann as the first President – 
a weak and dying ex-leader, whom he did not even intend to come to Israel when it


--- PAGE 37 ---
28  
 
 
was established.  This was the message given to us by the first U. S. Ambassador to Israel, James 
McDonald, in his strange and amusing book My Mission to Israel.  
What was really going on was that Zionism in Palestine was using the Zionists abroad to 
do their public relations work while they went at the business of gathering arms, training a force, 
and preparing for Plan Daleth - the expulsion of the Arabs and the conquest of wider boundaries. 
Nothing that Weizmann or Silver said in the U.K. or the U.S.A. in any way bound the Jewish 
Agency Executive in Jerusalem.  These assimilated Jews lived in a Gentile society and were, 
therefore, useful in getting Gentile support, but only the Jews in Palestine were a self-ruling 
community on the way to becoming a State, and so they alone were responsible for future actions 
and decisions.  Judge Brandeis in the U.S.A. had learned this lesson a generation before.  He was 
the Head of the American Zionist Organization, but later he learned that his position was purely 
a nominal one and he had no influence or decision making powers.  Where this was, he never 
found out.  Weizmann only found this out in 1946 when he was unceremoniously voted out of 
his office "by a strange a strange sea of new faces I had never seen before" at the Basel meeting 
of the W.Z.0.  in 1946.  Rabbi Silver discovered this in 1948 when, after doing his bit to get U.S. 
support, he was bypassed and had the disillusionment of watching Ben-Gurion and the former 
Jewish Agency Executive in Jerusalem set up a government while notifying Silver he was not to 
interfere in the affairs of State.  
In fact, any statements made by "OUTSIDE" spokesmen were purely for public relations 
imagery.  The hardboiled reality lay with the political parties


--- PAGE 38 ---
29  
 
 
in Palestine - and they were keeping secret what their plans were.  There were at least three U.S. 
observers who were developing parallel theories of how Zionism functioned - George 
Wadsworth, Minister in Lebanon, whom I had known ever since he was in Iran a decade earlier; 
Lowell Pinkerton, the very conscientious and astute Consul General in Jerusalem, and myself. 
My own opinion was forming because I had to work with various members of the Jewish Agency 
Executive.  My immediate contacts were with Edwin Samuel, son of Lord Samuel, the first U.K. 
High Commissioner in 1920; Ruben Zaslani (later Shiloah), Chief of the secret G-2 of the 
Haganah (Jewish Defense Force); Eliahu Golomb, reputed Commander of the secret Haganah; 
Dov Joseph, later Governor of Jerusalem, and L. Brilliant, an ex-American Jew who was a 
reporter for the Jerusalem Post
.  He arranged for me to attend rallies led by Ben-Gurion and 
Golda Meir.  Ted Kolleck, at that time Secretary to Ben-Gurion, cordially invited me to his 
Kibbutz, Ein Gev, on Lake Tiberias.  
 
The U.S. Army G-2 in Cairo also helped out by an arrangement with the Jewish Agency 
Executive in Jerusalem.  Numbers of Jews were escaping from Europe and, by an underground, 
arriving in Palestine.  By mutual agreement, a U.S. Army officer, Lt. Nicholas Andronovitch (of 
Russian parentage) was placed in the Jewish Agency office to pick up items of intelligence 
coming from Europe via the refugees arriving in Palestine.  In the loose arrangement we had, he 
was under G-2 Cairo, but worked with me.  I was frequently called back to Cairo for reporting 
and frequently briefed the whole U.S.A.F.I. M.E. staff on events taking place in Palestine.  This 
was to reveal to me one of the techniques of Zionist operations.  After I gave a report at Cairo on 
arms thefts


--- PAGE 39 ---
30  
 
from U.S. supplies sent to the U.K. forces in Palestine, a Jewish member of the U.S.A.F.I.M.E. 
who heard me reported my speech to Mr. Chernowitz, the Jewish Agency Executive 
representative in Cairo.  He in turn sent a report of my talk to the Jewish Agency Executive 
intelligence chief in Jerusalem (presumably Zaslani).  This report was seen by Lt. Andronovitch, 
who at once copied it and sent it back to U.S.A. to  U.S.A.F.I.M.E.  Andronovitch also shortly 
thereafter intercepted the response of the Jewish Agency Executive to Mr. Chernowitz (Cairo) in 
which they suggested that Chernowitz contact me and see if it was possible to stop my anti-
Zionist reporting.  At this moment, two young Jewish Palestinian zealots ambushed and shot 
Lord Moyne on the Cairo streets.  Other British officers were being ambushed and shot in 
Palestine.  These Jews involved were members of the Stern gang or the Irgun Zwei Leumi the 
Jewish National Defense Organization headed by Menachim Begin, a Polish Jewish officer who 
deserted from General Andrus’s Polish army to join the Jewish underground guerilla movement 
in Palestine.  He did not want to fight Nazis – but the British. 
 As a result of the intercepted instruction from the Jewish Agency Executive G-2 to 
Chernowitz, two things happened.  First – General Giles, Commanding Officer of 
U.S.A.F.I.M.E., called me and interrogated me at length about the Jewish terrorists and then 
instructed me NOT to report to the Staff, because it was obvious someone there was leaking 
information to the Jewish Agency Executive in Jerusalem, and General Giles did not want to 
initiate an investigation of his staff.  So thereafter, I reported only to General Giles and later to 
General Royce with one or two other officers invited.  Second – I


--- PAGE 40 ---
31  
 
 
soon had a call from Mr. Chernowitz, who took me out to luncheon and gave me some literature 
plus a book on early excavations by the Palestine Archaeology Foundation.  He suggested he 
would be glad to help me get any information I wanted.  This small incident revealed to me how 
Zionists operated.  They recruit Jews in ANY organization to report to the Jewish Agency 
Executive.  Later on I was to learn that this function of gathering information is performed in the 
U.S.A. by the Research branch of the Anti-Defamation League - the B'nai B'rith.  The way I 
discovered this was as follows:  
While in Palestine as G-2, I met a graduate of the American University of Beirut who 
spoke fluent Arabic and worked in the Jewish Agency Executive - Eliahu Epstein.  He was until 
1974 President of Hebrew University.  As we were both academicians and interested in history, 
we had a common interest and I found him a very congenial associate.  When I came into the 
State Department in February, 1946, 1 discovered Epstein (now Elath) was representing the 
Jewish Agency Executive in Washington, so we continued our contacts with occasional lunches. 
Epstein had also contacted my long time acquaintance Lt. Col. Robert H. McDowell, who had a 
history somewhat like my own born of missionary parents in Turkey, a graduate of Wooster 
College, 1916, whose brother Philip married my sister Sarah.  Lt. Colonel Robert McDowell had 
spent many years in archaeological work in Iraq and lived in Turkey, then was an Aide to 
General Patrick J. Hurley of Texas who was a Special Roving Ambassador for President 
Roosevelt.  When General Hurley visited Egypt and Palestine, he requested me to join his party 
for a few days, and I was his escort officer in Palestine.  Epstein also contacted Colonel 
McDowell


--- PAGE 41 ---
32  
 
in 1946-48, along with me on the "specialists" staff briefing the Chief of staff-U. S. Army.  The 
U.K. C.I.D. (Civil Intelligence Division) in Palestine discovered a wide network of couriers 
traveling between the Jewish Agency Executive in Jerusalem and the Zionist leaders in the 
U.S.A.  They caught an American Jew trying to enter Palestine illegally and, when searching 
him, found a letter from Epstein to Ben-Gurion.  It mentioned Epstein's judgment that Colonel 
McDowell was a hopeful contact in the Pentagon in an influential position.  It also reported there 
was opposition to support of Zionist interests in the State Department - but named no names.  
But most important was a conversation Epstein had had with Rabbi Silver, who wished the 
J.A.E.- Jerusalem to know that if necessary, the Z.0.A. (Zionist Organization of America) would 
call upon U.S. Jews to organize a march on Washington as well as mass demonstrations in other 
U.S. cities demanding that the U.S.A. recognize and support the movement for a Jewish State.  
 
I became the custodian of that intercepted letter - which later I turned into the Secret 
Archives of the State Department.  What it showed was that the Jewish Agency Executive and 
their armed forces (the Haganah and the Irgun Zwei Leumi) were not only the Muscle of the 
Zionist Organization but also its Head - the Directorate to which information went and from 
which action instructions issued.  Shortly afterwards Epstein stopped in my office and we had a 
pleasant chat, without my telling him about the intercepted letter.   I asked him why the Zionists 
were so anxious to drag the U.S.A. into an issue which, in my opinion, would be detrimental to 
U.S. interests in the area.  His answer was frank.   "Because the U.S.A. alone has everything we 
need - political


--- PAGE 42 ---
33  
 
 
power, finances, and if the Arabs fight - arms.'    We had lunch at the Mayflower Hotel, and 
when Epstein ordered his meal, he remarked, "I'm going to order ham - I never get it in 
Palestine.”  
 
What has bothered me is meeting Jews who insist they are Jews - but eat ham, violate the 
Sabbath, prefer to live among Gentiles, and totally ignore the Hallakah - the Shulman Aruch and 
all the other 613 rules which have traditionally been the lifestyle of Judaism.  When Moshe 
Sharett was asked at the U.N. in 1947 to define a Jew, he replied, "Anyone who thinks he is a 
Jew is a Jew - but he need not practice its rules.”  Yet these same non-religious or non-observant 
Jews at once quote the Bible for justification of a Jewish State.  In my book of rules, I cannot 
quote as authority that which I ignore in life.  But that does not apply to Zionists.  When I 
escorted General Patrick Hurley to meet Moshe Shertok (later Sharett) in Jerusalem, Shertok said 
Hurley, as a Christian, had to believe in the Biblical promises about a Restoration of the Jewish 
State.  After we came away, General Hurley asked me what promises Shertok was mentioning?  I 
wrote him a several page memo to try to clear up the fog in General Hurley's Biblical memory.  
 
In the Hebrew sacred mythology, the Temple of Solomon had at its western end a small 
room where YHWH, the Hebrew Tribal God lived.  It was called the Holy of Holies and was 
separated from the rest of the Temple by a curtain.  Inside the Holy of Holies were the sacra - the 
magic symbols of Divine Power - in a sacred receptacle called the Ark of the Covenant.  It 
included a Bronze Snake, some Celestial Food (manna) and the Rod of Moses.  So exclusive was 
the Holy of Holies that only the High Priest, selected by


--- PAGE 43 ---
34  
 
YHWH, dared once in a year to part the curtains and enter the Holy Presence.  Anyone else 
attempting such a sacrilege would be struck dead – or be smitten with leprosy as in the story of 
King Uzziah, if he as much as touched the Ark – the Sacra. 
The surrogate in Modern Israel for the Seat of Power is the Jewish Agency Executive 
(pre 1948) and its continuation after 1948, the Government of Israel.  (J.A.E./G.O.I.)  The High 
Priests of Zionism since 1897 have been a small group of European Jews, mostly from Eastern 
Europe, who migrated to Palestine.  During the U.K. Mandate (1919-1947), they gathered in 
their hands the threads of power.  By his ability, ruthless discipline, and political manipulation, 
Ben-Gurion became the High Priest of the power structure, and in 1948, by control of the Israeli 
Defense Force, he eliminated all opposition, even including Menachim Begin and his terrorists, 
the IRGUN. 
Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion had learned how to use the Jewish community in the 
Diaspora for the purpose of glorifying and enlarging Israel, but they were to have no part in 
decision making.  It was a case of taxation without representation.  Jews abroad were to use their 
influence for several purposes:  (1)  To financially support Israel.  (2)  To send immigrants – 
aliya.  (3)  To get their governments to support Israel.  But unless they migrated to Israel and 
came under the discipline of his party, they were to be excluded from any share in the elite 
function of decision making.  Weizmann served Zionism well, but because he could no longer 
deliver British support, he was discarded in 1946 and Rabbi Hillel Silver put in his place.  Silver 
lived in the delusion he would share in the power structure, but by 1950 had learned


--- PAGE 44 ---
35  
 
he was an outsider and Nahum Goldman was elected as President of the World Zionist 
Organization. 
 Goldman has listed all the serv ices he performed for Israel in his autobiography.  He, too, 
had the delusion he had some right to enter the Holy of Holies.  He negotiated the strange 
covenant between the W.Z.O. and Israel in 1952-53, but he was clearly told he had no place in 
the Power Elite as long as he stayed out of Israel.  Finally he made his obeisance and moved to 
Israel, but he soon discovered he was still an outsider.  He and Ben-Gurion carried on an open 
feud.  In 1967, with Israel’s victory over the Arab neighbors and a burst of hallucinations about a 
glorious and conquering hero nation developing, Goldman entered openly into the opposition.  
Finding no voice inside Israel, he published an article in 1970 in Foreign Affairs, warning Israel 
that it was facing future disaster because of the glorification of its generals and military prowess.  
When Golda Meir read the article, she snorted, “It’s the most anti-Zionist statement I’ve ever 
seen.” 
 Goldman was read out of the party and not ev en invited to attend the next Zionist World 
Conference.  When Nasser suggested he would negotiate with Israel if  Nahum Goldman were to 
represent Israel, the Holy of Holies stripped him of any right to represent Israel.  Then came the 
disaster of October, 1973, which Goldman and others had anticipated.  He published his 
scorching criticism of Israel’s blind leadership in the New Outlook of May, 1974, under the 
caption, “The Necessity to Compromise.”  On page 12 appears this denunciation of Israel’s 
Zionist leadership which has created “years of illusions, of belief in wrong values, of sticking to 
false values and especially


--- PAGE 45 ---
36  
 
of unjustified illusions of grandeur.”  The Fourth Arab Israeli War, he argued, is a direct result of 
this stubborn and blind leadership, the collapse of which, “has led to this psychology of gloom, 
despair, and hopelessness which is beginning to pervade so many of our people both in and out 
of Israel.”  Nahum Goldman also, like his predecessors Weizmann and Silver, learned that 
Palestinian/Israeli Zionism used Diaspora Jews to the limit, but did not admit them to the Holy of 
Holies Party Power Elite.  When it considered them a nuisance in trying to give advice, they 
were discarded as no longer useful.  
 The same may be said of Israel’s treatment of its Gentile supporters – as will be 
illustrated later.  Israel’s power elite is one of the most self-centered myopic groups I have ever 
studied.  The events of October 6-25, 1973, were traumatic.  When General Moshe Dayan was 
asked if Israel had learned anything from the Yom Kippur War, he replied, “Yes, it proved that 
all of our assumptions were false.”  When Vice Premier Yigal Allon was asked why the Arabs 
were able to surprise Israel on October 6, 1973, he replied, “It was because of our excessive self-
esteem and our contemptuous scorn for the Arabs.”  (New York Times, December 4, 1973).  To 
this catalogue of traits, false assumptions, excessive self-glorification, and contemptuous scorn 
for the Arabs, may be added arrogant disregard for all criticism and a complete blindness toward 
the interests of other nations which give Zionism support – a sad lesson first learned by the 
United Kingdom and later by the United States.  
 Obviously some of these conclusions are based on hindsight, as a result of Israel-
watching since 1948.  But Israel’s dogmas were all there in


--- PAGE 46 ---
37  
 
1941-1944, and events since then have been the development of the fruit that grew from those 
seeds. 
 It is now absurd to believe that the elite Zi onist establishment in Palestine/Israel were in 
the least bound by what Weizmann or Silver or Eddie Jacobson said.  They were useful 
instruments for creating an Image.  Reality was Plan Daleth and the eviction of the Palestinians 
as rapidly as possible.  There was a cover-up conspiracy to tell the world that the Palestinians left 
because of the calls of their own leaders and therefore forfeited any rights to live in Israel – 
FOREVER.  That has been the Israeli theme ever since 1948. 
 That President Truman believed he was negot iating with responsible Zionists appears in 
his letter to Henry Morgenthau, Jr., dated December 2, 1947.  It is quoted in Margaret Truman’s 
book about her father: 
 “Dear Henry, 
  I appreciate very much your telegram of November 29 th last but I wish you could   
  caution all your friends who are interested in the welfare of the Jews of Palestine 
  That now is the time for restraint and caution – The vote in the United Nations is  
  only the beginning, and the Jews must now  display tolerance and consideration  
  for the other people in Palestine with whom they will necessarily have to be 
  neighbors.” 
 
 Twenty-six years later, Israeli cabinet members were to confess that Israel had not 
adopted the attitudes President Truman had advised; that if Henry Morgenthau, Jr., had even 
passed on Truman’s advice, it had been ignored and that the characteristics which marked 
Israel’s first 26 years were “false assumptions, extreme self-esteem, and contemptuous scorn for 
the Arabs.”  Those later characterizations did not develop after 1948 – they are the attitudes 
expressed by Theodore Herzl, Chaim Weizmann, and those leaders


--- PAGE 47 ---
38  
who formed the Jewish Yishuv in Palestine and shaped the course of the State of Israel for its 
first generation.  They are the characteristics that mark the Zionist movement from its birth in 
1897. 
 The charitable attitude is to argue that President Truman believed he was dealing with 
responsible, humanitarian, tolerant Zionist leaders who would use restraint and caution in their 
dealings with the Palestinian Arabs.  That view demands an admission – that he was warned by 
his State Department advisors but did not believe them.  This is the self-serving view President 
Truman presents in his Memoirs.  But that charitable view assumes Truman was a naïve idealist.  
It simply does not fit the facts. 
 Truman rose to political influence by serving the Pendergast machine in Missouri 
politics.  As soon as he became President, the long shadow of an election year loomed ahead in 
1948.  There was a midterm election in 1946.  Newspapers and polls indicated Truman was the 
underdog and Dewey would win.  If so, the Democrats would suffer some lean years.  In the 
Democratic Party, Jews played an inordinate position of influence, not only in financial 
contributions but in the Electoral College.  For Jews are concentrated in the five largest states – 
New York, California, Illinois, Pennsylvania, and Ohio, and all polls indicated around 80 percent 
of the Jews paid for and voted for the Democratic Party.  The defection of a small percentage of 
Jews thus could influence finances, the vote in the Electoral College- and the four years 
following 1948.   
It is impossible to believe that those political factors were ignored when President 
Truman made his decision to favor the establishment of a Jewish State in Palestine and not only 
ignore but insult his State Department advisors.  That


--- PAGE 48 ---
39  
 
latter factor really pleased the Zionists!  They were going to press their victory over the State 
Department with subsequent Presidents till October, 1973 – when events compelled President 
Nixon to face realities and start the process of trying to regain some confidence in the Arab 
world.  Truman ignored what Ben-Gurion was to repeat constantly – the Arabs understand only 
one thing – FORCE.  As Israel’s policies alienated her from other power centers, her last and 
only hope for the means to apply force – arms and finances – was the United States.  That was 
the process President Truman began in 1946-48. 
THE WORLD ZIONIST ORGANIZATION (WZO) 
 The WZO was established in Switzerland in 1897, elected Theodore Herzl as its 
President and spokesman and was made up mostly of delegates from Eastern Europe and Russia.  
Its purpose was to organize a world-wide series of “national” chapters who would send delegates 
to future conferences, which were held in Switzerland till the State of Israel was established and 
since then in Jerusalem.  The national chapters were called by their local names – such as the 
American Zionist Organization in the U.S.A.  At first, there were very few members, and Herzl 
suggested one of the main purposes of the W.Z.O. and its national branches was “to capture the 
Jewish communities.”  He had a great sense of urgency, for he saw Jews becoming French, 
British, or Americans.  So assimilation to the national culture was the worst enemy of Zionism.  
At all costs, Jews MUST resist assimilation.  The national branches MUST therefore stimulate 
“Jewish awareness and pride,” discourage mixed marriages, set up special Jewish schools, and 
preserve the Jewish


--- PAGE 49 ---
40  
 
heritage.  Furthermore, the national branches MUST raise funds to purchase land in Palestine.  
This is accomplished by the Jewish National Fund, established in 1901.  Such land was to be 
exclusively Jewish – forever.  Only Jews could rent, work, or profit from the use of J.N.F. land.  
A further task was to recruit Jews for aliya – “going up” to Jerusalem – the traditional term for 
pilgrimage to the Temple.  An extremely important function was to influence policy making in 
their national states to favor Zionist goals. 
 The occasional World Zionist Organization conventions established world-wide policy, 
but it had a permanent Secretariat which would operate to carry out policy.  This was the Jewish 
Agency Executive.  It was supposed to represent leaders from all the national organizations, but 
it soon became dominated by Jews from Poland and Russia.  In 1916-17 Weizmann persuaded 
the United Kingdom to recognize the Jewish Agency Executive as representing the World 
Zionist Organization in the Mandate.  It thereby acquired a political stature as a national political 
body.  There was a long struggle in Palestine between various Jewish political parties to 
dominate the J.A.E. – Rabbis, terrorists, leftists, conservatives, etc., but by 1936 Ben-Gurion and 
his Labor Party had risen to the top. 
 The Revisionists under Vladimir Jabotinski (8) split off demanding use of terror and more 
territory and were not brought under control until Fall, 1948, after three scandals – the Altalena 
gun-running affair, the murder of Count von Bernadotte, and also the terrorist massacre of the 
Palestinians  
 
                                                           
(8)  Later replaced in 1944 by Menachim Begin


--- PAGE 50 ---
41  
in Deir Yassine on April 9, 1948.  Although publicly Ben-Gurion denounced Begin – there was 
collaboration on the covert level.  Ben-Gurion hastened to cash in on Begin’s atrocities and to 
protect him by a cover-up.  He got half of the smuggled arms.  He immediately sent in bulldozers 
to level the ruins at Deir Yassine and turned the land over to Jewish settlements, an he protected 
the murderers of Count von Bernadotte.(9)  So Begin was rewarded by becoming a member of 
Parliament and later a cabinet member.  Ben-Gurion used the same tactics – but secretly.  The 
“capturing of the Jewish communities” was a slow process till Hitler appeared with his NAZI 
effort to purge Germany of Jews.  Anti-Semitism has had the result of strengthening Zionism.  
This was true in France in the Dreyfus scandal, true of Russia in 1882, and again true of Hitler 
after 1932.  It may well be argued that Jews do not go to Palestine/Israel from choice – a few 
might such as Golda Meir.  The majority go because they are afraid to stay where they are.  The 
driving force is not love of Palestine/Israel, but fear of persecution.  Where there is weak anti-
Semitism, such as the U.K. or U.S.A., Jews have not migrated in significant numbers to Israel.  
The corollary is:  Where anti-Semitism is strong, Zionism grows.  Where it is weak, Zionism is 
weak.  U.K. and U.S.A. Zionists find themselves caught in a dilemma.  They urge OTHER 
JEWS to go to Israel, but do not go themselves.  Herzl scorned such Jews and said they were “in 
reality anti-Semites dressed  
 
 
 
(9)  It is commonly known in Israel that Dr. Israel (Sheib) Eldad was one of the assassins.  He is a fanatic 
founder of the Greater Israel Movement that emerged in 1967.  See Fouzi el Asmar’s book, page 143.


--- PAGE 51 ---
42  
up in the robes of Jewish philanthrophy.  Mrs. Rose Halperin of the Hadassah had an excuse to 
explain why she did not migrate.  It was that Israel needed U.S. political support and finances.  It 
was necessary for her to stay in the U.S.A. to carry out that service to Israel.  Ben-Gurion was 
scornful of such circular reasoning.  He was a true believer of the Herzl school.  He stated no one 
had the right to use the term Zionist unless they migrated to Israel.  Zionists must prove their 
Zionism by immigration to Israel. 
 In 1942, Ben-Gurion came to the U.S.A. and organized the Biltmore (New York) 
Program which called upon the U.S.A. to recognize a Jewish State, organize a Jewish army and 
added more claims, formerly hushed up.  Gradually the Zionist program was being revealed and 
the excuse was - Hitler’s Nazi Germany.  Although the extent of Hitler’s holocaust (the burnt 
sacrifice of the Bible) was not fully known till 1944-45, the word “holocaust” has become the 
chief psychological tool in Zionist/Jewish propaganda.  Any criticism of Zionism or Israel is 
immediately identified with anti-Semitism or someone suggesting an American holocaust.  This 
is a paranoiac reaction to Jewish insecurity and anxiety and has been most successful in stifling 
any criticism.  Even Eliahu Epstein, who knew me personally over a long time, angrily retorted 
to me, “What happened in Germany can happen in the U.S.A.”  I was soon placed on the list of 
“enemies” by the Zionist intelligence and propaganda agencies.  Such a statement needs 
documentation, which I will supply. 
 In 1946, a small group of six organized the Middle East Institute, now at 1741 N Street, 
N.W., in Washington, D.C.  20036.  Five of them had lived for many years in the Middle East, 
had been in academic work, and all of us


--- PAGE 52 ---
43  
 
were aware that the Middle East would be a vital part of U.S. foreign policy in the future.  We 
were also aware of the vast ignorance of Americans about the area and that the Zionists were 
anxious to fill the information void with their propaganda.  It was our purpose to create an 
Institute where accurate, unbiased and relevant information could be collected and published.  
There was an immediate rush of Jews to “capture it” and use it as an outlet for Zionist 
propaganda.  Numbers of U.S. Jews and some from Palestine joined.  They submitted articles 
and urged more emphasis on Palestine/Israel.  In one of the early issues of the Middle East 
Journal, Kermit Roosevelt published an article on Zionist Pressures and tactics at the United 
Nations.  Ephraim Speiser, Professor at the University of Pennsylvania, a former chief of mine in 
the O.S.S., whom I greatly admired and respected, wrote a diatribe
 against the article and said he 
would never have anything more to do with the Middle East Institute.  Yet every statement in the 
Roosevelt article was true! 
 Another attack was leveled against me.  Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt was on the U.N. 
delegation, and I was assisting the U.N./U.S. delegation as a staff member.  Mrs. Roosevelt 
received a letter referring to me as anti-Semitic and in Arab pay.  Would Mrs. Roosevelt use her 
influence to have me removed from the State Department?  Mrs. Roosevelt forwarded the letter 
to Public Relations in the State Department, then under Francis Russel.  He gave the letter to me 
for reply.  So I drafted the reply, and it was signed by Francis Russel and sent to the irate Zionist.  
This routine was to be followed many times in subsequent years.  The men in Public Relations 
knew me well, for they frequently sent me to represent the State Department at universities and


--- PAGE 53 ---
44  
 
other groups.  Many of these were “off the record” conferences for “background only” and “no 
attribution” for quotations.  But that did not bother Zionists in the audience.  They would rush 
out to the nearest newspaper and give a distorted report on what I said – often fabricating some 
statement completely.  The article would then appear, be clipped by the Research Branch of the 
Anti-Defamation League, and sent out, broadcast to Jewish groups all over the U.S.A.  There 
would follow a deluge of letters to the President of the U.S.A. or to the Department of State 
demanding I be removed from office.  I would be called in by the Assistant Secretary of State – 
George McGhee or William Roundtree – told to be more discreet in the future.  Once I was 
ordered not to speak in public on the Arab-Israeli issue unless I used a written text cleared by the 
proper authorities.  The proper officials were scared of their shadows lest the Zionists attack 
them and would only give the blandest and most meaningless statements for use.  Perhaps I, too, 
would have been cowed into silence by Zionist threats, but two factors were in my favor.  First, I 
knew I had the facts correctly and, second, I had several invitations to go back to academic 
teaching.  The Zionist attack upon me began in 1946-47 in connection with the Middle East 
Institute.  It has continued ever since. 
 The Zionist Lobby in Washington publishes The Near East Report which claims no 
objectivity but is an open propaganda sheet.  On August 24, 1974, it leveled its attack against the 
Middle East Institute in a full page study by David Ettinger.  The following are some quotes 
from the article: 
  “Often being accused of being pro-Arab, the Institute strives – with questionable  
 success – to maintain a reputation for the high standards of scholarly objectivity set out in 
 its charter - - -


--- PAGE 54 ---
45  
Several members of its Board of Governors are outspoken anti-Zionists and pro-
Arabists and there is only one Jew.  Edwin M. Wright, a founder and member of 
the Board is a strident anti-Zionist who uses his forum as Professor of 
International Studies at the University of South Carolina to espouse the Arab 
cause - -.” 
 
The Near East Report lists the MEI as among those organizations “which both officially 
and reputedly promote Arab interests in the United States.”  This is typical propaganda.  
Because the MEI does not serve Israel’s purpose, it must be classed as a part of a hostile 
group.  My reply to this attack is found in the Appendix #2. 
ZIONIST TECHNIQUES 
 Herzl set the pattern.  Seek sources of power and make a direct approach at the 
top.  He used flattery, bribery and promised to further Imperial interests.  Yet he failed, 
because he was too arrogant, impetuous, and in too much haste.  Weizmann had the same 
goals and techniques, but went at them more quietly and partially succeeded.  So 
wherever there is a seat of power, not far off will be some Zionists attracted like bees to 
honey.  Jews are a capable and brilliant people, and as a minority they have sought – like 
most minorities – how to enter the power structure, not only for self-protection but self-
promotion.  Of all societies, the U.S.A. is the least structured, the most open, and the 
most technical.  Jews have found social and political mobility, and though they represent 
only some three percent of the total population, they crowd to the top of the professions, 
the mass media, and politics, in which fields they represent two, three, or four times their 
numerical ratio in the population as a whole. 
 Again, let me document my personal histor y.  As a State Department official, I 
was labeled anti-Semitic or anti-Zionist.  Drew Pearson attacked


--- PAGE 55 ---
46  
 
me twice in his column as pro-Arab, and the man from his staff who called me on the 
phone was a Jew.  Another journalist who attacked me several times in his column 
“Washington Spotlight” was Milton Friedman. 
 Friedman deserves a special paragraph in the art of propaganda and cover-up.  A 
Ventriloquist is a skilled artist who can project his voice so it seems to be coming from 
some other object – viz:  Edgar Bergen and Charlie McCarthy, who was a brainless 
wooden figure.  Friedman claims to be a master at this art.  The Cleveland Jewish News 
of October 18, 1974 (page 15) published an article by Richard Yaffe about the great 
success story of Milton Friedman.  His father ran a kosher food store in Portsmouth, 
Virginia.  The son “Milt” credits his 24 years with the Jewish Telegraph Agency (JTA) as 
“its man in Washington, for his success in being able to put his words in someone else’s 
mouth” – “I really got acquainted with how the Federal government worked and with a 
lot of people.”  (Until 1963 the JTA pretended it was a U.S. organization and Friedman 
carried a State Department Press Card.  But in 1963, the Fulbright Committee 
investigated foreign agents operating in the U.S.A. under cover, and among them was the 
JTA.  So Friedman’s press card was withdrawn.)  Friedman then went to work for the 
Republican Congressional Campaign Committee as a speech writer.  Congressman 
Gerald Ford worked with him and eventually took him on as his own speech writer.  The 
article identifies Friedman as “President Ford’s senior speech writer” and lauds his great 
service to Israel.  By transferring to the U.S. government payroll, his paymaster


--- PAGE 56 ---
47  
had changed but not his voice – it now came from the mouth of Gerald Ford, 
Congressman from Michigan. 
 Once Ford had Friedman as his writer, Ford’s speeches on the Middle East echoed 
what was being said in Jerusalem.  The Israelis were delighted at Ford’s pro-Israeli 
statements.  In 1972, an election year, Ford spoke to many Jewish groups in an effort to 
win Jewish votes for Nixon.  In one such speech, he said the United States should move 
its Embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem.  That of course would have been the equivalent 
of recognizing Israel’s annexation of Jerusalem.  But at his first press conference on 
August 29, 1974, President
 Ford was asked if now, as President, he stood by his 
statement of 1972.  President Ford replied, “Under the current circumstances and the 
importance of getting a just and lasting peace in the Middle East, I think that particular 
proposal ought to stand aside.”  (Christian Science Monitor, August 29, 1974.)  This 
incident shows the irresponsibility of a congressman – who can advocate any policy to 
satisfy his supporters.  Yet when he becomes President, he must face realities abroad.  
This is what President Truman failed to do – as President  in the Arab-Israeli issue. 
 I am well aware of the quality of Milt on Friedman’s speech writing, for I have 
kept some few of the many journalistic gems he used to try to oust me from the State 
Department.  His column was syndicated to Jewish papers throughout the U.S.A. – and of 
course sent to his paymaster in Jerusalem.  People unknown to me would clip the article, 
add some of their own reactions, and mail them to me – with no return address.  I would 
then get a call from some State Department officer asking me to explain the article, 
because copies would


--- PAGE 57 ---
48 
come in from senators and congressmen demanding action to remove me.  So one such 
article took hours of my time and others likewise.  Then there would be the demand by 
local Zionists to call upon the Assistant Secretary for the Near East and Africa.  In great 
anger these Zionists would denounce me and demand my removal.  My trouble was that 
as a historian and teacher, I was constantly asked to brief committees, seminars, and 
conferences on the Middle East.  In the audiences were usually some Jews.  They would 
try to bait me in order to get a quote they could use against me.  This then would be 
reported to the Research Department of the Anti-Defamation League, and they in turn 
supplied it to such mass media outlets as Milton Friedman.  But by the time it had gone 
through several sets of communications, it would really be a fearful and wonderful 
production.  Herewith one such sample”  (A photostatic copy of the original is in the 
Appendix #3) 
Copy:  Los Angeles Voice  May 18, 1956 
MILTON FRIEDMAN 
WASHINGTON – Will the UN Security Council investigate the Patriarch Abraham?  A 
State Department official has charged Abraham with aggression. 
 The official is Edwin M. Wright, adviser to Secretary Dulles and assistant director 
of the US Foreign Service Institute.  For many years, Wright’s objectivity towards Israel 
has been questioned.  Early this month Wright turned to the Bible in his search for anti-
Zionist arguments. 
 Speaking in the State Department’s ow n building to a group of the American 
Association of University Women, Wright said the Arabs feel 1948 was only the latest 
time the Jews infringed on their territory.  He hinted the Arabs would reconquer the land 
now occupied by Israel.  He referred to Biblical precedents purporting to illustrate 
aggressions by Jews.  Abraham, he alleged came from the “outside” into Palestine, 
attacked the local people and drove them out of their own country. (1) 
 Wright’s blend of half truths and prop agandistic distortions are presented in a 
pseudo-academic context. (2)  Employing a guise of scholarly objectivity, he is a clever 
and forceful speaker. 
 He plants the germ of an idea that th e Arabs were wronged by the Jews. (3)  His 
next step is to stress the importance to the United States of Arab oil and Arab


--- PAGE 58 ---
49  
 
friendship.  He maintains the U.S. support of  Israel may have undermined American 
security interests in the Middle East. (4)  
In a recent address at George Washington University, Wright said that oil being 
pumped by Israel in the Negev, might be coming from deposits running under nearby 
Egyptian territory.  He suggested such oil rightfully belonged to Arabs.  
Wright has been in difficulty with his superiors a number of times for publicly 
voicing his private views on Israel.  Officials feel  he is undiplomatic in voicing thoughts 
that do not coincide with official expressions of impartiality. (5)  
 Anti-Israeli remarks by Wright brought many embarrassing protests to the 
Department.  The Department usually claims he was not speaking “officially.”  Wright 
alleges he is “misquoted.”  
 In November, 1950, at the U.S. Naval A cademy in Annapolis, Wright told the 
audience that Israelis murdered Arabs.  (6)  He made similar remarks before the Army 
War College in Washington in 1951.  (7)  He responded eagerly to invitations to the 
University of  Indiana, the University of Maryland, the YWCA of the District of 
Columbia and other places where thousands got the “unofficial” facts on Israel.  (8)  
 Finally on February 28, 1952, Wright stood on the platform of the State 
Department auditorium.  This time he had the official assignment of his supervisors to 
brief a group of American editors who were preparing to leave for a visit to Israel and 
elsewhere.  This time he spoke inside the very building of  the State Department as an 
official representative of the U.S. Government.  
 According to the United Press, he said that  the U.S. had to give aid to Israel when 
the United Jewish Appeal fell short in its quota for funds but he contended, as long as 
American aid is forthcoming, Israel does not feel the need to compromise with its Arab 
neighbors.  (9)  
 Subsequently, an inflammatory atta ck on American Jewry written by Iraqi 
Diplomat Abdullah Ibrahim Bekr was read by Wright to a Washington conference of 
business executives.  The speech questioned the loyalty of American Jewry and alleged 
that Jews were unreliable citizens throughout the world.  (10)  
 When Wright concluded, one of the conf erees arose and questioned the propriety 
of the State Department and American business corporations providing a platform for a 
foreign attack on a section of the American public.  The conference was on 
“Developments in the Middle East.”  No Israel or Zionist representative was invited 
although a number of Arabs and pro-Arabs were listed on the program.  
 Wright’s record includes recent service as  Chief Intelligence Officer of the State 
Department Near Eastern Division and Officer in Charge of Turkish Affairs.  He had 
much to do with briefing Henry A. Byroade when Byroade was Assistant Secretary of 
State.  As Ambassador to Egypt, Byroade has used every possible influence to justify 
Arab arms purchases form the Communist block while opposing U.S. arms sales to Israel.  
 Today, Wright, Assistant Dean of the Foreign Service Institute, is mainly 
concerned with the education of young diplomats.  He also advises Dulles


--- PAGE 59 ---
50  
 
 
on Near Eastern policy.  Wright finds time, too, for close friendship with the Arabian-
American Oil Co. (ARAMCO) and various anti-Zionist groups.”  
 
Comments by E.M.W. 
 
 I consider this a highly flattering report – but full of errors.  I have placed 
numbers in the text for specific comments as follows: 
(1)  A reference to Genesis 14:13-24. 
(2)  “Pseudo-academic” I have taught at Columbia University, 20 years at the                 
School of     Advanced International Studies of  John Hopkins University, Wooster 
College, Mills College and two years in the Graduate School of the University of  South 
Carolina.  That is some mileage for a pseudo-scholar. 
(3)  Many Israelis are now deeply troubled over the treatment of the Arabs by the Israelis.  
One should subscribe to “The New Outlook” 
or read Amos Elon’s books or the articles by Dr. Israel Shahak. 
(4)  The Arab oil embargo of  October, 1973, proved this point. 
(5)  The official attitude of the U.S. government was not one of impartiality, but one of 
favoritism called “a special relationship.”  When Gov. Scranton returned from a tour of 
the M.E. to report to Nixon, he stated that the U.S. should adopt an attitude of “even-
handedness” but Nixon ignored it and continued to a policy of favoritism till the October 
war of 1973. 
(6)  I told the story of Menachim Begin’s massacre of the villagers of Deir Yassine.  
Collins and La Pierre have a vivid description of this horror tale in O Jerusalem. 
(7)  Friedman does not know that the Army War College is at Carlisle Barracks, 
Pennsylvania.  I was invited to speak there at least 25 times in my 20 years in State – and 
afterwards. 
(8)  Cleared Official speeches are about as interesting as drinking dishwater – a lot of 
ambiguous platitudes that say very little.  So the State Department sometimes sent 
speakers to special audiences where it was clearly announced that the speaker was “not 
for attribution” and where a little more honesty was anticipated.  It was 
based on an honor system.  So the sponsor would request the audience not to report what 
I had said.  I was so naïve that I believed the audience would reciprocate my frankness.  
But evidently some of the audience could not wait to rush to the B’Nai B’rith and report 
on my statements, using my name.  I risked this violation of confidence – and so M. 
Friedman compiled a long list of my speaking engagements.  What encouraged me in this 
policy was the response I got from those who appreciated my frankness.  They often 
recommended me to others – which was my pay. 
(9)  This has been amply proven by events in 1973-75.  As long as the U.S. grants Israel 
what it demands, it will make no concessions


--- PAGE 60 ---
51  
 
to the Arabs.  But in 1975, President Ford withheld Israel’s request of some $3 billion in 
what he called a “reassessment” of U.S. policy – and Israel realized it could no longer 
thumb its nose at the Arabs. 
(10)  I often quoted Nahum Goldman’s demand that Jews should be granted “dual 
loyalty” – which the U.S. Supreme Court finally approved in the “Rusk vs. Afroyim” 
case.  Though Nahum Goldman was an American citizen, he had only one loyalty and 
that was to Zionism.  He was at least honest about it – for which I respected him. 
 
I have no idea where Friedman got the mis-information that I was an advisor to Secretary 
Dulles.  This is a proof of his creative journalism.  Because I speak both Persian and 
Turkish, I was interpreter between Secretary Dulles and President Bayar of Turkey and 
Prince Daud of Afghanistan.  But I doubt that Secretary Dulles ever knew who I was.  An 
interpreter is not “introduced.”  He is a nameless mechanic who tries to convey the 
meaning of a sentence in one language to another.  Otherwise I never met Secretary 
Dulles.  Milton Friedman is most careless with his facts.  He was not adverse to throwing 
in a few lies to enhance his dramatic instincts. 
     
This sample of his reporting gives the reader a fair specimen as to how to judge 
his accuracy or competence.  What is clear is that he had access to a file on me, going 
back to 1950, from which he selected these misquotes.  Friedman is far more of a Zionist 
than many Israelis.  
Each article by Friedman called for an explanation by me to my superior officers.  
I append one of these as a sample.  Donald Bergus was Israeli desk officer at the time the 
article appeared.  I immediately got my  explanation to him so he could answer the irate 
callers who came to demand my ouster – as inevitably happened.  I called Milton 
Friedman’s office once and urged him to come to my office, so we could meet face to 
face and find out  something about each other.  He declined and never came to see me – 
nor did he ever make a call to verify his material before he published it.  He was in Israeli 
pay and was not interested in facts – but in how he could play his part in forcing me out 
of government service.  The air of Washington was poisoned long before Watergate!


--- PAGE 61 ---
52  
TO:        NE – Mr. Bergus 
FROM:  FSI – Mr. Wright 
 
   Article in The Voice (Los Angeles Jewish paper) 
     May 16, 1956 
 
  In case it may be brought to your a ttention, I have received a copy of a 
clipping from the above-mentioned paper.  Milton Friedman of the Jewish Telegraph 
Agency has again renewed his usual charges against me but adds two new ones.  They 
are as follows: 
 
(1)  Recently in the State Department Auditorium, I “turned to the Bible” in my search  
 for anti-Zionist arguments.  “He referred to Biblical precedents purporting to illustrate 
aggression by Jews.  Abraham, he alleged came from “outside” Palestine, attached the 
local people and drove them out of their own country.”  This was during a briefing I gave 
to the AAUW in which I referred to the antiquity of problems in the NEA area, citing 
Kashmir, Cyprus, North Africa, etc., as conflicts of differing cultures which have 
fought for centuries over the region.  The Arab-Israeli conflict was one of the oldest, 
being reflected in the Biblical story of Abraham coming from Ur of Chaldees, joining 
in a tribal alliance with four local chiefs of Palestine and driving out the older five tribes, 
then occupying their territory (Genesis 14).  Palestine being the land route between three 
continents had continuously been occupied by invading forces.  Milton Friedman 
considers this quotation as anti-Zionist and anti-Israeli. 
 
(2)  In a talk I gave at George Washington University, I am accused of the following: 
“Oil being pumped in the Negev might be coming from deposits running under nearby 
Egyptian territory.  He suggested such oil rightfully belonged to the Arabs.”  What I said, 
in response to a question on whether Israel had oil, was that two wells known as Heletz I 
and II had struck producing oil strata.  The wells were 4 miles from the Gaza border.  If 
the field lay to the west, it might extend under the Gaza strip.  However as sovereignty 
over the Gaza strip is doubtful, it will be some time before anyone will attempt to drill on 
the Gaza side.  In theory the strip is part of an Arab State which the UN partition plan 
envisaged but which never developed.  Egypt holds the strip under an armistice 
agreement which is temporary.  I doubt if anyone will try to drill on the Arab side till the 
problem of ownership is established. 
 
After such an article, the usual pattern is for a series of letters to come in 
protesting my anti-Zionism.  I am already getting fan mail.  A post card signed “J C 
Stern” and addressed to Edwin M. Wright, Advisor to Dulles, Washington D.C. and 
postmarked Los Angeles May 21, 1956, states “We know you well and class you with 
Hitler.  As long as there is a world there will be Israel and the Jews.  Spit your hate and 
see how far you get.”  Lest you get some brickbats intended for me – I’m sending this  
explanation.  Harry Howard is responsible!  His wife arranged for the briefing of the 
AAUW.  I gave a


--- PAGE 62 ---
53  
 
“global survey” in which discussions of NE problems were very brief.  I doubt if I spent 
over 10 minutes on the whole NEA area.  Evidently the Bible is a dangerous book to 
quote.  In the wrong hands, it can be alleged to show that when the Jews repeatedly 
reoccupied Palestine, they were not very kind to the older and local inhabitants. 
 
 I have always been fascinated with hi storical geography.  During the four years 
with G-2 U.S. Armed Forces in the Middle East (U.S.A.F.I.M.E.), I teamed up with a 
friend – Rabbi Nelson Glueck, one of the foremost Reform Jewish Rabbis and an 
outstanding scholar.  He was operating under “cover” for the O.S.S., where I first met 
him as a colleague in 1941-42.  In Palestine I toured with him weekends and put history 
and geography together.  In 1956, I organized a Training Tour of three months for 30 
U.S. government officers who worked on Middle Eastern affairs.  We visited each state 
in the area for a week or more where we interviewed leaders in government, the press, 
business, etc., and I was “Lecturer” in visiting historic spots.  We spent eight to ten days 
in Israel. 
 The first trip in 1956 brought me into close contact with the Orthodox Rabbinate.  
Rabbi Yacov Herzog, the son of the former Rabbi Herzog (from Ireland), Chief Rabbi of 
the Ashkenazi Jews, was in charge of the American section of the Israeli Foreign Office.  
He was in charge of the two days we spent in Jerusalem.  He was so Orthodox he would 
not shake hands with a woman (and we had several), he would not write on the Sabbath, 
nor would he answer the telephone on the Sabbath.  He appointed Rabbi Pinhas Eliav as 
our Escort Officer for touring Israel.  We hired a bus and went to Beersheba, Galilee, 
Haifa, and other regions where we visited Kibbutzim, factories, schools,


--- PAGE 63 ---
54  
etc., so as to get the “feel” of Israel.  At all times Rabbi Pinhas, also an Orthodox Rabbi, 
was with us. 
 As a result of my studies and experien ce, I came to be highly suspicious of the 
word “Orthodox” which means “Right-thought.”  It assumes that any difference of 
opinion is “Wrong-thought.”  While in Iraq, in 1921-23, I had visited Sir Leonard 
Woolley’s excavations at Ur, one of the ancient city States of the Sumerians.  Professor 
James B. Pritchard’s two books Archaeology and the Old Testament and The Ancient 
Near East place side by side passages from Sumerian literature – with other passages 
from the Old Testament – indicating how the writers of the latter borrowed from the 
former.  The story of Noah is a paraphrase of parts of the Gilgamesh Epic, and the birth 
of Moses is an almost exact duplicate of the myth of the birth of Sargon of Akkad who 
lived about 2150 B.C.  The Orthodox Rabbinate in Israel insist that the Torah and 
Taanach are of Divine Origin, inerrant, infallible, and immutable, and any one who 
disagrees is an enemy trying to destroy the Will of God.  This makes communication 
between the Orthodox and anyone not Orthodox almost impossible. 
 Having an Orthodox Rabbi listening to ev ery word I said was both awkward and 
embarrassing.  His responsibility was to indoctrinate us in the Orthodox tradition; mine 
was to try to describe what I believed had actually happened in history.  We often came 
to embarrassing confrontations on many occasions.  For instance, in riding down from 
Jerusalem to Beersheba, we went down the Valley of Sorek.  The bus had a loud-speaker 
which I used to explain the story of Samson and Delilah in the book of Judges.  I pointed 
out the name Samson is the Hebrew-Arabic name for Sun, and Delilah means, “She


--- PAGE 64 ---
55  
of the Night” – that this story belonged to the early folk-hero legends of Israel which 
corresponded to the folk-hero tales of all cultures – the Iliad and Odyssey of the Greeks, 
the Prometheus myth, the Heracles-Hercules myth, the Osiris-Usus-Set myth in Egypt, 
the Tammuz Sumerian-Babylonian myth, and the Rustam hero tales of early Iran.  These 
myths are personifications of the forces of nature.  Among the most popular such myths 
was that of the Sun God rising in power in the morning, but in the evening dying in the 
west, lured to its death by the Goddess of the Night.  I made reference to Joseph 
Campbell’s book The Hero of a Thousand Faces and his four volume The Masks of God 
and urged them to read these books.  Rabbi Pinhas was furious. 
 But the showdown came when we were in  Carmiel (above Haifa).  It is now a 
purely Jewish town, and non-Jews are prohibited renting, owning or working in the area, 
though previous to 1948, there were three Arab villages there, whose lands had been 
confiscated and turned over to the Jewish National Fund.  Fouzi el Asmar in his book To 
Be An Arab In Israel (page 44:107-8) describes how he was shunned when he was 
invited by a friend to visit in this purely Jewish town – as it is now. 
 I felt it was important our group understa nd Israeli land laws.  After lunch, I took 
the group to a lookout point and gave a talk on the history of the northwest Galilee.  
Pointing to the east, there lies the small stream and plain where the fold-heroine Jael 
pounded a tent peg through the head of the Philistine Sisera while he was asleep in her 
tent.  (Judges 4.)  We were standing on the spot where Elijah slew 2,000 priests of Baal 
after his divine miracle.  To the north we could see the mountains of Lebanon – at the 
time of Solomon


--- PAGE 65 ---
56  
the source of the timber for building the Temple in Jerusalem.  To get that timber, 
Solomon, among his thousand wives, probably married a pagan daughter of Hiram, King 
of Tyre, and ceded several villages to Tyre.  He then intensified corvee (forced) labor 
upon the Hebrews to cut and transport the timber to Jerusalem.  It was this forced labor 
which brought on a revolt of the northern tribes against the son of Solomon – Jereboam – 
and forever destroyed Hebrew unity. 
 Rabbi Pinhas could not cont ain his anger and said my story was not true.  That 
evening we were at the U.S. Consulate in Haifa for an outdoor dinner, and I asked for a 
Bible.  I read from I Kings 5 to substantiate my story.  This was humiliating to Rabbi 
Pinhas, and he was later to get his revenge.  It had another effect.  The 30 officers in the 
course became very suspicious about everything they were told by Israelis and would ask 
me afterwards, “What’s the truth?”  Rabbi Pinhas’s revenge was to go to Rabbi Herzog 
and Teddy Kolleck.  He complained that I had insulted him and Israel and made it 
impossible for him to get the Israeli point of view across.  The result was a visit to the 
U.S. Embassy in Tel Aviv by a delegation of two, who asked the Ambassador to inform 
the State Department I was persona non grata in Israel.  The Ambassador recommended 
that I should not be sent to Israel in the future.  Fortunately for me, the Ambassador left 
after 1957 and Ogden Reed of New York was the new Ambassador.  There was also a 
new Deputy – my former Chief in the office of Greek, Turkish and Iranian affairs – 
William Baxter.  Bill knew Turkish and had taught at Robert College, Istanbul.  He well 
knew me and the whole


--- PAGE 66 ---
57  
story, so in 1958 and following years, I was again allowed to enter Israel – but cautioned 
not to irritate the Rabbis!! 
 Rabbi Yacov Herzog later appeared in th e Israeli Embassy in Washington.  As a 
concession to the Gentile practice of shaking hands with women, he decided he would do 
so for public relations purposes.  But the attack on me from the Orthodox Rabbinate in 
the U.S. entered high gear. 
 The pretext for the next attack upon me developed out of a talk I gave at the 
National Presbyterian Church.  I had recently returned from a three months study tour of 
the Middle East, and my friend Reverend Ed Elson, the Pastor, also President 
Eisenhower’s Pastor, asked me to give a report on my visit.  It was a tense time.  By a 
conspiracy, Israel, France and Great Britain had launched an attack upon Egypt two 
weeks before, and the headlines were focused on the Suez Canal.  I spoke for an hour 
reporting my findings on Turkey, Iran, and Israel, as well as four Arab states.  In the 
audience was Mrs. Lillian Levy, a Jewish reporter.  My talk was factual, and I tried to 
avoid controversial statements – and succeeded.  Then came the question and answer 
period.  A Presbyterian minister in the audience asked me, “What part is religion playing 
in the modern Middle East?”  In my reply I said that the Middle East had never had a 
Renaissance like Europe in the 15th-17th Centuries.  Therefore to understand religious 
passions, it was necessary to recall what happened in Europe.  The shift from religious 
wars to secular national wars came in the Thirty Years War 1618-1648.  The Middle East 
was in that same shift now.  Turkey had only become a national secular state under 
Kemal Ataturk during 1923-1928.  Lebanon was in form secular but in fact a balance of


--- PAGE 67 ---
58  
religious minorities.  All other states were in the throes of religious change which had 
produced violent internal movements of three kinds – (1) Reactionary, (2) Evolutionary, 
and (3) Revolutionary.  The Reactionary were interested in the preservation of theocratic 
traditions and institutions and are afraid of secular, scientific, and national forces.  In 
Europe, it was the clash of the Papacy vs. Copernicus, Galileo, and the Reformers.  
Judaism in Spain had witnessed the same phenomenon earlier.  The Arab schools had 
introduced Greek rationalism especially in Cordova.  The greatest of Jewish scholars, 
Moses Maimonides, had been attacked because he had followed the rational theories of 
Ibn Rushd, and an extreme Orthodox sect had ex-communicated him.  These reactionary 
groups were now represented in the Islamic world by such groups as the Ikhwan – el 
Muslimeen, the Mollah Kashani Fidayeen in Iran and the Orthodox Rabbinate in Israel. 
 But I expressed the opinion that the Middle East would repeat the European 
mode.  The future of the Middle East depended upon its mastery of technology and the 
scientific world view.  In this, the various orthodoxies, which emphasized a static and 
nostalgic effort to preserve the past – rituals and social customs – had little to contribute 
to what was an explosive situation.  The Middle East was trying to move from centuries-
old stagnation to a new dynamic form of society in one generation. 
 Mrs. Lillian Levy is a creative journalist.   By selecting a few phrases and adding 
some statements I did not make, she published a pseudo-report of my talk.  Her report 
was like the hunters’ trumpet for the Zionists and Orthodox to unleash their bloodhounds 
and track the victim.  Mrs. Levy appointed herself


--- PAGE 68 ---
59  
a one woman inquisition and tried to get interviews with everyone in my office.  There 
were some young Jewish Foreign Service officers in the orientation course, where I 
lectured on the Middle East.  She got their names and invited them out to lunch to quiz 
them about me.  I was living then in McLain, Virginia.  Odd characters claiming they 
were investigating me as an insurance applicant asked my neighbors about my habits – 
what did I do over weekends?  Did I get drunk?  Did I have a wild sex life?  My 
neighbors asked me what was going on.  Unfortunately for Mrs. Levy’s bloodhounds, my 
sex life is very dull, and I am almost, but not quite, a teetotaler in relation to alcohol.  But 
the Jewish Telegraph Agency – with Milton Friedman to the fore – took up the hue and 
cry as shown on the following pages. 
 An anonymous correspondent living in Los Angeles sent me a clipping from the 
California Jewish Voice of December 7, 1956.  He had liberally decorated it with 
interpolations such as “Aw Nuts,” “Jewish Insolence” and sent it without any return 
address – a kind of mail I began to anticipate.  It was as follows: 
U.S. JEWISH GROUPS ASK STATE DEPARTMENT TO OUST ITS ANTI-                    
SEMITIC LECTURER. 
 
New York (J.T.A.) Protesting the “warped and bigoted” anti-Semitic speech delivered 
recently by Edwin Wright, a high official of the State Department, the American Jewish 
Congress appealed this week, to the department, “publicly to repudiate his statements.”  
The A.C.J. also called for the removal of Mr. Wright from any position of influence or 
authority within the State Department.  A similar demand was made earlier by the 
Agudas Israel of America in letters addressed to President Eisenhower and to Secretary 
of State John Foster Dulles.  
 In a letter to Herbert Hoover, the Acti ng Secretary of State, Judge Justine A. 
Polier, Chairman of the American Jewish Congress Executive Committee deplored the 
“incredible” anti-Jewish remarks made by Mr. Wright, Assistant Dean of the Foreign 
Service Institute of the State Department, in a


--- PAGE 69 ---
60  
 
speech delivered at the National Presbyterian Church in Washington on November 1 
(1956). 
 The Department of State, Judge Polier sa id, is under an obligation to rectify the 
wrong that has been done and not only to dis-associate itself from Mr. Wright’s remarks 
but publicly to repudiate his statements in a manner that will make it unmistakable they 
have no place in American public life and play no role in the determination of American 
public policy.  This should be followed by the removal of Mr. Wright from a position of 
influence or authority within the State Department. 
 The Agudas Israel letter stated, “It is  unthinkable that a government official 
should permit himself to so callously malign the millions of Agudas Israel citizens of the 
Orthodox Jewish faith who have made their productive contribution to every phase of 
American life.  The glorious service to mankind rendered by American citizens who 
observe their faith and proved their loyalty to our beloved country is a matter of public 
record.  Their religious faith had often been the source of inspiration that enables the 
American Jews to develop their manifold contributions for the betterment of society. 
 
 I had no idea who Judge Polier was, but it interested me that a U.S. Judge had 
condemned me on the basis of hearsay evidence- especially when Milton Friedman was 
working for the Jewish Telegraph Agency.  So I tried to discover who this irate lady was 
– and was told she was the daughter of Rabbi Stephen Wise.  If so, that explained 
everything.  It was the Father who threatened Truman that unless he supported the Zionist 
program, “Truman would be run out of town.”  Now it was the daughter, ignoring all 
rules of a Law Court, using her position to run me out of the State Department.  I decided 
the emotional quality of the Father was inherited by the daughter – “Like Father – Like 
Daughter.” 
 I am most grateful that I live as a ci tizen in a society which developed its Law 
from the Graeco-Roman model – no the Jewish one.  As an example, Numbers 5:11 starts 
with the phrase “And the Lord spoke unto Moses saying.”  Then follows a passage about 
how a jealous husband deals with a wife of whom he is suspicious.  The procedure is pure 
Voodoo-Magic found in all primitive


--- PAGE 70 ---
61  
peoples – yet here it is specifically attributed to God.  Because “western law” is largely 
Graeco-Roman, the State of Israel has never adopted the principle “God is no respecter of 
persons” a thesis which appears in Acts 10:34.  This is the absolute opposite of the belief 
in a Chosen People.  So in Israel today – Goyim are administered by the British 
Emergency Regulations of 1945, as applied by the Police or the Military.  When Judge 
Polier took for granted my guilt, being accused by Milton Friedman, she was acting like a 
Judge in Israel. 
 
 But in the U.S.A. I had a chance to give my  side of the story.  So I went to five 
who were in the audience that night, showed them the Milton Friedman article and asked 
them to give their reactions.  The accusation fell apart.  (The correspondence on this case 
is in the Appendix #6.) 
 I was fortunate in my friends.  The Reve rend Ed Elson went directly to the White 
House, spoke to President Eisenhower and Maxwell Rabb, and gave the whole story.  In 
the Foreign Service Institute, my Director was Harold L. Hoskins.  His father was a 
missionary doctor in Lebanon.  He was born in Syria.  In 1942-45 he had served as a 
Special Representative of President Roosevelt.  He spoke fluent Arabic, and while he was 
in Egypt in 1943-45, in charge of Lend Lease, we had enjoyed close personal 
relationships.  He had come under attack because of his “Arabic” background, so he well 
knew Zionist tactics.  He refused to give Mrs. Levy an interview and told other members 
of the staff to avoid her.  He finally got out a statement which was issued by Public 
Relations if anyone inquired about me.  After some two months, the effort to remove me 
from the State Department died down.  It was fortunate this incident occurred during the 
Eisenhower Presidency.  Eisenhower was greatly irritated


--- PAGE 71 ---
62  
 
by the Israeli-U.K.- French aggression against Egypt and ordered Israel out of the Sinai 
with the threat of economic sanctions if they did not withdraw.  Both Eisenhower and 
Dulles came under Zionist attack, and possibly Eisenhower recollected I had been his 
briefing officer in the Pentagon when he became Chief of Staff in 1946.  I had also been 
Escort Officer and Interpreter between President Eisenhower and President Bayar of 
Turkey. 
 Whatever the facts may be, I was not fi red!  In fact, quite the opposite.  Many 
people, unsolicited, came to my defense, and in 1964, I was granted a Superior Merit 
Award by the Department.  One of my close colleagues was somewhat jealous.  His 
complaint was he said practically what I said, but the Zionists never attacked him.  He 
felt he must not be of sufficient importance to be attacked.  I told him to take comfort.  
The difference between us was that I quoted the Bible and that stung the Zionists to the 
quick.  Gentiles are not supposed to know the Bible.  They are to believe it as God’s Holy 
Word – but not know what it contained.  This colleague is Harry N. Howard, a 
distinguished scholar and author of several books, and a fellow worker with me in the 
Department of State for over 20 years.(10) 
 The type of Zionist attack on State De partment officers received great impetus 
when President Truman himself joined in the attack.  He diverted the Zionist threats 
against him by turning them against his own Departmental officers.  And it worked.  
Truman was elected by a narrow majority.  He 
(10)Also the author of The King-Crane Report and The Partition of Turkey.


--- PAGE 72 ---
63  
got Jewish funds, 80  per cent of the Jewish vote, and great praise.  The Zionists had 
smelled blood in the case of Loy Henderson and were now out after others of his staff. 
 
ZIONISTS AND THE PRESIDENCY 
 The Zionists were licking their lips ov er the way they had captured President 
Truman.  During the F. D. Roosevelt Presidency, Zionism was weak and disorganized 
and could get no satisfaction from F. D. R.  Then at the end of his meeting with King 
Abdul Aziz al As Saud (best described by Col. William A. Eddy in his pamphlet F. D. R. 
Meets Ibn Saud), Roosevelt was captivated and wrote a letter promising he would make 
no decisions on the Arab-Zionist issue without consulting the King.  A few weeks later, 
F. D. R. was dead, and the Zionists at once pressed in to reverse the decision of F. D. R.  
Truman fell into the Zionist trap and committed the U.S.A. to the support of a Zionist 
Jewish State in Palestine.  His term in the White House was marked by a pro-Israeli 
policy. 
 President Eisenhower was primarily a military and not a political man.  I had 
briefed him when he was Chief of Staff.  During my briefing, he would often interrupt to 
ask questions or make comments of his own.  He was NOT in the Zionist pocket.  So 
when Israel, the United Kingdom, and France conspired to attack Egypt in October, 1956, 
they set the date to come the week before the elections in the U.S.A.  The strategy of this 
date was that just before a vote, no U.S. President would dare to criticise Israel lest the 
Jews in the U.S.A. would vote against him.  Eisenhower ignored the myth that the Jews


--- PAGE 73 ---
64  
could influence the U.S. elections.  So he denounced the aggression and ordered Israel to 
withdraw. 
 The Zionists decided to attack Dulles, as the architect of Eisenhower’s anti-Israeli 
policy.  As an excuse for attacking Dulles, they urged their representatives in Congress to 
investigate Dulles.  So Dulles was hailed before the Foreign Relations Committee on a 
pretext.  The issue they used was the fact that there were no Jews in the U.S. Embassies 
in the Arab states, and no Jews in the Political section (N.E.A.) of the Department of 
State.  To assist him in the enquiry, he took along William Roundtree, Director N.E.A.  
Bill Roundtree is a true southern gentlemen who had served as Harold Hoskin’s 
Administrative Officer in Cairo in 1943-45, but as an expert on Middle East history, he 
did not qualify.  The Congressional enquiry, well supplied with questions by Zionists, 
accused Dulles of violating the civil rights of Jews by discriminating against them in 
employment in the N.E.A. political section and U.S. Embassies in the Arab world.  
Dulles tried to explain that Arabs were very suspicious of Jew.  Arabs feared Jews would 
act as Israeli agents using the State Department as “cover” to spy on the Arab states.  
Therefore, the presence of Jews tended to “dry up” relationships and information from 
Arab sources.  A member of the committee then asked Dulles why Arabs were so 
suspicious of Jews – what had happened in history to create this hostility?  Dulles was not 
a man to admit ignorance – nor did Bill Roundtree have any knowledge of Islamic-Jewish 
history.  So Dulles answered, “I think it was because a Jew killed Muhammad.”  So far 
this story is all on record in the Congressional Record
 of that date, but what follows is 
known to only two persons, Bill Roundtree and myself, and has never


--- PAGE 74 ---
65  
been put on record.  Bill noticed the newspaper reporters all turn to note-writing upon this 
statement of Dulles – and it worried him.  He slipped out of the Committee room into the 
next door room of a Senator and called me by phone.  I was at my desk when Bill called 
me and asked this question: 
 Question:  Did a Jew kill Muhammad? 
 
 Answer:    No – who said so? 
 
 Question:  Was there some incident in Muhammad’s life when he came  
 into conflict with Jews? 
 
Answer:     Yes, it is called the Beni Qurayzah incident.  In 625 A.D. the Meccans 
besieged Medinah.  Muhammad appealed to the Jews to assist him to resist the 
Meccan forces.  The Jews decided to play neutral.  As a result, following the 
Islamic victory and riots between Jews and Muslim, Muhammad ordered the Jews 
to leave Arabia.  Muhammad died of what seemed natural causes, years later. 
 
 Roundtree thanked me and ended the call.  I thought he was in his office at State 
 
and had no information on what prompted the call.  What he did was to return to the 
 
Committee room and scribbled a note to Secretary Dulles about as follows: 
 
Mr. Secretary:  I think we should check the statement about a Jew killing 
Muhammad.  For the sake of the record, I would suggest a statement like this, 
“During the life of Muhammad incidents occurred between Jews and Muslim 
which resulted in hostilities.”  
 
 The next day the newspapers appeared with the Dulles quote that “a Jew killed 
Muhammad.”  But when the Congressional Record appeared, it reported the Roundtree 
suggestion.  A few days later, I met Roundtree and asked him why he had called me – 
and he told me the occasion.  The Zionists had to use this occasion to malign me as usual, 
and in a full page article in The American Zionist.  It accused me of misleading Secretary 
Dulles and attributed Dulles’s error to


--- PAGE 75 ---
66  
my coaching!  When the article in The American Zionist appeared, I jokingly showed it 
to Roundtree and said he should write to the Zionist and give them the true story.  
Roundtree laughed and said that if he proved I was right, it proved Secretary Dulles was 
wrong – “and you know, the Secretary is never wrong.” 
ZIONISM – AN ECHO OF BIBLICAL THEMES AND MODELS 
 What President Truman failed to realize was the emotional force that the concept 
of a “Jewish State” would generate in all Jewish communities everywhere – and 
especially in the Jewish communities in the U.S.A.  The Hebrew Torah – and its many 
other documents which are called “The Old Testament” was produced in a society and at 
an age when the social norm was a tribal society.  Ancient Israel reflected tribal concepts 
of the family, the clan and tribe.  The rules of life are tribal as well as a tribal territory.  
The God of the Hebrews had special relations only with the Twelve Tribes.  After the 
destruction of northern Israel in about 710 B.C., the Ten Tribes were carried as captive to 
Mesopotamia, and because Hebrew society had not yet become sufficiently cohesive and 
integrated, the northern Ten Tribes were absorbed into Babylonian and Persian life and 
were “lost.”  Under Cyrus the Great (550-530 B.C.), the Iranian Kings favored a return of 
some Jews to their homeland after 539 B.C.  But only a few returned, the great majority 
having assimilated to Persian norms. 
 Those who returned were led by a small e lite of priests.  Having seen the allure 
that foreign society had for Hebrews, it became the task of these


--- PAGE 76 ---
67  
priests, such as Ezra,  to create a series of taboos and rules so that Jews could resist any 
temptation to integrate with other peoples.  Under this Priestly cult, the small Jewish 
community in Palestine generated a whole series of taboos and regulations intended to 
separate them forever from all others.  This period saw the development of what Biblical 
scholars call the Priestly Code.  To reinforce the authority of these rules, they were 
retroactively credited to the myth of YHWH, the tribal god, speaking to Moses.  Thus 
these priests, as they made up new forms for a Jewish lifestyle, prefaced their additions 
by the phrase, “And God said unto Moses.”  This was of course a fraud, but justified as 
necessary so as to create a wall of separation between Jews and all non-Jews which 
would in the future assure the continuation of a purely Jewish cult forever.  It was thus a 
“pious fraud” inasmuch as it was done for a “Holy” purpose.  It was so successful that 
ever since then, Jews have believed God actually spoke to Moses and thereby endowed 
the “Jewish nation” with divine favor making them a special people with a theocratic 
form of government that must resist all foreign temptations.  Thus the concept of a “pure” 
people in a Holy Land in a divine dispensation was drilled into the minds of Jewish 
children with a whole series of legends, rituals, and taboos that “conditioned” them 
against contact with or assimilation to all other nations.  All other people were followers 
of False Gods who had an unclean and defiling nature.  (Hebrew “TAME” or “TUMAH” 
meaning “unclean”) 
 The two most prominent factors which se t apart Jews from all other people were 
the rite of ritual circumcision as a physical sign – and birth from a Jewish mother.  So the 
phrase “circumcision” came to denote the pure, the holy, the


--- PAGE 77 ---
68  
 
eternal,  and the unchangeable, while the term “uncircumcised” came to be identified 
with all that was inferior, evil, impure, and degenerate.  The idea of a Jewish mother then 
was written into the legend of Abraham and his wife Sarah (who presumably was a 
Hebrew), while his Egyptian concubine Hagar was a slave girl.  Through this myth-
legend the Jews were able to look down upon the other Semitic peoples of the area and 
think of them with contemptuous scorn. 
 These concepts, rituals and legends served well to surround the Jewish nation 
with a protecting shell so resistant to surrounding cultures that they have acted so as to 
perpetuate “Jewishness” as a tribal entity.  They have a tribal ancestry (Abraham), a tribal 
God who selected the Twelve Tribes as God’s Kingdom on Earth, tribal rituals 
retroactively assigned to Abraham (Genesis 17:9-27), and every Jewish child from the 
day of its birth is taught these tribal values as the sign of a separate Jewish “identity.”  
Any Jew who violates these rules develops a strong sense of guilt and is punished by the 
community as a traitor and expelled.  (cherem) 
 Modern scholarship, much of it Jewish, has been able to penetrate the myths 
created by these priests of the Fifth Century B.C.  (See William Albright’s From Stone 
Age to Christianity or the many volumes of the Anchor Bible, especially the Book of 
Genesis by Professor Ephraim Speiser.)  This creates a new peril for the survival of 
Judaism.  It is essential for the perpetuation of a Jewish “cult” for these myths and 
legends to be repeated to each generation so as to keep the Jewish community separate 
from its surrounding Gentile environment.   
There have been two periods in Jewish history which threatened the survival of 
the Jewish cultic nation.  The first was following the Hellenistic age under the


--- PAGE 78 ---
69  
 
Seleucid and tolerant Greek monarchs.  Many Jews found in the more open and 
“universal” culture of Hellenic and later Hellenistic ideas an escape from the totalitarian 
and confining traditions of Jewish inheritance.  Many individual Jews found Hellenism a 
liberating experience.  They adopted the Greek language, took Greek names, wore Greek 
clothing, and merged into the Greco-Roman society.  Jewish reaction took three historic 
forms:  (1)The Pharisees who stressed to an exaggerated degree the idea of Jewish piety 
and separateness from the Gentile world, (2)  The Saducees, a sort of Jewish elite who to 
a degree collaborated with their Greco-Roman rulers, but who were very conservative in 
their religious inheritance and, (3)  The Zealots who developed a Messianic mania. 
 It was at this time that two of the books of the Bible appeared.  The Book of 
Daniel was probably written about 165-163 B.C. during the reign of the mad Antiochus 
IV Epiphanes, who tried to forcibly extinguish Jewish ritual.  The Book of Daniel is a 
novel purporting to have taken place back in the Persian period, but its real characters are 
those of the late Seleucid rule.  Its theme is “Persist in Jewishness and God will send his 
Messiah to once again restore the Jewish nation to dignity and power.”  So Daniel is the 
image of the Jew who resisted the temptation to Hellenize.  The book had a magical 
effect upon Jews, encouraging them to reinforce their Jewishness and resist assimilation.  
The Zealots took this book as their model for a Messianic military solution – defiance of 
the Roman Empire.  This Messianic dream and resort to violence produced the Roman  
reaction of destroying the Jewish nation under Vespatian in 64-70 A.D.  A few Zealot 
hold-outs survived till the revolt of Bar Kokhba in 135 A.D. when


--- PAGE 79 ---
70  
 
the Jewish center in Palestine came to an end and all hope for the restoration of a self-
ruling Jewish nation was deferred to a later age.  Then it was revived in 1896 A.D. by 
Herzl’s Der Judenstaat.   
 Another book appeared about 130 B.C. which became the expression of the 
Saducee group.  It was the novel about Esther.  It has served as a model for another type 
of Judaism, especially useful in the Twentieth Century.  The theme of Esther is partially 
secular in that it never refers to the Jewish God, but it is intensely nationalistic.  Again 
the scenario is cast in the Fifth Century B.C. – King Ahasuerus is a reference to one of 
the ArtaXerxes of the Archemenid dynasty.  Esther is his queen-consort.  This role is a 
violation of Jewish divine command as established by Ezra – forbidding Jewish 
intermarriage with all Gentiles.  But Esther should not be taken as a historic person.  She 
is rather the symbol of the Jewish people – living in a Gentile nation.  All the characters 
in the book are symbols – not individuals.  Haman represents those forces which would 
by violence destroy the Jewish nation.  Esther and Mordecai are the symbols of the 
Jewish nation.  Ahasuerus is the symbol of a foreign power which can be manipulated by 
Jews for ultimate Jewish purposes.  Thus Esther got Ahasuerus drunk – a condition in 
which he forgot his responsibility to his own people.  While thus inebriated, Esther got 
his seal and issued an edict by which Haman was put to death and the Jews became 
victorious by massacring the Persians (Esther 9:5-17) by the tens of thousands.  The book 
preaches that the ends justify the means.  The end is the victory of Jews over non-Jews 
and using the non-Jews by unethical means


--- PAGE 80 ---
71  
 
to their own destruction. The art of political manipulation, by any means, is justified. 
 The Book of Esther sets the model fo r Theodore Herzl.  His end was the re-
establishment of a Jewish State in Palestine.  In form he was a secular person, but in 
motive intensely Jewish.  So he decided to use the idea of a Jewish State – but to 
manipulate some Imperial Power to establish it – regardless of whether it was of 
advantage to that Power or not.  But he had to make the idea of a Jewish State enticing so 
that the Powers would support it by getting them “drunk” with the idea of dominating the 
Middle East.  That idea was an intoxicating one around 1900.  Intense rivalry existed 
among the European Powers at that moment in history.  Russia had fought 14 wars 
against the Ottoman Empire since 1685 A.D. and had coveted control of the strategic 
Middle East, claiming it inherited the role of medieval Byzantium.  Kaiser Wilhelm was 
intoxicated with the theme of “Deutschland uber ales in der welt.”  Italy was anxious to 
restore the ancient Roman Empire and was trying to conquer Ethiopia.  Great Britain was 
securing her route to India and had recently acquired Cyprus as a base of operations. 
 The Book of Esther sets the roles.  Esther  is the symbol of the seductive, beautiful 
Jewish nation.  But she needs a Mordecai to fulfill her role.  So Herzl is the Mordecai.  
The European Imperial Powers are the symbols of Ahasuerus.  Haman is the symbol of 
anti-Semitism.  So if the beautiful Esther (read the Jewish nation) could be married to the 
Imperial Power (read Russia, Germany, Great Britain, Italy, or the United States) and get 
them drunk with the wine of controlling the Middle East, then the fusion of Zionism with 
a powerful Gentile


--- PAGE 81 ---
72  
 nation is justifiable.  The concept of a large Jewish State controlling the access route to 
India was a seductive proposal which Herzl believed he could sell to the greed of 
European megalomaniacs.  If he could persuade them to establish a Jewish State in the 
area – preferably Palestine, then he was certain all Jews would migrate to this State.  The 
Arabs need not be considered.  They would be expelled.  So in his diaries and his book 
Der Judenstaat, he paints a picture of a large Jewish State, inheriting all the territory of 
the Kingdoms of David and Solomon, dominating the Middle East.  As a marriage broker 
he had to marry the idea of a Jewish State to some powerful Gentile ruler.  What might 
happen to any Imperial Power after the State was established, he ignored – but it was 
upon that rock that all his schemes foundered.  So he promised one of the bitterest anti-
Semitic Prime Ministers of Russia, Von Plehve, in 1903, that the Jewish State would 
answer two Russian problems.  It would serve Russia as an outpost of the Russian Empire 
and take all the Jews out of Russia.  The seduction failed.  Russian geopolitics were too 
realistic to fall for such a doubtful scheme.  His effort to sell a Jewish State to Kaiser 
Wilhelm failed because Wilhelm II was hoping to make an alliance with the Ottoman 
Empire.  The latter naturally did not want a Jewish national state on its own territory.  
Italy thought Herzl was selling an idea he could not deliver – so that attempt failed.  And 
the United Kingdom was more interested in a Jewish colony in Kenya-Uganda to 
consolidate its recent conquests in Africa. 
 Herzl died in 1904, a marriage broker una ble to wed his seductive Jewish State 
idea to the Imperial Powers of his day.  But though Herzl failed as a marriage broker, the 
idea did not die, and so for a decade Zionism had to


--- PAGE 82 ---
73  
wait for a more favorable time – and a more successful broker.  But both the broker and 
the timing came in 1914 with World War I. 
 The broker was Chaim Weizmann, and the time was a war between Great Britain 
and the Germano-Ottoman powers.  Weizmann was unable to sell the idea of a Jewish 
State to the United Kingdom.  Marriage of the two made problems for the United 
Kingdom, but a situation of having a Jewish mistress was seductive.  A Jewish State 
meant binding treaties and obligations, but the idea of a Jewish National Home was 
enticing.  It could be a plaything for the United Kingdom in its Middle East plans which 
could be terminated if it proved embarrassing or too demanding.  The problem of the 
U.K. was that it was playing with two concubines – a Jewish National Home and an Arab 
State or States, hoping it could get the advantages of both without becoming committed 
to either.  So Weizmann settled for a concubine Jewish National Home in the Balfour 
Declaration, hoping that as a mistress, it could eventually displace the Arab rival in the 
British Imperial Scheme.  A Jewish mistress (read the National Home) could in the 
process of time become the wife (a Jewish State with binging treaties) of Imperial 
Britain.  The two concubines, however, did not play the roles of submissive playmates.  
Each demanded the other be displaced – as had formerly been dramatized in the story of 
Abraham, Sarah, and Hagar.  (Genesis 21).  God (read Destiny) favored the Hebrew wife 
over the Egyptian concubine - a theme drilled into the mind of every Jewish child from 
the day of birth.  So Weizmann accepted a compromise – with a belief in a future destiny 
which would favor the Jews over the Arabs.  The influence of the Biblical myths on 
Judaism cannot be exaggerated.  They are what has created and maintained the “cult.”  It 
was not long before the United


--- PAGE 83 ---
74  
 Kingdom began to realize the two concubines (the Jewish National Home and the Arab 
mandates) were locked in a life and death struggle.  Great Britain sent repeated 
commissions to try to calm down the contradictory concepts it had assumed.  By 1939, 
the British White Paper dealt a death blow to the dream that the Jewish Communities 
could ever displace the Arabs under British rule.  Another Power must assume the role of 
Ahasuerus.  While the United Kingdom had been tipsy enough in 1917 to play with 
Zionist aspirations, by 1939, it had realized its larger interests lay in normal relations with 
the Arab world.  So the marriage brokers looked for another Power which might be wed 
to the idea of a Jewish State.  All European Powers had long histories of the expensive 
Imperial game and none of them wanted to play with the idea of a Jewish State. 
 But there was a growing world power, quite innocent and uneducated in Middle 
East affairs – the United States.  President Wilson, in 1919, had sent two commissioners, 
Charles R. Crane and Henry King, to Syria to ascertain the wishes of the newly liberated 
Arabs.  They pointed out in the King-Crane report that the Arabs solidly opposed 
Zionism, because it planned the displacement of the Palestinian Arabs by an exclusive 
Jewish State.  If Zionism were to be accepted, it would need 50,000 American troops to 
force it upon the Arabs.  Unfortunately this accurate appraisal of the situation was filed 
away and did not appear till a generation later, and it is very doubtful if President Truman 
ever heard of it.  But officers in the Middle East section of the State Department knew 
about it and felt its recommendations NOT to support Zionism were far more relevant in 
1945 than it had been in 1919.  Zionism had had some initial successes during the 
Mandate period – there were some 650,000 Jews in Palestine – ten


--- PAGE 84 ---
75  
times the number in 1919.  They were well organized with military supplies and 
leadership through the growth of the Haganah. 
 The United Kingdom was through as an Imperi al Power.  To replace it, there was 
the U.S.A. – a rising power with a community of 5.5 million Jews – a Jewish Trojan 
force which could be manipulated for the fulfillment of the Zionist dream.  American 
ignorance about the Middle East was near total and the “Christian” Fundamentalists 
believed Divine Prophecy had decreed a Restoration of a Jewish State.  (Read Hal 
Lindsey’s The Late Great Planet Earth which has sold several million copies in the Bible 
Belt.  It predicts a miraculous restoration of Judaism and its Temple in the near future.)  
Americans were not only ignorant but gullible.  A further advantage was that Jews in the 
U.S.A. were concentrated in those states with the largest electoral vote – New York, 
Pennsylvania, Illinois, Ohio, California, etc.  And 1948 was a year for national and state 
elections.  It certainly looked like the Lord God of Israel had prepared the U.S.A. as the 
bridegroom for the 1948 Esther – a Jewish State marriage to U.S. diplomacy.  There 
appeared a strong team of marriage brokers to wed the future Jewish State with U.S. 
foreign policy, such as the aged but experienced Chaim Weizmann, Ben-Gurion, Rabbi 
Hillel Silver of Cleveland, Felix Frankfurter, Rabbi Stephen Wise and many others 
strategically located in state and national affairs with close personal ties to senators, 
congressman, and even the Presidency. 
At the Biltmore Hotel in New York in May, 1942, this constellation of marriage 
brokers came out with a program and a goal, i.e., to wed Esther to the U.S. Government 
in a permanent bond.  Ignorant of the consequences, the


--- PAGE 85 ---
76  
U.S.A. would be committed to support the establishment of a Jewish State – after which 
it could not withdraw because the Jewish community in the U.S.A. would be the 
guarantor for such a permanent alliance.  So in 1946 at the last meeting of the World 
Zionist Organization in Switzerland, Weizmann, as a symbol of a Zionist-United 
Kingdom affair, was ditched, and Rabbi Hillel Silver of Cleveland was elected the new 
President. 
 The theory of the unity of the Jewish na tion was thus given a test.  U.S. Zionists 
put such pressure on the White House and Congress that they succumbed to the 
enticement of a marriage between Esther (the Jewish State) and King Ahasuerus (the U.S. 
Government).  But this was against the advice of many.  Secretary of State Dean Acheson 
in his biography Present at the Creation stated his distress, fearing an emotional 
attachment to a Zionist State might undermine U.S. larger interests in the Arab world.  
Secretary of State Marshall was angered at the insult given him at the United Nations but 
bore it as a good soldier.  The position recommended by Loy Henderson and his staff of 
“experts” was buried in archives and only emerged in 1971 (Foreign Relations of the 
United States – 1945-47).  They had warned President Truman that establishment of a 
Jewish Zionist State in territory dominantly Arab would create hostilities, open the door 
to U.S.S.R. penetration, destroy Arab confidence in U.S. integrity – with world wide 
repercussions. 
 Zionists with their eyes inside the U.S. Government were aware of Loy 
Henderson’s attitude.  They used David Niles in the White House to block his efforts to 
get to President Truman.  Several times while I was taking dictation or discussing 
documents in Loy Henderson’s office, he would be called by


--- PAGE 86 ---
77  
David Niles and given instructions.  One day he called Henderson to say that one of the 
State Department staff had been overheard at a party.  He was criticizing President 
Truman’s decision to support a Jewish State.  Niles wanted Henderson to call his staff 
and let them know there was to be no further criticism of President Truman – or the 
offending officer would be removed at once.  This Jewish Zionist Damocles sword hung 
over the heads of the whole staff throughout my 20 years of service in the Department of 
State.  But its first use was to get rid of Henderson.  Niles notified Secretary Marshall that 
Henderson was to go at once.  Marshall suggested he be sent to Turkey as Ambassador, 
but Niles ordered him to be sent far from the immediate area – so he was summarily sent 
to India early in 1948. 
 Israel and its Zionist agencies feel th ey have a “secret” weapon:  to use Jews 
abroad as agents of the State of Israel.  This “unity” was well demonstrated in the case of 
Eichmann.  This Nazi butcher had disappeared and was living under an assumed name in 
Argentina.  But the Israeli Shin Beit and Mossad traced him and discovered him.  The 
problem was how to get him out of Argentina.  The Jewish community in Argentina 
cooperated with the Shin Beit and Mossad to trail him awaiting a favorable moment.  It 
came when the State of Argentina invited guests to a celebration.  Ben-Gurion decided to 
use the occasion to seize Eichmann and use the Israeli Embassy plane as the courier.  
Abba Eban attended the celebration as an official guest of the Argentine government.  
Then “the Plan” went into effect.  Israeli and Jewish secret agents seized Eichmann and 
abducted him to an airfield some distance away.  When Foreign Minister Eban’s plane 
took off, it radioed that the engine was misfiring and asked permission to land at the field


--- PAGE 87 ---
78  
where Eichmann was gagged and bound.  The plane landed, the Eichmann body was 
rushed onto the Eban plane – with the assistance of the airfield’s local personnel who 
received generous bribes for violating the rules of their own country.  This pattern of 
considering the world Jewish community as a political unit, which will cooperate with 
Israel to the detriment sometimes of the country in which they live in “exile” is now well 
established.  British Jews who were shocked at the conspiracy in 1956 by Lord Eden, 
France, and Israel to attack Egypt, voted in opposition to British Tory action in 
supporting Israel because they voted in solidarity with the labor Party.  But Zionists and 
Israel denounced them for a lack of support for Israel. 
 The story of Esther is a popular one in Israel.  The Hebrew name Hadassah 
(Esther) was adopted by one of the largest Jewish women’s organizations.  Though 
originally supposed to be non-political, like most Jewish organizations, it has been 
“conscripted” by Israel to serve Israeli ambitions and goals and has lost its independence.  
A “Reform Jew” Professor Klaus J. Herrmann of Concordia University, Montreal, 
Quebec, well illustrates the successful way in which Israel’s politics have destroyed any 
independence in most Jewish groups and chained them to the chariot of the State of Israel 
– wherever they may be. 
 Professor Hermann heard about me th rough reading one of my pamphlets and 
under date of September 20, 1974, wrote as follows: 
  Dear Colleague: 
   I much appreciate your extensive letter of the 27 th 
  August, which I read with great attention. - - 
   Your analysis of the Middle East quandary is, of course, 
  a most valid one.  Regretably, the old Reform-Jewish point of 
  view, which saw in “Jews” (or Judaists,


--- PAGE 88 ---
79  
Mosaists, Hebrews, Israelists) in the words of the 1883 Platform of 
Pittsburg a “religious community,” has been totally destroyed in the 
  contemporary “Reform” estab lishment.  These Rabbis and lay 
  people have made a bloody mocker y of every single tradition and 
  principle of Liberal Judaism, pref erring to revive the old fictions  
  and myths of ethnicity, nationalism, folkism and reactionism.  I  
  will not change it, neither will – regrettably – those few sturdy 
  people among Liberal Judaism who re tain their previous allegiances. 
      
      With best regards, 
             Yours, 
       K l a u s  J .  H e r m a n n ”  
 
Professor Hermann, a Political Science scholar, has put his finger on the amazing 
contradiction that U.S. Jews pride themselves on their Liberal attitudes – but in Israel 
they find themselves enthusiastically supporting a Zionist State that has remarkable 
parallels to the white Afrikaners in South Africa – a state with which Israel has close 
affinities. 
 One cannot penetrate President Trum an’s mind so as to find the REAL reasons 
for his decision to establish a Jewish State in what was a dominantly Arab Palestine.  All 
of his explanations in later statements were “rationalizations” – efforts to put the best face 
possible on what was a dangerous decision which was destined to plunge the area into a 
generation of wars, massacres, guerilla operations, billions of dollars of war damage, and 
payments by the U.S.A.  Looking backward, it is possible to see the pattern
 as events 
unrolled.  One of the most brilliant of these studies is the booklet Israel, A Colonial 
Settler State by Professor Maxime Rodinson (Pathfinder Press, 1973).  Rodinson’s 
analysis is to compare the tactics and ideas of Zionism as part and parcel of the 19th  
Century European Colonial Imperialism.  The theme was – A Mother Imperial Power 
located in an area that was backward or underdeveloped.  Small groups of settlers


--- PAGE 89 ---
80  
were planted in the “colony” under military protection.  In time the colonial group grew 
strong enough to displace or massacre the “natives” and replace them with settlers.  
However, the conditions existing in the colony were so different from the motherland that 
in time the colonials would revolt against the motherland and take off on their own. 
 The pattern can be seen in the Spanish colonies which revolted against Spain in 
the 19th Century, the Portuguese colony Brazil, which also freed itself from the mother 
country, the British colonies in North America, the Dutch colonies in South Africa and 
even to a degree France’s colonial policies in North Africa.  Efforts to make Frenchmen 
out of Algerians failed. 
 The great error of the Zionists was to c onsider the Arab world so backward and 
disorganized that they need not consider the Palestinians. 
 The Zionist dogma #3 insist ed the indigenous population must be driven out.  
Zionists looked upon the Arabs as the American colonists looked upon the Indians, as the 
Spanish and Portuguese conquistadors did upon the indigenous population of South 
America and as the Dutch looked upon the Hottentots.  There were a few who recognized 
the Arabs were there, but their protests were swept aside by the Zionist elite. 
 I had taught Bible History at a summer c ourse in Columbia University in 1940.  I 
could see the parallels between Hebrew history described in theocratic terms in the Bible 
– and European 19th Century Colonial Imperialism.  Also I had witnessed the high tide of 
such Imperialism, for I was in Iraq in 1921-23 when Lord Curzon was trying to extend  
British influence in Turkestan, Iran, Anatolia, and Greece.  In 1923, the reaction came 
with the victory of the Labor


--- PAGE 90 ---
81  
Party.  The British began the retreat from Empire as the rising tide of local nationalism 
began to appear.  I lived through most of the age of Riza Shah Pahlavi in Iran and visited 
Turkey under Ataturk.  The same phenomenon emerged under Zaglul and Nahas Pasha in 
Egypt, the “Golden Square” in Iraq, the Syrian Nationalists in Syria.  Furthermore, I had 
been in Palestine in 1921, again in 1929, and spent months at a time in Palestine in 1942-
46.  Though the British had killed or exiled most of the Palestinian leaders in the Arab 
revolt of 1936-39, a blind man could feel the powerful emotional appeal of Palestinian 
self-determination growing.  As U.S. Army intelligence officer in 1942-46, I met most of 
the “experts” in the field and found my ideas were similar to theirs.  The Arabs were not 
a “backward people” like the Hottentots, the Africans or American Indians.  They were 
the inheritors of a great and brilliant civilization which had, under Ottoman rule, suffered 
neglect and demoralization.  But is was inherently capable of revival – and that was 
coming fast.  I was convinced the Biblical models – which were taught as eternal truth in 
the synagogues – would not work in 1946 or years following.  The age when Hebrews 
could kill off the Canaanites or force conversions as occurred in the Hasmonean Dynasty 
of John Hyrcanus and Alexander Janneus (135-80 B.C.) – or the age of European 
Colonial Imperialism was forever dead.  Yet Zionists were trying to use both models for a 
Jewish State in the latter half of the 20th Century. 
 Jewish tradition is a mixed bag of ideas , in no way coordinated nor integrated.  
Barbaric practices are issued in the name of God.  There are also some valuable universal 
moral principles.  Zionism’s policy toward the Palestinians followed the barbaric models 
referred to in the preceding paragraph.  The


--- PAGE 91 ---
82  
contrast in the two concepts of Judaism is well illustrated in a Washington Post report of 
November 11, 1974.  I. R. Stone represents the universal morality of Amos – but others 
represent the barbaric age of the book of Joshua.  When I. F. Stone compared the Book of 
Joshua to Hitler’s Nazi theory of “Lebensraum,” adrenalin flowed.  Stone was intelligent 
enough to see that there are damaging parallels between the Biblical stories and Hitler’s 
Germany. 
 The following quotations from an articl e entitled “Jews Hear Argument For 
Palestinian State” was written by Jay Mathews, Washington Post Staff writer, in the 
November 11, 1974, Washington Post. 
 “In light of the fact that the Arab world is arming itself to the teeth,” a 
middle-aged woman at the Sinai Temple Social Hall said to I. F. Stone, “are you 
suggesting that all of the Jews march into the Mediterranean Sea?” 
 Stone, the venerable journalist speaki ng at an afternoon forum in favor of 
a separate state for Palestinians, folded his arms.  “No…I’m not even suggesting 
an international fund to teach us all to swim…I am suggesting the Arab world is 
reconciling itself to the existence of a Jewish state.” - - -  
 Stone received long applause at the end of his talk and many members of 
the audience stood while clapping. 
 But most of the questions from the a udience, particularly those directed at 
Stone, were bitter and critical. 
 Stone told the audience that unless Je ws took actions to ease the plight of 
Palestinian refugees confined to camps throughout the Mid-East, “everything 
we’re proud of, and everything the best side of the Bible and prophets stand for, 
we will have defamed.” 
 One man rose immediately after Stone’s talk to retell the biblical story of 
“the Jews who were told to go into Canaan and wipe out all the people in 
Canaan.”  The man said “the Jews survived that spiritually and physically, and 
we’re here today and we’re still a moral light in this world.” 
 “I really ought to make my answer in German ,” Stone replied.  “The 
Germans would say we had to wipe out the Jews and Slavs to make a lebensraum 
for our people.”  “Don’t call me a Nazi!” Stone’s questioner shouted back at him 
from the audience. 
 At another point, in the middle of  his talk, Stone told the audience:


--- PAGE 92 ---
83  
 
“If the situation were reversed, Jewish boys would be doing just what Arab boys 
are doing today.” 
“Never!  Never!”  Some people shouted from the back of the room. 
 “They did it in 1946, don’t kid yourself, ” Stone shouted back, referring to 
Jewish terrorists’ activities against British army units that were then controlling 
the Palestinian area. - - -  
 
 It is not difficult to see how the endless repetition of Bible stories has moulded the 
Jewish character – in different ways depending on which “models” are emphasized.  
During the two periods when Israel was an independent nation (one following David’s 
kingdom and the second 134 B.C. to 70 B.C.), national exclusivist militant Judaism was 
the norm.  To understand the extremes to which this went, it is necessary to read Joshua 
and Josephus, who witnessed the madness which Judaism can generate.  The motto 
becomes “The Torah Lifestyle or Suicide.” 
 In 1929-30 I studied at Union Theological  Seminary and took a course under 
Professor Reinhold Niebuhr, one of the more sensitive theologians to social and political 
issues.  It was at this time a Palestinian revolt took place, and Jerusalem was temporarily 
occupied by Arab forces.  Niebuhr asked me to lead the class in the discussion of this 
event.  I went into the history of Zionism and its total disregard of the presence of 
Palestinians.  This had led to the growth of a group of young religious orthodox hotheads 
who felt Solomon’s temple area was being defiled by the presence of Gentiles.  So on the 
basis of the Torah teachings, they seized the Wailing Wall area, rushed in Jewish 
religious objects, closed it off to non-Jews and thereby triggered a


--- PAGE 93 ---
84  
fanatical reprisal on the part of Palestinian Muslim groups who foresaw in this incident 
exactly what has happened since – Jewish dominion over the city. 
 In discussing this, I set it in the historical phenomenon that revolutionary 
movements start with moderate intellectual thinkers, but as it grows in power, the 
movement moves towards extremism – into the hands of violent demagogues who appeal 
to pure irrational emotion.  Such was the historic evolution of the American and French 
revolutions, the Russian revolution, and now it was becoming a trend in nationalistic 
movements against colonial rule.  Thus we could expect to see Zionism and Arab 
nationalism develop fanatic anti-rational violent groups who would sweep the masses 
into suicidal wars.  Niebuhur sadly admitted he feared such a development and gave his 
opinion that “moderates,” because they tried to see both sides of an issue, could never 
lead a mass fanatic movement.  The men of action – the demagogues, the warriors seized 
the wave of the future and precipitated bloodshed.  Power is the final arbiter. 
 During my four years in Ar my Intelligence, I witnessed the evolution of militancy 
and demagoguery on both sides – the growth of the Revisionist Party under Begin, led by 
the Stern gang.  I found men like Dov Joseph, Ruben  Zaslani and others in the Haganah 
admired the Storm Troopers, though for the sake of public relations, they disclaimed 
them.  In the trial of Sirkin and Revlin, the two Zionist agents who hijacked British trucks 
carrying U.S. Lendlease military supplies from Cairo to Haifa, I was interested to note it 
was Dov Joseph’s brother who was defense lawyer.  Also the fact that these Jewish 
terrorists were protected and hidden in the Jewish “Yishuv” indicated the broad sympathy 
for terrorism dormant in the whole Jewish community.  One


--- PAGE 94 ---
85  
 
 
night as the guest of Colonel Hunloke, C.I.D.(11) a bomb went off in the “Russian 
Compound” in the building in which we were.  In November, 1944, I was in the Zion 
Theater when a bomb blew a building apart and a shower of stones fell on the cinema 
roof.  The reaction of the Zionists was openly to condemn such activities, but to protect 
the terrorists – and secretly admire them. 
 In 1942, I read the speeches made at the Biltmore Hotel conference.  The appeal 
to violence was no longer secret:  “Give the Jews arms and they will fight for their 
independence.”  It was a certain sign violence had been adopted by the Jewish Agency.  I 
had also met frequently with Musa Alami, a moderate Palestinian leader.  He was related 
to a Hussein girl and was my contact with the Palestinian leaders.  I could see the same 
trend toward violence as the only solution.  In my reports to the War Department, I sent 
in samples of the Irgun literature which were circulating.  The symbol was a map of 
Palestine crossed with a rifle and the slogan in Hebrew, “Only Thus.”  When I arrived in 
the State Department in February, 1946, I found many who felt like I did – Gordon 
Merriam, Bill Eddy, George Wadsworth, etc. – the Arab-Israeli issue was a Holy War in 
the making. 
 The remark by the Jewish youth in the I.  F. Stone discussion previously referred 
to is typical of Zionist thinking.  Violence, war, massacre, and terrorism are essential to 
found a state but afterwards – “the Jews survived that spiritually and physically and we’re 
here today a moral light in the world.”  His myth is that a culture outlives terrorism and 
becomes a model of enlightenment.  This 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
(11) Civil Intelligence Division.


--- PAGE 95 ---
86  
hypocrisy is beautifully illustrated in the speech made by Ambassador Tekoa of Israel in 
the United Nations on November 13, 1974, following the appearance of Yasir Arafat of 
the Palestinian Liberation Organization.  In stentorian oratory Tekoa shouted, “We will 
not negotiate with murderers and killers of children.”  Yet standing in the podium, he was 
representing Israel in whose government sits Menachim Begin, a murderer and killer of 
children (Deir Yassine) and Israel Sheib Eldad – the assassin of Count Bernadotte.  It 
seems Jewish murderers and assassins are patriots – not so Palestinian guerilla fighters! 
 What this Jewish youth and Tekoa fail to  recognize is that the animal – the 
barbarian – the violent are never completely conquered or banished within us – but only 
covered over by a thin shell of civilization.  It remains dormant, ready to burst forth under 
emotional tension.  I saw “the beast” emerging in Jewish life.  I also was interested that in 
Herzl’s and Weizmann’s Zionism – violence and force were to be applied by the United 
Kingdom against the Palestinians by removing them so the Jews could come to an 
“empty” land – a “land without a people.” 
 A revealing document showing the influence of the Zionists upon some British 
officials and the Labor party is to be found in Colonel R. Mienertzhagen’s Middle East 
Diary – 1917-1956.  In his conversations with Weizmann and other Zionist leaders, he 
favored the expulsion of the Palestinians from all the areas mentioned in the Bible.  The 
Jew knows perfectly well that he is to live not with – but rule over the Arab (page 161).  
He quotes the British Labor’s Conference resolution of December, 1944, “that the Arabs, 
with handsome compensation for their land, should be encouraged to move out as


--- PAGE 96 ---
87  
the Jews move in” (page 198).  In 1948, the Zionists did better.  They drove the 
Palestinians out and never paid compensation of any kind. 
 In my contacts with the British in the area in 1942-46, I was convinced the British 
in the Middle East realized it was impossible to carry out Zionist ambitions without 
sacrificing British interests in the Arab world.  From this it was no long journey to 
deduce that any
 nation which supported Zionist ambitions would be asked to impose 
Zionism on a resisting Arab world.  I had, perhaps, a unique experience in studying 
Jewish history and religion, in having personal contacts with Zionists and Arabs, in 
studying Arab history and religion and in using this background information in reporting 
to the War Department and the State Department.  When I arrived in State, I was 
delighted to find how unanimous the whole group of “professional diplomats” working 
with Loy Henderson were in reinforcing my views.  In 1974 when Rabbi Elmer Berger 
and I cooperated in publishing Pentagon Papers 1947(12) I wrote to Loy Henderson saying 
that events had vindicated his advice to President Truman.  Mr. Henderson replied that he 
had written what he had because he had complete confidence in his staff.  But as to a 
result – “the Zionists made my name synonymous with anti-Semitism and did all they 
could to defame me.”  The vindictiveness of Zionists against any opposition to their 
pressures on the U. S. is too well documented to need further illustrations. 
 Zionism is a powerful emotional force wh ich contains within it intense Love-Hate 
contradictions.  Love of Israel means contempt toward the           
 
                                                           
(12)  AJAZ, Suite 404, 133 E. 73rd Street, New York, NY  10021


--- PAGE 97 ---
88  
 
Palestinians.  Love of Zion creates hate for non-Zionists.  It even generates a 
contradiction in the attitude toward Gentiles.  Gentiles who sacrifice their own interests 
for Israel are “good,” but Gentiles who think first of their own interests are “bad.”  As 
long as Great Britain gave privileges to Jews – they were “good.”  But when the White 
Paper of 1939 appeared and it became apparent the U.K. was also interested in its Arab 
interests, the Zionists denounced Great Britain, and guerilla warfare against them began 
in Palestine.  This same ambiguity and contradiction exist toward the United States.  If 
the U.S.A. abandons its own interests to favor Zionism, it is “good,” but those citizens 
who argue that the U.S.A. has larger and vital interests in the Arab world (i.e. the 
“experts” in the State Department) are anti-Semitic.  At the same time another dichotomy 
appears.  Zionists who go to Eretz Israel are superior, pure, courageous, creative, 
independent Jews.  Jews who continue to live in a Gentile environment, when they have 
the opportunity to go to Israel, live in an unhealthy environment (Gentile), are greedy, 
thinking only of making money, and still worse, will eventually cease to be Jews!  This is 
emphasized in Herzl, Weizmann, etc., and Ben-Gurion went so far as to quote a medieval 
Jewish sage who said, “Jews who live outside Israel live without God.” 
 The New York Times , September 4, 1974, carried a full page advertisement:  “IF 
YOU’RE JEWISH THE CHANCES ARE YOUR GRANDCHILDREN WON’T BE” – 
the theme being that assimilation to Gentile (U.S.A.) life is destructive of Jewish 
continuity.  Nahum Goldman said Judaism cannot survive freedom of choice – therefore, 
it was essential to go to Israel where no such choice is available.  Inasmuch as in the 
Zionist lexicon the Gentile world is incurably anti-Semitic,


--- PAGE 98 ---
89  
what all this means is that Jews living in a Gentile environment become anti-Semitic.  
Zionists are obsessed with “anti-Semitism” but can neither define it nor decide how to 
cope with it.  If it is true that the U.S.A. is absorbing Jews into a Gentile world – as the 
New York Times advertisement states – then the U.S.A. is the greatest anti-Semitic force 
now extant – yet it is the sole support for the survival of a Zionist Jewish State.  Mrs. 
Meir never could decide whether the U.S.A. was a friend or enemy to Judaism.  At the 
age of 17, she left the U.S.A. for Palestine.  At the age of  76 at the close of the fourth 
Arab-Israeli war with disaster facing Israel, she came to the U.S.A. “to see her friends,” 
yet only a year before she had made a speech bewailing the seductive influence on Jewish 
youth.  According to her statistics, 17 per cent of all marriages involving Jews were with 
Gentiles – but on U.S. campuses it was worse.  Forty per cent of Jews in colleges were 
intermarrying with Gentiles.  This, she said, must be stopped.  So U.S. life is a menace to 
the survival of Judaism – and shortly afterwards an advertisement appeared in New York 
papers:  “JEWS – DO NOT MIXMATCH.”  The U.S. open society is an enemy of 
Judaism – yet Zionists operate in this open society to pressure the U.S. government to 
support Zionism, which is a closed racial partially theocratic society!  It is little wonder 
that caught in all these contradictions, Zionists are neurotic people.  How can they escape 
the dilemma of trying to restore an ancient culture in the modern world by persuading the 
U.S.A. – which is both a friend and an enemy – to act so as to ignore its greater interests 
in the Arab world so as to favor Zionism!! 
 Here is where the story of Esther provides the model.  It is permitted for a Jewish 
girl to violate the Jewish tradition of non-marriage with a Gentile – if


--- PAGE 99 ---
90  
it is able to seduce a power system – Ahasuerus or Truman – support a Jewish State.  And 
as in the case of Ahasuerus or Truman, the cost to the “father country” can be great.  This 
the United Kingdom learned in 1936-39, and the painful message is now coming through 
to Secretary of State Kissinger and President Ford. 
 I am perfectly willing to admit that writ ing as I am in July, 1975, my description 
may take on the evolution of 28 years of development in the Arab-Israeli conflict.  But 
fortunately I have preserved letters I wrote home during my years in the Middle East, 
1942-46.  Furthermore, the 400 pages in Foreign Relations U.S.A. publishing the State 
Department documents prepared in 1945-47 are solid history.  Some of them I aided in 
drafting; one is completely my own with my signature, and they reflect what we honestly 
thought – and dared to say – before the Zionist pressures frightened younger State 
Department officials. 
 President Truman had close intimate friends hips with a few Jews.  What they told 
Truman about Zionism, I cannot possible know.  What they knew about Zionism, I 
cannot know.  Truman does mention C. Weizmann as a moderate and wise Zionist and 
allowed him to influence Truman’s decision – against the advice of his State Department 
staff.  I never met Weizmann, though I met Ben-Gurion several times.  Having read 
Weizmann’s autobiography and Leonard Stein’s The Balfour Declaration as well as a 
host of other books and documents dealing with Zionism, I cannot describe him as either 
moderate or wise.  Ben-Gurion was an activist – make facts and then cover up how things 
were done, and the world will soon accept the changed situation.  “The Arabs understand 
only one thing – force.”  He was a dual personality, and a compilation of his


--- PAGE 100 ---
91  
 
writings and speeches indicate his Dr. Jekyll and Hyde philosophy.  His Jekyll Zionism 
followed the Herzl theory – drive the Palestinians out and bring in all the Jews to replace 
them in a large Jewish State.  For the purpose of public image, he often said just the 
opposite.  In 1948-49, he played the Jekyll role and covered it up by saying the 
Palestinians left voluntarily.  With the “miraculous” victory of the Six Day War in June, 
1967, Ben-Gurion was at first elated, but the joy soon turned into consternation when he 
discovered that the conquest of the West Bank had not eliminated the Palestinian 
population – thus bringing under Israeli overlordship a formidable minority.  Ben-
Gurion’s 1948 victory had reduced the Arab population to a mere 10 per cent – but the 
victory of 1967 had greatly increased the proportion of Arabs to the Conquering Jews.  
The Israeli army had done its best to terrorize and panic the West Bank Palestinians but 
had failed.  Amos Kenan, serving as a soldier, witnessed the brutalities and was deeply 
shocked.  He ended his report to his superiors, “Thus, that day we lost our victory.”  
Fouzi el Asmar got hold of a copy of Kenan’s report and got it published.  It is 
reproduced in his To be an Arab in Israel (page 124 ff). 
 Ben-Gurion’s plan was to seize Arab land – from which the Arabs had been 
expelled.  Ben-Gurion was much like Conan Doyle’s character – the kindly Doctor 
Jekyll, when he thought of the Jews, but a vicious and destructive changed personality 
when he faced the Arabs.  The Six Day War had failed to expel the majority.  Israel had 
to face a situation which could no longer be covered-up or ignored – a large Arab 
population who in the future might become a majority.  John M. Roots in an article in the 
New York Times of February 8, 1975, reported that shortly before his death, Ben-Gurion 
revealed his


--- PAGE 101 ---
92  
anxieties.  The expected “Return” of Jews was disappointing, the 1967 conquests had 
greatly increased the Arab population being kept down by military controls, the Arabs 
outside were increasing in numbers, technical skills, and wealth – and the U.S.A. would 
eventually weary of supporting an Israel thousands of miles away.  Therefore, to buy 
time, Israel should return the West Bank to the Arabs and consider friendship with the 
Arab world as the ultimate “security” – not territorial secure boundaries.  Ben-Gurion had 
spent most of his life making enemies of the Arabs – the next generation must reverse the 
trend and make friends. 
 Annexation” by Arie Eliav.  The large LIKUD party, inheriting the policy of the 
HERUT, Ever since 1967, the Israeli government had carried out a policy called 
“Creeping reinforced by the militant expansionist General Arik Sharon, demanded full 
annexation of all territories within the Biblical boundaries.  The bewilderment in Israel as 
to what to do with the Palestinians and what boundaries Israel must have is now complete 
– because these were never clearly defined. 
 
LIBERAL JUDAISM VERSUS POWER POLITICS 
 The long history of Jews wandering for centuries in Gentile societies and 
suffering discrimination from their ruling cultic states caused them to hate and stigmatize 
violence, prejudice and discrimination.  They portrayed themselves as a persecuted, meek 
and gentle people.  Yet in the synagogues and the reading of the Torah, they deified 
violence, genocide, trickery, and pious frauds.  With the emancipation and enlightenment 
(Haskalah) in Western Europe, some Jews emerged into Gentile society and found it 
exciting and liberalizing!  This threatened the traditional theocratic closed ghetto that had


--- PAGE 102 ---
93  
“saved” Judaism for two millennia.  A few Jews renounced all traditional forms and 
followed Marx or Bakunin, justifying violence.  Others formed Reformed or 
Conservative Judaism – halfway measures toward adapting to the surrounding culture.  
The Orthodox found in Zionism and a Jewish State the hope for a return to sharing power 
in a political state.  While recognizing Herzl’s Zionism and that of Ben-Gurion was 
partially secular, to the Orthodox it contained seeds of the ancient racial theories of 
Jewish ancestry which could be used to eventually infiltrate the whole of Zionism to 
perpetuate their “cult” in a Jewish State.  Thus with the exception of the small but fervent 
Mea Sharim group of Rabbi Blau, they married Orthodoxy to secular power in a system 
that has defied description!  Thus they have participated in every government since 1948, 
using their political leverage to impose on Jews an obscurantist ritualistic cult that has 
made Israel look ridiculous to all who know the encroachment of this bloc on the private 
lives on all Israelis. 
 In the charged emotional atmosphere of the 20 th Century, the model of Judaism 
that seized control of Zionism was the “sacred” model of Moses and Joshua, the heroic 
and tragic model of the Macabees – an appeal to violence!  The Palestinians and their 
Arab neighbors must be forced to accept Zionism – with some Imperial Power supplying 
the means of violence.  It seems never to have occurred to the Zionist leaders that 
violence breeds counter violence.  Nor did President Truman understand this.  President 
Roosevelt in his meeting with Ibn Saud in February, 1945, had promised full consultation 
with the Arabs and that he would never make a decision harmful to the Arab people.  
President Truman repeated the promise of carrying on President Roosevelt’s policy, but


--- PAGE 103 ---
94  
under Zionist prodding soon violated their confidence.  Truman went further – he refused 
to consult even his own advisors, trusting more in Eliahu Elath and C. Weizmann to 
guide his decision and thus created what has come to be called a “special relation” 
between Israel and the United States.  This special relation has worked to the advantage 
of Israel – and the disadvantage of the United States – as the Zionist-United Kingdom 
special relation did under the Mandate.  But how much longer the U.S.A. can continue to 
pay the price for such an undefined relationship is now being asked openly for the first 
time. 
 Dana Adams Schmidt in his recent book Armageddon in the Middle East  (1974) 
concludes by stating that the Arab manpower, wealth, and increasing mastery of skills 
will inexorably overwhelm Israel in the future – Armageddon in the Middle East.  And if 
the U.S.A. then rushes in arms and personnel to “save” Israel, the U.S.S.R. will probably 
respond by supporting the Arabs – Armageddon in the World – or World War III.  If the 
U.S.A. cannot reconcile its emotional interests in Israel with its larger vital interests in 
Arab oil, it faces disaster.  Senator William Fulbright in his speech at Fulton, Missouri, 
on November 3, 1974 (printed in the National Observer
 November 12, 1974, page 17) 
states that Israel’s use of its position in U.S. politics is “making bad use of a good friend” 
and U.S. Jews are encouraging Israel on a course that will lead to its destruction – and 
possibly ours as well.  When President Truman, against the advice of his own experts, 
chose to ignore them and give in to Zionist pressure, he launched the U.S.A. on a policy 
based on fantasies, illusions, emotions,


--- PAGE 104 ---
95  
and domestic lobbies that would need a generation to bring the U.S. back to realities. 
 The quick Israeli victory of 1967 only intens ified Israel’s dreams of grandeur and 
glory – and its grip on U.S. policies.  Politicians running for state and local offices had to 
make a pilgrimage to Israel – paid for by Zionist supporters in the U.S.A. – then return 
extolling the virtues of Israel, before they got Jewish contributions and votes.  It became 
a routine.  Newspaper editors, clergymen, and other M.I.P.’s in U.S. life felt it essential to 
announce they, too, had been in Israel and to repeat parrot-wise the phrases they picked 
up from trained tour guides in Israel.  Israel developed the dream it could do as it wanted 
and get full support from the U.S.A.  Some 72 Senators and over half the members of 
Congress became an automatic cheering section for anything Israel wanted.  Along with 
the glorification of Israel went its counterpart – disparaging descriptions of the Arab 
world, which these paid visitors had never seen.  This Israeli-Zionist euphoria came 
crashing down on October 6, 1973, when in a few hours the Egyptian armies crossed the 
Suez Canal and captured the Bar Lev line on which Israel had spent $250 million dollars 
– an Israel Maginot Line.  The U.S.A. was primarily at fault for praising Israel’s 
delusions – and paying for them after 1948.  The curve of Zionist Israeli arrogance began 
to rise with President Truman’s decision.  That arrogance and contempt infected both the 
U.S. Congress and the White House whose members for years had played the part of a 
chorus to the Israeli Orchestra Master.  Secretary of State Kissinger remarked that the 
October, 1973, attack had caught the U.S.A. intelligence community completely by 
surprise.  It was as though the U.S.A. had lost its


--- PAGE 105 ---
96  
own independence and heard only Zionist propaganda – a continuation of President 
Truman’s precedent in 1947. 
 President Nixon immediately, upon hearing of an Arab oil embargo, reversed 
direction and in June, 1974, made a “triumphal” tour.  In his farewell address of August 
8, 1974, he had this odd paragraph: 
  “In the Middle East, 100 milli on people in the Arab countries, 
 many of whom have considered us their enemies for nearly 20 years, 
 now look on us as their friends.  We must continue to build on that 
 friendship so that peace can settle down at last over the Middle East 
 and so that the cradle of civilization will not become its grave.” 
 This illustrates what an oil embargo will do!  But an examination of this 
paragraph reveals some oddities.  To what 20 years is Nixon referring?  That takes the 
date back to 1954.  But it was in 1947 that Truman decided to ignore the Arabs and 
supported a Zionist Jewish exclusivist state on Palestinian territory.  It also raises the 
question – who considered whom as enemies?  I experienced five long and extended trips 
through the Arab countries and Israel between 1955 and 1960.  I interviewed Premier 
Abdul Karim el Kassim in Iraq and high ranking officials as well as the “little men” in 
Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, and Egypt.  I found no “enmity” toward the U.S.A.  On the 
contrary, the Arabs I met were bewildered by U.S. hostility to them.  They wanted to 
trade and have normal relationships with the U.S.A.  They pointed out they were anti-
Communist in one of the most strategic parts of the world, with 100 million Arabs closely 
tied to hundreds of millions of people of Muslim faith.  They had oil, an indispensable 
item in world energy use.  Why did the U.S.A. always support Israel against the Arabs?  
At the risk of being fired from the State Department if my replies


--- PAGE 106 ---
97  
 
were ever reported back in the U.S.A., I freely admitted it was because of domestic 
pressures put on Congress and the White House, because of general U.S. ignorance of the 
issues, and odd fundamentalist belief in many churches that God had promised the 
Chosen People a return to Palestine – and general apathy.  I have always found the Arabs 
friendly, fairly honest (at least as much so as U.S. citizens) and very frank.  I did not find 
these qualities in Zionists whom I met.  I felt they were constantly trying to manipulate 
me. 
 It is one of the phenomenon in the mental  state called paranoia that the neurotic 
mind projects onto the other the mental state which really exists in his own mind.  
President Nixon’s statement reveals a paranoiac tendency.  He was reflected in the Arabs 
his own attitude toward them – enmity.  The Zionists were remarkably capable in 
transferring their own enmity toward the Palestinians and their fellow Arabs into the U.S. 
scene – through the press, the mass media, and their paid for Congressmen and Senators 
who received generous fees for speaking to Jewish groups in the U.S.A.  Using the old 
Edgar-Bergen-Charlie McCarthy puppet analogy, the Zionist Edgar Bergens made the 
U.S. press and political instruments echo a Charlie McCarthy type propaganda – 
disguising its real source.  President Nixon also was victim of this process.  What broke 
the spell was the October, 1973, war.  The Arab states announced they did not want to 
destroy Israel, but to reoccupy their own lands.  They would welcome U.S. mediation and 
invited President Nixon to visit them.  But the momentum of 27 years of misinformation 
and illusion will carry on for some years to come – especially in the Senate, Congress, 
and in the Democratic Party, whose members will continue, like a broken record, to 
repeat the phrases and slogans they have


--- PAGE 107 ---
98  
 
memorized so well in the past.  The sight of a hundred thousand angry Jews massed in 
front of the U.N. building, led by Senator Henry Jackson, Senator Jacob Javits, Abba 
Eban, and Moshe Dayan, demanding the Palestinian Liberation Organization be refused 
passage to the U.N. building is a reflection on how well certain groups have been 
“conditioned” – as were Pavlov’s dogs – to repeat the well learned phrases of an age now 
past. 
 It is one of the tragedies of U.S. po litical life, that in 1947, President Truman 
ignored the interests of the Palestinians and their Arab neighbors when their opposition 
was clearly expressed – and inflicted on them a Zionist State which believed only force 
would persuade the Arabs to give in.  Then in the grip of Zionist propaganda, the U.S.A. 
largely lost sight of the Palestinians.  Golda Meir even said such a community had never 
existed, and Moshe Dayan had prophesied it never would exist – so why bother about a 
non-people?  It was a shock in October, 1973, to hear Arabs could fight and could shut 
off oil to the U.S.A. – a shock that has fundamentally affected U.S. policy and will 
continue to do so in the future.  What a tragedy that a people’s right to existence, self-
determination, and political entity was ignored by the U.S.A. – till a war and oil shortage 
brought us to our senses!  But not all have yet learned the message.  Some are now 
demanding the U.S.A. send troops to capture the Arab oil fields – or send troops to rescue 
Israel because it must “win” every war against the Arabs.  (William Saffire in his New 
York Times column of November 1, 1974).  In the U.S.A. we do not put lunatics into 
asylums – frequently they are paid to publish their  ideas in the leading newspapers in the 
U.S.A.  On the one hand, a few intelligent senators are “discovering” the Arab world.  
Senator James A. McClure


--- PAGE 108 ---
99  
of Idaho addressed Arab-American University graduates in Cleveland on October 26, 
1974.  He had recently returned from a trip to the Middle East and spoke on “The Arabs – 
an American Awakening.”  Because his recent speeches have deviated from the accepted 
Zionist dogma, he has been accused of being anti-Israeli but “I believe that my position 
concerning the Middle East is best not only for the United States but for the Arabs.”  He 
then punctured several of the propaganda balloons filling the air.  “Misconceptions (about 
the Arabs) have abounded within the American population – They will have to be 
dragged out into the open.” 
 In January Senator Charles Percy of Illinois returned from a trip to the Middle 
East.  He stated that Israel should no longer take for granted that when the Administration 
asked for financial aid to Israel that there would be an automatic majority of 70 Senators 
to increase the amount – as had so often happened in the past.  It is becoming painfully 
apparent that the interests of an exclusively Jewish, expanding State are not parallel to 
those of the U.S.A.  As the divergence increases, the newspapers record another violation 
by Israel of the agreement made at the time the U.S. recognized Israel – neither State was 
to interfere in the internal affairs of the other.  But with Zionists like Nahum Goldman 
openly urging the “dual loyalty” of Jews, both to Israel and to the countries in which they 
live as is expressed in his letter to the New York Times
 of February 4, 1975, Israel has 
always considered the American Jewish community in the U.S.A. as one of its colonies 
living abroad.  Thus every Israeli Ambassador has a double function – to the State to 
which he is sent, as well as to the Jewish colony in that State.  At least this is what Walter 
Eytan told us in his book


--- PAGE 109 ---
100  
The First Ten Years.  So in 1972, Ambassador Rabin urged the Jewish community to 
thank President Nixon.  Thus this “instruction” to the U.S. Jewish community on how to 
act is mere routine standard order of procedure.  Among the latest illustrations was the 
speech Ambassador Yosef Tekoa to the U.N. gave on May 27, 1975, reported in the New 
York Times.  The Conference of Major American Jewish Organizations was meeting at 
the Delmonico Hotel to get their instructions – and they got them.  The Jewish 
community must give “unremitting display of Jewish strength on the side of  Israel” even 
though his country (Israel) might have to adopt “positions which do not find favor with 
others.”  In this delicate way, he was instructing his “colony” to support Israel even if the 
latter adopted an anti-U.S.A. attitude.  From the Zionist point of view, that is not 
interfering in U.S. internal affairs but simply having the “center” in Israel tell the 
Diaspora that it expects their complete loyalty.  There was another Jew who once 
remarked, “No man can serve two Masters for if he loves the one, he will despise the 
other.”  But that Jew was not a Zionist and his teachings ran counter to the Zealots of his 
day. 
 I have watched the Zionist “manipulati on” of the U.S. press, the political 
institutions, religious bodies and labor organizations with practically no counter-
balancing group. 
 My own efforts to get information a nd views across through my 20 years in the 
State Department were a complete failure as far as influencing policy was concerned.  
But in another way, my efforts were rewarded.  At John Hopkins School of Advanced 
International Studies where I taught as “Part Time Faculty” for 20 years (1946-66) I had 
a number of excellent students who since


--- PAGE 110 ---
101  
 
then have become high ranking officials or research workers – such as Ambassador 
Herman Eiltz, now in Egypt.  Others are in teaching.  I frequently meet these people in 
my travels and am encouraged to believe that I was somewhat influential in guiding their 
initial interests in making an in-depth study of the Middle East.  They are now in 
positions to influence public information and policy.  It was one of these students who 
made the selection of materials which were published in the Foreign Relations U.S.A., 
1945-47.  He consulted me on whether to publish Loy Henderson’s memos – and I urged 
him to include them as most valuable documents.  I have frequently asked how it is 
possible to get accurate information to the public.  I have given literally hundreds of 
lectures in universities, colleges, and other groups.  I am convinced they think I am 
prejudiced or just a “nut” for expressing my opinions.  I have frequently written to 
Senators and Congressmen but have abandoned that as hopeless – unless one makes a 
significant campaign contribution to a candidate! 
 As an illustration of the type of hysterical outburst that fills the news pages, the 
New York Times
 and other papers on November 1, 1974, printed a column by William 
Saffire.  He is a former speech writer for President Nixon.  Whenever he discusses Israel, 
he falls into a sort of neurotic tantrum, in this case, advocating an atomic war against 
Kuwait – and his syndicated column reaches millions of people.  It pays to be a blood and 
thunder demagogue. 
 My reply was printed in the Wooster Daily Record  of November 14, 1974. 
  Editor, Daily Record: 
On November 1, 1974, you published a column by William 
Saffire.  For sheer idiocy, it takes the cake.  Note items (2), (4), and his 
conclusion. 
(2) The U.S.A. must tie Jewish emigration and limitation of the 
sales of arms to the U.S.A.-U.S.S.R.


--- PAGE 111 ---
102  
 
Trade Bill.  Just how far can the U.S.A. force the U.S.S.R. to conform to 
the interests of Israel? 
 (4) The Indians should use their nuc lear power to capture the oil of 
Kuwait.  “Why should India sit and wait with folded arms?” 
 The conclusion – The U.S.A. must make clear to the Arabs that 
Israel will win the next war.  (That can only be done if the U.S.A. 
promises to send troops to fight the Arabs). 
 William Saffire is a Zionist and sees the whole world from the 
point of view of Zionist domination of the Arab world. 
 As a more intelligent view, the Record would do a great service if 
it reprinted Senator William Fulbright’s speech printed in the National 
Observer of November 12 (page 17).  He states, “Israel is making bad use 
of a good friend,” and that blind Zionist supporters in the U.S.A., “are 
encouraging Israel on a course which must lead toward her destruction – 
and possibly ours as well.” 
 If Israel is to survive, it will not be by U.S. arms or troops.  It can 
only survive when it changes its mentality of “winning” over the Arabs by 
military means, and by becoming a creative participating community in 
the Arab world. 
 No wonder the U.S. public is ignoran t of the issues when they read 
the emotional tantrum of a William Saffire without knowing what is really 
going on.  Fulbright gives us a glimpse of reality. 
    Edwin M. Wright 
                            618 E. Wayne Ave., Wooster, Ohio. 
 I have earlier described how the Zionists used their political pressures to remove 
Loy Henderson from his office in the State Department in 1948.  The latest victim of the 
Zionist political apparatus is General George S. Brown, U.S.A.F., Chief of Staff, who 
exposed a small corner of the Zionist cover-up in his speech at Duke University, October 
10, 1974.  The Wall Street Journal of November 14, 1974, gave some of the details (page 
109) of how the Zionists operate to purge the government of any criticism by an official.  
At this time there were a number of articles appearing in the U.S. mass media urging the 
U.S.A. to use military action to seize the Arab oil fields – earlier advocated by 
Ambassador Rabin.  At that time I wrote a letter to Assistant Secretary of State Joseph 
Sisco, whom


--- PAGE 112 ---
103  
I had known when we were colleagues in the State Department (see Appendix #4) 
expressing my fear that if the U.S.A. continued to follow Zionist propaganda, it would 
lead to disaster.  “In the increasing gap that exists between the U.S. Government and the 
public because of the passion for secrecy, there exists the seeds of despair and cynicism.”  
The question of sending U.S. forces to occupy the Arab oil fields became a political 
football and this question was put to General Brown.  He replied, “I don’t know.  I hope 
not,” then went on to describe the Israeli lobby.  “It is so strong, you wouldn’t believe it.  
We have the Israelis coming to us for equipment.  We say we can’t possibly get the 
Congress to support a program like this and they say, ‘Don’t worry about Congress.  
We’ll take care of Congress.’”  Unfortunately along with this revealing statement, he 
blundered on some others.  Immediately the Zionists and their Echoes in Congress 
demanded that General Brown be relieved of his office.  There was no effort to find out 
how the Israeli lobby worked – that would expose the Cover-up.  President Ford 
reprimanded General Brown and made him come to the White House to apologize.  Why 
is there no open investigation of the Zionist Lobby.  Or an effort made to find out how 
many Senators and Congressmen are “bought” by Jewish campaign funds and honoraria 
for speeches?  When this is done, the Millenia will have come nearer and some 
confidence will be restored to Congress.  Till then, Congress is undermining its own 
reputation.  Cynics remark, “We have the best Congress money can buy.”  The Zionists 
know this well. 
 In 1974 Merle Miller published his b ook on President Truman entitled Plain 
Speaking.  It is based on hours of oral recordings on tape.  There is a chapter entitled 
“Israel” in which Truman reminisces over his decision in 1947 to support


--- PAGE 113 ---
104  
a Jewish State in Palestine.  He repeats the story of pressures by the Zionists, naming 
Rabbi Wise by name and then has a bitter attack upon his State Department “experts.”  In 
this tense situation, Eddie Jacobson came to see him, violating his promise NOT to 
discuss the Middle East situation.  Jacobson broke down in tears, which melted Truman’s 
heart, so he called Weizmann in New York to come see him.  But to hide the fact from 
the public, Weizmann was brought in via the East Gate.  It was Eddie Jacobson’s tears 
which decided Truman’s policy on the Arab-Israeli conflict.  These tears have now cost 
the U.S. government billions of dollars.  (See Carl Rowan’s column in the Appendix #8). 
 The neurotic quality of Zionism, with its  hyper-Messianic visions of grandeur and 
glory at one moment, is well illustrated by the experiences of Fouzi el Asmar as 
described in his book (pages 118-188) when the Israeli’s became aware of the 
“miraculous” victory over the Arabs on June 5, 1967.  At the same time, the Police began 
wide scale use of Gestapo methods against Palestinian Arabs who did not share in the 
hypnotic delusions that seized the great majority of Israeli Jews – as well as the American 
Jewish community.  Fortunately a small minority saw the danger involved in such flights 
from reality.  Some left Israel, finding it impossible to share in the rejoicing over the 
dehumanization of the Arabs that followed.  Others stayed in Israel, hoping to bring an 
element of sanity into the picture.  Among the latter was Dr. Israel Shahak, Professor of 
Biochemistry at Hebrew University.  A survivor, as a boy, of the Belsen extermination 
camps in Nazi Germany, he migrated to Israel and spent some time outside Israel getting 
his Doctoral degree, then he returned and won a position on the faculty of Hebrew 
University.  In 1967 he witnessed in Israel


--- PAGE 114 ---
105  
much the same kind of hysterical racism and appeal to violence he had seen in Germany.  
To try to introduce a degree of sanity, with a few friends, he organized the Israeli League 
for Human and Civil Rights – there being no Civil Rights laws in Israel.  I had the good 
fortune to spend three days with Dr. Shahak in April, 1973.  I had only recently debated 
at the Cleveland City Club with I. L. Kenan who has frequently stigmatized me as a 
dangerous “Arabist” and a strident anti-Semitic spokesman.  But the attack against Dr. 
Shahak was a hundred fold more vituperative than against me.  Dr. Shahak was a Traitor, 
would be fired from the University and efforts to expel him became a “Cause.”  I 
discovered in him a man of prodigious memory, dedicated to seeing all people as human 
beings trapped in their cultural spider webs and unable to see any point of view but their 
own.  To me, he is one of the most courageous persons I have ever had the privilege of 
knowing.  Because of the fanatical hatred he has aroused in Zionist circles, I have placed 
one of his articles in the Appendix (#7).  That he has survived in the super-heated 
emotional atmosphere of a Zionist State is in a way a compliment to those who have 
dared to support him.  All Israelis have not bowed the knee to the new Baal – the 
deification of the Zionist State of Israel.  But while in Israel, there is recognition of 
Israel’s predicament, there seems too little of this in the U.S. Jewish community.  General 
Mattityahu Peled, who played a prominent role in Israel’s 1967 victory, reacted 
negatively to the hysterical delirium that seized the Zionist communities.  As a lecturer in 
Arabic at Tel Aviv University he has tried to bring a note of caution, urging 
reconciliation with the Arabs by withdrawal from occupied Arab territory and a face 
about on the treatment of the Palestinians.  In Spring, 1975, he made a three weeks 
lecture tour to the United States and in


--- PAGE 115 ---
106  
 
an article in the June, 1975, issue of the New Outlook (pages 18-22) he writes of his 
disappointment with the American Jewish community, which he finds, as a whole, 
supporting the most intransigent groups in Israel – in the belief that this is expected of 
them – and ignorant that the hard line taken by the Israeli government is seriously 
challenged within Israel itself.  He concludes that the liberal tradition of American Jewry 
has been chained to the wheel of the Israeli war chariot.  And that war chariot includes a 
potential 10 Atomic bombs as Christian Science Monitor reminds us (editorial dated 
August 1, 1975).  What are the potential targets of those Atomic bombs?  Damascus, 
Baghdad, the Arab oil fields, the Aswan Dam, Cairo and Alexandria.  This would re-
enact the story of Samson and Delilah in dramatic form – the Sun God of the Chosen 
People being dragged into the prison of the Philistines in Gaza (the Arabs) but retaliating 
with a burst of 10 Atomic bombs that would destroy not only Israel but Civilization – in 
the very cradle where it was born.  This would be a fitting holocaust as the conclusion of 
President Truman’s decision to establish a Zionist State on Arab territory.  But President 
Truman will not have lived to see such an event. 
May he rest in Peace. 
      Edwin M. Wright 
      618 East Wayne Ave. 
      Wooster, Ohio  44691 
 
August, 1975.


--- PAGE 116 ---
107  
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX.  
=  1  The Biblical Boundaries of Eretz Israel as described in Numbers 34.  
=  2  My letter to Isaac L. Kenan, Zionist Lobbyist.  
=  3  Excerpts – Letters from Evan M. Wilson.  
=  4  Letter to Assistant Secretary State for NEA – Joseph Sisco.  
=  5  Milton Friedman’s Column from the Los Angeles Voice of May 18, 1956.  
=  6  Samples of the type of correspondence generated by Milton Friedman.  
=  7  Article by Dr. Israel Shahak, “What are my Opinions?”  
=  8  Column by Carl T. Rowan from the Cleveland Plain Dealer of August 31,     
1975. 
 
=  9  Some suggested source materials which are most useful in studying Zionist 
dogmas and actions. 
 
= 10  Letter from the Harry Truman Library.  
= 11  Index of names.


--- PAGE 117 ---
108


--- PAGE 118 ---
109  
Appendix #2 
618 East Wayne Avenue 
Wooster, Ohio  44691 
August 27, 1974  
Mr. I. L. Kenan, Editor  
Near East Report  
2341 East Street, N.W.  
Washington, D.C.  20005  
 
Dear Mr. Kenan,  
 
This is a personal letter in response to the honorable mention you gave me  
in the 7 August 1974 issue of the Near East Report.  In the article by your  
writer David Ettinger on the Middle East Institute, I am flattered by being  
called a “strident anti-Zionist.”  But I am surprised by how out of date he is.  
He refers to me as being at the University of south Carolina.  I was there  
only two years as Visiting Professor.  In June 1970 I retired and am now living  
at the above address.  
 
Furthermore, you may recall we had a brief debate at the Cleveland City Club  
on April 13, 1973.  I reviewed the tape recording of that debate.  Your theme  
was that Israel is strong, supported by  the U.S. Congress, White House and  
most of the public.  The Arabs were discouraged and dared not resort to arms.  
You concluded that you were optimistic and the Arabs would face realities and  
sue for peace.  I have a copy of my speech in which I took just the opposite  
view.  Israel’s strength is a delusion created by false assumptions.  I quoted  
your testimony before the Foreign Relations Committee:  “Israel’s existence  
is a priori protection for American oil interest in the Persian Gulf – in Saudi  
Arabia, Kuwait, Bahrain – and Iran” to illustrate how exaggerated the Zionist  
delusions were and I predicted a war not far ahead in which the Arabs would  
use their oil power.  In closing, I asked, “And what is at stake?  Only the  
security of the United States and its economic stability.  History will not  
forgive even a powerful nation like the U.S.A. the luxury of ignorance and  
innocence much longer.”  
 
If you wish a copy of my part of the debate, I will be glad to send you one.  
 
What is an anti-Zionist?  Is it a term of derision or insult?  Or should we  
praise anti-Zionists for seeing through the fog of propaganda put out by  
I. L. Kenan and Associates?  Albert Einstein opposed the idea of a Jewish  
State because it would “destroy the inner spiritual morality of Judaism.”  
When offered the Presidency of Israel, he refused, preferring - like you –  
to live in exile among Gentiles.  M. Buber and Judah Magnus did not favor a  
Jewish State.  Recently Nahum Goldman, for years President of the World  
Zionist Organization, published a scathing denunciation of Israeli Zionist  
leadership (The New Outlook, May 1974, page 12) in which he says Israel should  
have listened to some of the criticisms of its policies which it has pursued  
for “years of illusions, of belief in wrong values, of sticking to false values  
and especially of unjustified illusions of grandeur – (the collapse of which


--- PAGE 119 ---
110  
 
in the October 1973 war) have led to this psychology of gloom, despair and  
hopelessness which is beginning to pervade so many of our people both in and  
out of Israel.”  
 
When ex-P.M. Golda Meir read N. Goldman’s article in Foreign Affairs in  
1970, she denounced him as an anti-Zionist.  
 
What Zionist has needed all along is intelligent criticism as an antidote to  
the worshipful adoration showered upon it by such as you.  Israel was a  
victim of its own propaganda – that it was a Perfect State, a Democracy fighting  
communism, the outpost of U.S. Imperialism in the area supporting U.S.  
interests, etc.  In the Messianic Euphoria created in Israel by all this chorus  
of praise, the Israeli government simply lost touch with reality.  By generous  
contributions to U.S. political politics and large honoraria to senators and  
congressmen who echoed Israel’s propaganda, the U.S.A. was becoming identified  
with Israel’s dream of an Expanding Jewish Zionist Militant Colonial Empire.  
In October 1973 reality broke through. 
 
When Yigal Allon was asked why the Arabs surprised Israel on October 6, 1973,  
he replied, “It was because of our exaggerated self-esteem and our contemptuous  
scorn of the Arabs.  (N.Y. Times, December 4, 1973.)  
 
What Israel and Zionists need badly is an intelligent criticism of their Messianic  
Delusions of Perfection and Grandeur – an end to the Cover-up of what Israel  
really is and how it has treated the Palestinians.  
 
IF stating the Truth is anti-Zionist, then by all means, more power to the  
anti-Zionists.  
 
While I know you have printed what you consider an attack on me, I take it as  
a compliment.  I am at least one person who has kept his independent judgement  
alive.  I shall continue to urge Americans to get the facts.  Following the Zionist  
will-of-the-wisp can only lead to disaster – for Israel, for the Arabs and for  
the U.S.A.  At least let us use some intelligence and try to bring in some elements  
of sanity.  Failure to do so the past 26 years has led to four wars, an eye-ball-to-eye-ball  
confrontation with the U.S.S.R. and an Arab oil embargo – because we have  
followed leaders (?) blinded by propaganda. 
 
         Sincerely,  
 
         [signed]  
 
         Edwin M. Wright


--- PAGE 120 ---
111  
Appendix #3   Excerpts from correspondence with  
EVAN M. WILSON  
3145 O Street  
Washington, D.C.  20007  
     April 2, 1975 
Dear Ed, 
 
         I have now obtained your manuscript and read it over.  
I entirely agree with you in the main thrust of your  
analysis of why Truman adopted so pro-Israel a policy.  
Much of your material was familiar to me - - but it is  
handy to have it all in one place, complete with citations.  
I have made some notes of points that I will want to use  
In my own book.  – 
 
       April 24, 1975  
 
         I have just come back from Independence where I  
found much of interest in the Truman Library, particularly  
A collection of NEA’s (Near East and Africa) most secret  
documents all routed to Sam Rosenman by HST and commented  
on most critically without our knowledge at the time. This  
of course is par for the course.  
         I share your concern about the present situation,  
in fact, I have been pessimistic for some time.  However  
we shall have to wait and see.  
 
     With best wishes, 
         Sincerely, 
 
         [signed] 
 
            Evan


--- PAGE 121 ---
112  
Appendix #4  
618 E. Wayne Ave.,  
Wooster, Ohio  44691  
August 14, 1973  
Mr. Joseph J. Sisco  
Assistant Secretary of State  
Department of State  
Washington, D.C.  20520  
 
Dear Sir,  
 
 I was lecturing at the Foreign Service Institute on August 6 th and picked  
up a copy of your interview with Israeli television on August 1, 1973.  In the first  
answer, you stated:  “I’m glad to say that the situation along the Israeli-Lebanese  
border is reasonably quiet.”  
 
 This statement appears a few weeks af ter an Israeli-killer squad, using  
British passports, passed into Lebanon killing 26 people – several of them  
completely innocent victims.  And on August 10th, on direct orders from  
Mrs. Meir, Israeli warplanes (were they U.S. equipment?) hijacked a Mideast  
Airliner as it left Beirut airport.  And Time of August 6, 1973 describes an  
Israeli killer-squad operating in Europe and killing the wrong person in Norway.  
 
 Of course, Israel pursues such policies because it knows the United  
States can be counted upon to support Israel – unconditionally.  This emboldens  
Israel to act as it does and allow its generals to state what U.S. policy should  
be.  As an illustration, I quote from a speech by General Rabin who claims  
to have an inside view of the United States.  This was a speech in a meeting  
of the Israeli Center for Administration held on July 20, 1973 at the Hotel  
Basle, Tel Aviv.  He is reported to have said, “America gives us weapons  
So that we should use them when necessary.”  As an illustration of such a  
necessity, he continued: 
 
“When asked about the energy crisis and the influence of Arab oil  
on U.S.A. policy, General Rabin stated…that an awareness is  
growing and crystalizing in the U.S.A., that in an extreme case,  
it is permitted in a civilized world to take control by force of  
the oil sources.  Experts in the U.S.A. are saying more and more  
openly that if some ‘medieval type rulers’ really mean to endanger  
the oil needs of hundreds of millions of people in the civilized world,  
then it is permitted to the West to take steps in order to prevent  
this.”  (quoted from Ha’aretz)  
 
 Israel is obviously anxious to play the role of saving civilization from  
the stupidity of the medieval-type rulers of the Arab world.  So often what  
Israeli generals – or Prime Minister Golda Meir – say eventually becomes  
U.s. policy when he mentions “experts in the U.S.A.”  That which Dean  
Acheson feared seems to be coming true, that in supporting a Zionist Jewish  
State on Arab soil, it would eventually undermine broader U.S. interests in  
The whole region.  Ex-Ambassador Rabin cannot be ignored.  In 1969 he


--- PAGE 122 ---
113  
attacked the Rogers’ suggestion and it was “shelved.”  In 1972, an election year,  
he instructed U.S. Jews to thank President Nixon for all he had done for Israel.   
Whereupon Max Fisher, the Jewish money-raiser for the Nixon re-election (how  
Much money went into that $60 million campaign?  and how was it used?)  
Announced he had no difficulty raising money for Nixon – that he was a  
“veritable Jewish delight.”  As a result, it appears John Erlichmann’s description  
of Pat Gray applies to U.S. policy – “There it hangs, twisting slowly, slowly in  
the wind.”  To be a “Jewish delight” the U.S.A. must give Israel arms and finances  
and political support while it can use these as it desires.  And so the U.S. allows  
its larger interests to be undermined by Israel – then a sudden realization comes  
that our wasteful use of oil places us in dependence on the Arab world - and taking  
U.S. swings slowly in the wind.  Will the contradictions be resolved as General  
Rabin suggests, by the civilized peoples destroying the Arab world and taking  
Its oil?  In the increasing gap that exists between the U.S. government and the  
Public because of the passion of secrecy, there exists the seeds of despair and  
Cynicism. 
 
 My whole life has been devoted to Middle Eastern affairs and I sense the possibility  
of great tragedy. 
 
 
         E d w i n  M .  W r i g h t   
 
 
Comment by E.M.W.  
 
To this letter, I received a reply from which I quote one sentence. 
 
Dear Ed, 
 
 “I wish to assure you that the nations of the area are moving away from  
the idea of confrontation towards negotiation for a peaceful settlement.” 
 
Seven weeks later, War come.


--- PAGE 123 ---
114  
Appendix No. 5  
 
 
[Note by the e-book producer:  A copy of an article by Milton Friedman that appeared in the Los 
Angeles Voice of May 18, 1956, was reproduced on page 114 in the original, hard copy of The 
Great Zionist Cover-Up.  That copy of the article that appeared on page 114 in the original book 
was illegible to the scanner that was used in making this e-book; therefore, that article is not 
reproduced here on page 114 of this e-book.  However, the exact, full text of this Friedman 
article is on pages 48-50 in this e-book, as it appears on pages 48-50 in the original The Great 
Zionist Cover-Up.  
 
The text, “See pages 46-62.”, appears at the bottom of page 114 in the original, hard copy of The 
Great Zionist Cover-Up and so it is shown hereon at the bottom of this page.]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
See pages 46-62.


--- PAGE 124 ---
115  
Appendix # 6     C O P Y  
 
   UNION OF ORTHODOX JEWISH CONGREGATIONS  
OF AMERICA  
305 Broadway,  New York 7, N.Y.  
 
Office of the        BEekman  3-2220 
    Executive Vice President  
               November 14, 1956  
 
Honorable Edwin Wright  
Assistant Dean of Foreign Service Institute  
Department of State  
Washington, D.C.  
 
My dear Mr. Wright,  
 
In the National Jewish Post of Friday, November 9th, there  
appeared on the front page an article concerning an address  
delivered by you recently at the National Presbyterian  
Church of Washington, D.C.  
 
This article alleges to you statements to the effect that  
Orthodox Jews are interested only in their Talmudic books;  
Confine themselves to ghettoes;  contribute nothing to the  
advances of our modern world;  have no scientists within  
their ranks;  and drove out Maimonides from Spain and excom- 
municated him for being too liberal.  
 
In this article you are also quoted directly as stating:  
“Zionist ideology comes straight out of Deuteronomy”.  The  
article goes on to state that you accused Jews of dual  
loyalty and depicted the Jewish religion as a faith which  
does not allow people to think.  
 
The Union of Orthodox Jewish Congregations of America, ser- 
vicing over 3,000 Jewish congregations and over 3,000,000  
citizens is hereby inquiring whether or not the above state- 
ments are a correct report of your remarks at the National  
Presbyterian Church of Washington. 
 
May we have your reply early.  
 
      Yours truly,  
 
            (Signed)  
      Dr. Samson R. Weiss  
      Executive Vice-President  
ENC:  Photostat of Article


--- PAGE 125 ---
116  
Appendix # 6  
Copy.  
      DEPARTMENT OF STATE  
  _________________  
    EXECUTIVE SECRETARIAT  
  November 30, 1956  
 
FSI – Mr. Wright  
Through: O-Mr. Zook  
 
 The acting secretary’s office has requested 
The preparation of a reply to the attached letter  
From Dr. Weiss by Tuesday, December 4. 
 Please have two copies of the reply made for me.  
 It is understood that Mr. Hill recently responded  
to a similar enquiry from a Senator or Congressman  
on this matter.  
 Signature to the reply to Dr. Weiss’s letter  
To the Acting Secretary presumably should be made  
With O or FSI.  
 
 
         R.L. Burns  
            S/S-RO  
 
Attachment: 
    Ltr. dtd. Nov. 28 enc. Copy ltr to Mr.Edwin  
    Wright criticizing his recent statement.


--- PAGE 126 ---
117  
Appendix No. 6.  
 
 
C O P Y  
 
UNION OF ORTHODOX JEWISH CONGREGATIONS  
OF AMERICA  
305 Broadway,  New York 7, N.Y.  
 
Office of the        BEekman  3-2220 
    Executive Vice President  
 
       November 28, 1956  
 
 
Honorable Herbert Hoover Jr.  
Acting Secretary of State  
Department of State  
Washington, D.C.  
 
My dear Mr. Hoover:  
 
On November 14th the undersigned directed a communication  
To Mr. Edwin Wright, the Assistant Dean of the Foreign  
Service Institute, a copy of which is hereby enclosed.  As  
Of this writing, we have not received any reply of Mr.  
Wright to our letter.  
 
May we hereby inquire as to the position of the department  
Of State in reference to the incident and as to the action  
The Department of State has taken or contemplates to take  
In this matter.  
 
Your early advice will be greatly appreciated.  
 
    Respectfully yours, 
 
   (Signed) 
 
    D r .  S a m s o n  R .  W e i s s   
    Executive Vice-President  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SRW: PR  
ENC:1


--- PAGE 127 ---
118  
Appendix N. 6  
[All typed text that appears below in this letter (except [signed]) appeared in the original but the 
original fonts were not readily available to this e-book producer.  There were various and short 
hand-written notations scribbled on this letter as it appears on page 118 in the original hard copy 
book. These handwritten notations could not be faithfully reproduced (some were illegible) and 
so no attempt was made to show all of them here.]  
 
        Cables: Newauthors, New York  
CARL COWL  
Authors’ Representative       516 Fifth Avenue 
Plays       Books       New York 36, N.Y.  
                 MUrray Hill 7-6782  
                 MUrray Hill 2-3383  
 
November 21, 1956  
Gentlemen,  
        If what Robert Spivack reports  
in today's New York POST has any basis in  
fact, there is no question in my mind that  
his continued activity in the post held by  
Dean Edwin Wright of your School of Inter-  
National Studies is a decided disservice  
to the United States government and that he  
should therefore be removed forthwith.  
 
     Sincerely yours, 
      [signed]  
      Carl Cowl  
 
UNITED STATES STATE DEPARTMENT  
Washington, D.C.  
 
CCaob


--- PAGE 128 ---
Appendix No. 6           119  
 
C O P Y  
 
 
Dear Dr.  Weiss:  
 
Your letter of November 28, 1956 to the Acting Secretary of  
State has been received.   Inasmuch as Mr. Wright is on the staff  
of the Foreign Service Institute, the letter has been forwarded  
to me for reply.  
Mr. Wright did not receive your letter.  He was speaking at  
Presbyterian Church on personal arrangements with  
Dr. Elson.  I have discussed the subject with  Mr. Wright and he  
has given the enclosed statement which I am forwarding for your  
information.  
 
    Sincerely yours,  
 
 
    Harold D. Hoskins  
Director  
Foreign Service Institute  
 
Enclosures:  
Copy of Statement.  
 
Dr. Samson R. Weiss,  
        Executive Vice-President,  
     Union of Orthodox Jewish  
     Congregations of America,  
 305 Broadway,  
          New York 7, New York.  
 
 
O/FSI:EMWright:nw  (12-4-56)


--- PAGE 129 ---
Appendix No. 6           120  
Copy. 
 
Mr. Hoskins       December 19, 1956  
Edwin M. Wright  
Lillian Levy’s Article in the National Jewish Post, November 9, 1956  
 
 The attached statements were sent to me by members  
of the audience who heard me at the National Presbyterian  
Church on November 1, 1956.  They had all seen Lillian Levy’s  
Article of the 9th of November, and comment on it.  
 
 I have several other letters which I have not included,  
considering these five as typical. 
 
Attachments :  
 
 1).Letter from Ross J. Adams of 12/6/56  
 2).Letter from Paul M. Somerville of 12/7/56  
 3).Letter from Antonette F. Gill of 12/5/56  
 4).Letter from Harry G. Uhl of 12/10/56  
 5).Letter from Agnes C. Proffitt of 12/11/56  
 
-----------------------------------------------------------------  
Comment by E.M.W.  
 When Lillian Levy’s article appeared, I asked several  
Members of the audience, who had seen her statement, to  
Comment on the accuracy of her reporting.  Five of these  
Replies I forwarded to Mr. Hoskins as material for a  
judgement as to what I had really said – rather than what  
had been reported.


--- PAGE 130 ---
a weekly digest of southwest asia and north africa news focusing 
on the israel-palestine confli ct, the persian gulf, and great power 
policies with translations from the hebrew and arabic press. 
 
        Vol. 1, No. 48               December 27, 1974  
    from ZU HADERECH, the weekly 
   newspaper of Israel's Rakah Party             November 27,1974 
What Are My Opinions? 
by Israel Shahak 
 
During my visit abroad to Western- Europe, a concerted attack on my activities was made in the Israeli 
press especially in Haaretz, but also in Maariv, Yediot Ahronot, Davar, Jerusalem Post and other papers. 
[See SWASIA I, 42, for translations of several arti cles attacking Shahak.] No attempt was made by any 
paper to check (with m e or my friends) any item  of the many lies they pu blished about m e personally, 
and likewise nothing of my opinions was explained in detail.  I was only accused in general ter ms of 
being a "slanderer," "poisoner of the wells of peace," etc. 
I have tried to offer the following article to Haaretz.  It was accepted and I was asked to shorten it. I did 
so to the prescribed length, and was then put off by a succession of ridiculous excuses, the las t of which 
was that the manuscript was lost. Finall y after more than three we eks I w as told that no article of mine 
will be published by Haaretz. The decision was made by the editor, Gershom Shoken.  The article in its  
original version is given below: 
There is a fact which should have really  i nterested the Israeli pu blic in the affair of the witch-hunt  
leveled again st me by  Herzl Rosenblum , editor of Yediot Ahron ot; by the editor of Maariv; Amnon 
Rubinstein [Dean of Tel Aviv University's Law School] and Uri Avneri [editor of Haolam Hazeh.] It is 
the plain fact that none of them said exactly  what ar e the “terrible" things, what are the so-called lies,"  
which even Rubinstein sometimes can't deny. In short, what is it that I really say, here in Israel as well as  
abroad? 
   Since I con sider it beneath m y dig nity to co nduct a discussion with people who do not even care to 
check the most elementary facts about me, I do not in tend to ans wer here any of the “charges" leveled 
against me. I do not see myself as a def endant, but as an accuser; I want to exp lain exactly about what I 
accuse the state of Israel; I mean by this term especially the Jewish community of the stat e of Israel and 
only after that the government, which fulfills the will of that public.  
   Space lacking, I will confine m yself to the occupi ed territories. I shall not enter into my claims 
concerning discrimination within Israel itself.  
 
The Occupied Territories  
 
In my opinion, the Israeli occupation regime in the conquered territories is not only not a liberal one; it 
is in fact one of the most cruel and repressive regimes in modern times. Maybe we can start with a simple 
problem: The num ber of P alestinians living now i n the occupied territories is slightl y above a m illion. 
Before the Israeli conquest the num ber of Palestinians  living t here was a one and one-half million, plus  
some three hundred thousand more relatives working temporarily in various countries. 
   The first thing done by the occupation authorities was to organize by all means, both by cruel coercion 
and in supposedly  "humane" ways, a mass-expulsion of Palestinians from  their motherland. This mass-


--- PAGE 131 ---
expulsion (unlike the expulsion of in dividuals, about which I'll speak la ter) was carried out until August, 
1968, and was only interrupted because the government of King Hussein shut the bridges for further 
expulsion.  In almost all Palestinian families that “policy" has caused separation of parents from children, 
of brothers from brothers and sisters; in short hu man suffering that it is hard to describe. But for the 
government of Israel, for all the Zionist parties and for undercover servants of the government like Uri 
Avneri, this is not a human problem, this is not a gross and cynical trampling underfoot of the most 
elementary values of justice--this is only the well-known "demographic problem." In the "united" 
Jerusalem of today, the very same situation also pr evails. The Israeli government speaks of "reunion of 
families" when it comes to Russian Jews, but does not allow the "reunion of families" when it comes to 
Palestinians of Jerusalem. And I talk of right, not of some act of charity, sometimes accomplished as a 
measure of favouritism. 
People who were born, and lived most of their life in  Jerusalem are not allowed to come back and to 
settle in their own city, if they are not Jews; of course, if a Dutchman converts to Judaism tomorrow (by 
way of Orthodox Jewish conversion) he  will not only be allowed to do so at once, he will also get an 
apartment in Ramat-Eshkol (all-Jewish suburb of Jerusalem, built on Arab land conquered in 1967). 
All the arrangements known as "summer visits", so praised by all sorts of hypocrites, is essentially 
meant to aggravate the problem: Brother is allowed to see brother, children to see their father. Of course, 
nostalgia becomes over-whelming, and then they are told: You want to reunite?  Please do so--but on the 
other side of the Jordan river! Thus does false liberalism serve the real aim of the Israeli government: the 
expulsion of Palestinians from their country. 
Democratic Rights 
   More than seven years have elap sed since the conquest. Let us consider what was the situation of Nazi 
Germany and Japan seven years after they were co nquered and occupied by the Allies. In 1952, there 
were already Japanese and German states. They were not spontaneously generated. They were established 
by Germans and Japan, because, shortly after the war, the residents of occupied territories in Germany 
and in Japan were granted basic democratic rights, rights that were constantly enlarged. These were the 
right to create political parties, to write political pr ograms, to hold non-violent demonstrations, in short; 
the right to debate and to decide about their future.  The situation in the territories occupied by Israel is 
just the opposite.  Not only are political parties--all political parties--totally for- bidden-, even unions, 
such as trade-unions, student-unions or cultural associa tions, are forbidden.  It is not only forbidden for 
Palestinians to demonstrate; it also is forbidden to go on strike; it is even forbidden to close one's own 
shop in sign of protest, even though it is hard to imagine a more peaceful way of protesting.  
I recall those facts, not only because I condemn and oppose them very deeply, but also in order to stress 
that here lies the root of Palestinian terrorism.  A nd even though I condemn all terrorism, be it Palestinian 
terrorism or Israeli terrorism--the  later being bigger from the standpoi nt of view of the number of 
innocents who fall victim to it--I place the heaviest  responsibility upon the shoulders of the Israeli 
government.  It is only natural that a people whose existence is denied, whose most basic family and 
human rights are denied, and who are denied any right to wage a political struggle--should choose another 
form of struggle, some manifestations of which certainly deserve to be firmly condemned.  
 
Violations of the Geneva Conference  
   Moreover, Israel shamelessly  and cynically violates, in the conquered territories, all the Geneva 
conventions. The same people who have the audacity to  recall the Geneva convention on prisoners of war 
when it is violated by the Syrians (and I have no doubt that it was indeed violated by the Syrians in 
regards Io our prisoners, just as I have no doubt that Is rael violated that convention in regards to Syrian 
prisoners). the same people were s ilent, and are still silent when Israel violates overtly, through acts 
committed in broad daylight, the 4th section of the set of Geneva conventions 1949, the section which 
deals with the status of the residents of occupied territories. Out of the many violations I shall quote only 
three, which are committed overtly, on the basis of an almost unanimous agreement inside Israel.


--- PAGE 132 ---
Let us take as an example the blowing up of hou ses and other collective punishments. The facts are 
well known: When the occupation authorities arrest a susp ect, even before he is put on trial, sometimes 
even before he is "officially" indicted, an order is issued to destroy the house in  which the suspect lived.  
Sometimes it is the house of his family, sometimes not. Sometimes "refinements" are introduced.  All the 
inhabitants of the village are forcibly concentrated on a nearby hill, so as to watch the "educative show". 
It must be stressed that such an act is fundament ally barbaric. People who even in the eyes of the 
authorities, are innocent are ousted. Children, old people, women, sick, cripples, and all of them together 
are thrown onto the street, regardless of weather. Th is is one example of collective punishment such as is 
expressedly prohibited by the Geneva conventions, as well as by any notion of natural justice.  More than 
once in the course of my functions, I had the privilege of sitting, together with one of such families, on 
the ruins of their house, and nothing convinced me more  of the barbaric character of our occupation than 
the sight of children on the ruins of their house.  Aside from that punishment, there is a whole set of 
different collective punishments. Does one want to punish the area of Hebron" (grapes are not allowed to 
be transported on the roads during picking time, until the "notables" finally fall on their knees before the 
military governor. Does one want to punish the city of  Ramallah? The sale of mutton is forbidden in that 
town for two months, or the municipality is not allo wed to receive contributions coming from natives of 
Ramallah abroad and sent for purposes of municipal de velopment. Does one want to punish the town of 
El-Bireh?  An order is issued to take pictures of Pal estinian folklore off the walls of the city hall, and to 
hide them in a cellar, I could go on indefinitely, and give innumerable examples of this kind.  
 
Learning from Antisemites  
 
   As a Jew, I must say that all this is quite fa miliar to me.  Collective punishments inflicted upon Jews, 
the belief all the Jews in the neighborhood are “guilty" of this or that deed committed by one Jew, and 
that they must therefore be collectively punished, all this is quite well-known in Jewish history.  All the 
collective punishments and the "justifications" raised to rationalize them only demonstrate in my opinion, 
to what extent the state of Israel is adopting progressively all the values and opinions of antisemitism. The 
discussion between the Israeli government and fal se liberals is only about the question of knowing 
whether "it helps" of not. In Israel one is not "owed to say that to take an innocent child and inflict a cruel 
“punishment" upon him is a barbaric and horrible act in it self. This is "calumny", for to say this is to 
relate to Palestinians, to non-Jews, as to human beings, while false liberals only deal with the "interest of 
the Jews"; they only deal with the hypocritical question:  Is the oppression of Palestinians a good or a bad 
thing for the Jews, in the short and in the long run?  
 
Individual Expulsions  
 
   I have spoken of the mass expulsion that wa s interrupted in 1968 after King Hussein refused to 
cooperate. But the expulsion of indivi duals is taking place all the time.  Here again, the story is simple. 
The authorities come to a man's house in the middle of the night. They give him a half-hour or an hour to 
pack up a few things, while making sure that neither he nor his family get in touch with the outside. A 
group of such people is taken to the Jordan Valley, and with the help of blows, shots (and even wounds 
provoked by the blows) they are simply forced to pass to Jordan. The majority of the expelled belong to 
the leadership of the Palestinian nation: mayors of to wns, lawyers, engineers and intellectuals. of course, 
they are not officially charged with anything, so th at they have no possibility to defend themselves. The 
day after, the Israeli government announces that they had "incited" the population; the Israeli intellectuals, 
the judges, the lawyers, the writers and others, who shout, for instance, about the harassment of 
"immigration activists" in the USSR, do not pronoun ce a single word of condemnation against that 
barbaric act, in which a person is uprooted from his mo therland, a father from his family, without a legal 
charge. And, of course, to a family thus orphaned of  its father, they say simply: Why don't you also go 
and reunite outside? In many cases the family rejects th is sentence of "liberal" occupation, and stays, and 
suffers, only so as to prevent the success  of the Israeli authorities' plot, to expel as many Palestinians as it


--- PAGE 133 ---
can from their country.  And the well-known "calumniat or", Israel Shahak, with his "primitive style" 
(according to Amnon Rubinstein) here by announces that he has more respect for those families than for 
the whole Israeli government together with its overt and covert servants, and that he will continue to 
struggle, in Israel and abroad, in order that those people obtain justice! 
Jewish Settlement in the Conquered Territories  
 
   At the time of the sterile discussion - about “legal" or "illegal" settlement, - there is a tendency in Israel 
to forget that any settlement of civilians of a conquering power in  the occupied territories is a violation of 
section IV of the Geneva conventions.  I consider with much greater  opposition the "legal" settlements 
authorized by the Israeli government than the illeg al settlements.  Not only  because of the Geneva 
convention, and not only because it prevents or does not prevent p eace (what peace?), but also because of 
more essential motives:  the Jewish settlements in the o ccupied territories, by their very nature, constitute 
a dispossession, a discrimination and a system of apartheid. The territories confiscated, so acquired by 
pressure and deceit for settlement become territories where only Jews are allowed to live, and where only 
Jews shall be allowed to live in the future, They ar e taken out of their natural geographical context, and 
become typical imperialist bases, serving the strategi c needs of the colonialist power--in this case Israel--
that has erected them. Thus, by the way of "legal" set tlement, the "Jordan Valley" has become one half of 
the West Bank, and almost reaches to the eastern suburbs of Nablus. Thus th e Gaza Strip constitutes a 
concentration camp (and just like a concentration camp  it is surrounded by barbed wire) "guarded" by the 
settlements of the Rafah area, and the "Jewish fingers." Those are the kibbutzim, which Moshe Dayan and 
Ariel Sharon have planted in the strip.  The function of  those settlements, clear to anyone who consents to 
look at the map, is territorial expansion; it is the enslavement and proletarization of the Palestinian 
population in the occupied territories.  
   I shall add a few words concerning the "princip le of land acquisition."  First of all, the Israeli 
occupation regime confiscated all the government lands and devoted th em to Jewish settlement.  This, 
from any point of view, is really a theft. In mo st cases those had always been communal lands of the 
Palestinian village. They were registered, according to the regional custom, in the name of the Ottoman 
Sultan, then in the name of the British High Commissioner, and finally, in the name of the Jordanian king. 
In all cases, those lands were actually utilized by the local residents. Now the 'Socialist" Israeli rule has 
come; it transfers land in a racist way to the use of  exclusive members of one ethnic group: the Jews. By 
the way, this was not exclusively for use by Isr aeli citizens but for the use of Jews from all over the 
world. This is racism! Another form of land acquisition is by way of confiscation of that which is called 
"lands of absentees."  Once again it is a simple matter: More than one-third of the Palestinians in the 
territories were expelled, and among them many whose lands were regi stered in their own name. For 
example, if a family father was expelled and if his wife and children remained in the village, then they are 
living on an "absentee's lands." Next comes the "Soc ialist" Israeli government and expels them from that 
land, which it consecrates to Jewish settlement. Thus is the land of Israel "redeemed!" In this way a 
supplementary "socialist" result is obtained. In many villages the lands “belonging" to the Jordanian 
administration separate and cut the plots still in privat e hands.  Then, pressure is exerted in direction of 
what is called "land concentration," i.e., that the remaining villagers shall become partners in the 
spoliation of widows and orphans of their village, by ex changing their lands for the confiscated lands, so 
as to create a "checker"--a continuous territory that  shall be “cleared out" for Jewish settlement. That was 
the root of the problem in the famous case of the vill age of Akrabah, and those were the means by which 
it was .. redeemed." On this land stands the kibbutz "N aha] Gittit" (which is, of course, in my view a 
kibbutz of robbers and oppressors). Together with the full kibbutz movement this represents looting!  
 
 
Jewish Terrorism?


--- PAGE 134 ---
I condemn and oppose all terrori sm. I have condemned in the firm est way every Palestinian act of 
terrorism, and I have done so in particular when in front of a public which sympathizes with the 
Palestinians. But unlike hypocrites, I really condemn all terror. Not only terror directed against Jews, but 
also terror committed by Jews and directed against Arab s. So as to save time, I shall not speak of the 
terrorism of all the Jewish underground organizations under the Mandate; I shall start with the existence 
of the state of Israel. It seems to me that it would be hard to find a man more worthy of the name of 
terrorist than Meir Har-Zion. In his diaries and in th e many interviews with him in the Israeli press, that 
man revealed not only what an assassin he was, but also how much he enjoyed--purely and simply 
enjoyed--murder. How much he enjoys killing an Arab, particularly with a knife, because he can then feel 
that he is a "male." [See Haaratz Weekly Supplement, November 9, 1969.] He asks of his commander the 
permission to kill an unarmed Arab shepherd, precisel y with a knife, and then  describes with sadistic 
enjoyment the way his comrade holds him, while Har-Zion plunges the knife in his back.” and the blood 
splashes from the wound" (See Meir Har-Zion Diaries). Are we in need of further description of Har-
Zion's deeds which appears in Moshe Sharett's dairy? [ See Maariv, June 28, 1974.] Sharett tells how Har-
Zion, with a group of terrorists like him, went across the borders of Israel, got a hold of six Arabs, and 
killed, with a knife, five of them. He felled them one after the other, while the ot hers watched; he left the 
sixth one alive so that he could tell ... That man is co nsidered a national hero by the majority of Israeli 
Jews. That man was praised and was presented as a mode l to the youth by the defense minister of Israel 
and the general in charge of the southern comma nd (Moshe Dayan and Arik Sharon). No protest was 
raised against that "model", not even among many people who talk of peace!  
   I will add to this the "Beirut expedition" of Apr il 1973, an operation in which were murdered, not only 
PLO leaders, but also women whose sole crime was th at they lived next to PLO leaders.  (This was a 
murder lauded by Uri Avneri.)  I will add to this  the napalm bombings in lrbid, Es-Salt and other 
Jordanian towns in the summer of 1968. I will add to this the summer, 1974, habit of bombing refugee 
camps in Lebanon, and on top of ordinary bombs,  dropping delayed-action bombs, which only explode 
after one hour or two, i.e., when the families and me dical squads are searching through the ruins to rescue 
the wounded.  And one can add much more to the list.  Is not all that terror?  Isn' t it just as bad as Kyryat-
Shmoneh?  Do those who are not ready to condemn th e sadistic declarations of Meir-Har-Zion, and the 
transformation of such a character into a "model for the youth" have any right at all to condemn Ahmed 
Jibril? My answer is: I have the right to do so.  They don't. Murderers and accomplices of murderers had 
rather not pose as moralists.  And to those who justif y (and even enjoy) the murder of non-Jews, to those 
for whom only Jewish children shed blood, and for whom, so it seems, Arab children have water in their 
veins, I will simply say:  It is not you who can preach morality to me.
 
 
Torture  
 
My considered opinion is that people are tortured in  Israel and in the conquered territories. I confess: 
I have in the matter no hard evidence, and I do not exp ect to obtain any. I am not so naive as to believe 
that a torturer will stand up and announce: I have to rtured!-Or that he will introduce two witnesses into 
the torture-room so that they can testify afterwards. But such is the situation in all the countries. There 
are no such testimonies about Brazil, none about Greece unde r the Colonels' rule. Moreover, there are 
no such testimonies about that which was inflicted upon the Israeli prisoners in Egypt and in Syria. Most 
of the claims, which I believe, are exclusively b ased upon the testimony of the victims of torture. 
Therefore it is not a matter of  “proofs", or of "unchecked a llegations." It is a matter of Jewish racism. 
The majority of the Jewish public in Israel (and also  out of it) believes that only Jews are human beings, 
and, therefore, deserve to be trusted, while the Gentiles usually lie, as stated in most cases throughout 
Talmudic Law. Hence, when a Jew claims that the Sy rians tortured him, we must believe him at once, 
on the basis of his testimony. But when a Palestinian claims that Jews tortured him, we must not believe 
him in any way, because he is a gentile. 
I, on the other hand, claim that all men are worthy of minimal trust, especially men who suffer, and I 
tend to believe the testimonies about tortures both when  they come from Israeli prisoners in Syria and


--- PAGE 135 ---
when they come from Palestinians in the conquered te rritories. I consider it my duty to publicize them 
and to demand an inquiry. I see the most striking ev idence that the Israeli government and its agents 
torture systematically thousands of people in the fact  that all the supporters of the Israeli government, be 
they vocal or hidden, refuse to demand an independent inquiry on the subject. 
 
The Right To Check  
 
   What is in my opinion even more appalling than the tortures themselves, a fact which I do not doubt, is 
the attitude of the majority of the Israeli public vis-a-vis the complaints about tortures, and especially the 
arrogant claim that facts haven't been sufficiently  checked.  How do Rubinstein and Avneri "check?" 
They never get in touch with the claimants or with their lawyers.  They do not answer letters demanding 
an inter- view with them, letters demanding a chance to give the opportunity to hear what the man 
himself cries from his own pain.  The inevitable c onclusion to be drawn from this is that when 
Rubinstein and/or Avneri claim that they have “checked,” they mean they consulted someone in one of 
the "security branches,"  and consider that the answer they got is the truth, without hearing the other side, 
without hearing the claimant at all.  The political conclusion is clear, but the human conclusion is worse 
than that: In the state of Israel th e majority of the judges, the jurists and the intellectuals, not to mention 
politicians, are indifferent to the most basic human rule that the claim of a man who says he's been 
mistreated must be listened to, and must be examined objectively.  That is, in my eyes, infinitely more 
important than the tortures themselves, for the majo rity of the public, and especially the heads of the 
public have been and are guilty of  that sin. Even though I am convinced that there were numerous cases 
of torture, I may be wrong. If my claims were chec ked, and the proof of the opposite was made, I would 
stand up and admit that I was wrong. But I am not mist aken, and I cannot be mistaken, when I claim that 
the majority of the Israeli public shut their ears to  a simple human cry, that this ignores the most 
fundamental political duty--the duty of  independent inquiry--and that this  is the source of the corruption, 
which is being uncovered, and that will continue to be uncovered in many diverse places.  
 
Nazification  
 
   Therefore, I am not afraid--neither in that field, nor in other fields, even though certainly not in all the 
fields--of the comparison with "that which befell the German people between the two world wars." I am 
not afraid to say publicly that Israeli Jews, and with them most Jews throughout the world, are undergoing 
a process of Nazification. Does a people whose offici al "hero" is Meir Har-Zion deserve any other title? 
Would we give another name to a people whose hero enjoys killing Jews with a knife and to see how the 
blood splashes? Isn't it the Nazi "Horst Wesel" who s poke of the pleasure of Jewish blood dripping from 
his knife?  
   But the silence concerning other claims is worse.  It includes--exactly as it did in Germany--not only 
those among us who are in my opinion real Nazis, and .there are a lot of those, but also those who do not 
protest against Jewish Nazism, so long as they think it ser ves Jewish interest. It is for  instance a fact, that 
according to Jewish Talmudic law, legally valid in Israel today, any Gentile woman is considered as 
impure, slave, Gentile and whore; when she embraces the Jewish faith she stops being impure, slave, and 
gentile, but she remains a whore. The argumentation, provided by Talmudic law to back that judgment, 
when raised in the twentieth century can only be co mpared to Julius Streicher; for instance the judgment 
whereby all "Gentile women" must necessarily be prostitut es.  Did a jurist in Israel explain this sentence? 
Did anyone warn any of the "famous female convents" that together w ith conversion they undertook to be 
“whores"? Did anyone raise the question of knowing whether that law is wise and just or not? The answer 
is clear, and just for the same reason similar ju rists in Nazi Germany accepted  the Nuremberg Laws 
(which are infinitely more moderate than the “G entile" regulations in Talmudic Law). Exactly for the 
same reason, the leading Israeli ju rists don't even want to examine the demand for inquiry on tortures 
raised by a non-Jew.  
I can only conclude with the words of Hugh Trevor-Roper, at the end of his book The Last Days of


--- PAGE 136 ---
Hitler, talking about Albert Speer: "He had the capacity to understand the forces of politics, and the 
courage to resist the master whom all others have declared irresistible. As an administrator he was 
undoubtedly a genius. . . His ambitions were peaceful a nd constructive: he wished to rebuild Berlin and 
Nuremberg, and had planned at the cost of no more  than two months' expenditure to make them the 
greatest cities in the world. Nevertheless, in a political  sense, Speer is the real criminal of Nazi Germany, 
for he, more than any other, represented that fata l philosophy which has made havoc of Germany and 
nearly shipwrecked the world. For ten years he sat  at the very center of political power; his keen 
intelligence diagnosed the nature and observed the mutations of Nazi government and policy; he saw and 
despised the personalities around him; he heard their outrageous orders and u nderstood their fantastic 
ambitions; but he did nothing. Supposing politics to be  irrelevant he turned aside and built roads and 
bridges and factories while the logical consequences of government by madmen emerged. Ultimately 
when their emergence involved the ruin of all his wo rk, Speer accepted the consequences and acted. Then 
it was too late; Germany had been destroyed.”  
So said Trevor-Roper.  I am trying to act before it is too late.  
SWASIA is published weekly by the Middle East and Europe Working Group, Division of Overseas Ministries, of the National 
Council of Churches, Room 614, 475 Riverside Dr., New York, N.Y. 10027. Richard Butler, Director, MEEWG. James Fine, 
Norton Mezvinsky, Editors. SWASIA's general business offices are located at 3631 39th St., N.W., Washington, D.C. 20016.  
Subscription rates: U.S. and Canada, $20/year. Overseas: Surface mail, $25/year; Airmail, $40/year.


--- PAGE 137 ---



--- PAGE 138 ---
123  
Appendix #9  
 
SOURCE MATERIA.LS, A short suggested list  
 
Many references appear in the ten to books from which I have quoted. An attempt to provide a 
larger Bibliography would be mind-boggling, such is the plethora of books now available.  The 
following is therefore a brief list of books and journals which can be consulted for basic 
background material.  
 
THE MIDDLE EAST COVER-UP by Michael Adams and Christopher  
Mayhew - Longman 1975  
 
TO BE AN ARAB IN ISRAEL by Fouzi el Asmar, Frances Pintner,  
London 1975  
 
The Zionist Mind by Alan R. Taylor, The Institute for Palestine Studies,  
Beirut 1974 (Alan Taylor's approach is quite similar to mine, except I give a 
worm's eye view of what it is like to be in the State Department.  Taylor insists 
Jewish legend and myth are essential for understanding Zionism.  The latter 
merely attempts to substitute secular language for what is essentially 
mythological.  
 
The Journal of Palestine Studies  P.O. B. 11-7164 Beirut, Lebanon is  
a much needed Quarterly. Many of the articles are based on translations from 
Hebrew sources published in Israel but practically unknown in the "west. " It has 
done a good job in tearing off the "cover" from much of the "cover-up.  
 
An Anthology of Quotations on the Palestine Problem  CAABU  
106 Grand Building, Trafalgar Square, London WC2N.  This is a series of 
quotes which illustrate how Zionists have spoken with a "forked tongue" so 
often contradicting themselves that anything can be "proved" by selecting what 
the researcher wishes to prove. There are also many other valuable quotations 
showing the hypocrisy of others who became entangled in the Zionist spider’s 
web - and tried to please everybody by lying to everybody.  
 
The Arab-Israeli Dilemma by Fred J. Khouri, Syracuse 1968.  
A comprehensive historical survey by a competent scholar of Arab parentage.  
Excellent for dates, facts, analysis of events from a non-Zionist point of view.  
 
SWASIA  3631 39th St., N. W., Washington, D. C. 20016  
An indispensable source for current events and opinions translated from various 
media. Appearing once a week, it gives a most valuable insight into what is 
being said on all sides of the question.


--- PAGE 139 ---
124  
 
Middle East International  105 Grand Building, Trafalger Square, London,  
England WC 2.  The United Kingdom was the first victim of Zionism.  By 1940, 
the hatred of Zionists for Great Britain was pathological, because the latter 
found its commitments to the Arabs conflicted with the ambitions of the 
Zionists.  The British have had a long and unhappy experience with supporting 
Zionism, an experience the USA will now have to learn as it finds its larger 
interests in the Arab world compel it to reassess its Special Relationship with 
Israel.  As the USA urges Israel to withdraw from its Conquests - the anger of 
the Zionists will be turned against the USA.  The British point of view is 
therefore of great value in anticipation of coming events in Israeli-USA 
relationships.  
 
Decisions in Israel's Foreign Policy  Michael Brecher  Oxford University Press  
1974  (Reviewed by Richard Allen in the Journal of Palestine Studies, Summer 
1975 p. 110)   
This book "brings out the fiercely possessive, rigidly self-centered Israeli 
attitude toward the land -- as if Palestine had remained entirely and exclusively 
Jewish since ancient times -- Israel is the sole guardian of Jerusalem's historic 
values.”  Israel's attitude is to quote U.N. decisions when favorable but to flout 
them when they fail to promote Israel's goals.  This explains, "the obsessive 
resistance to the territorial withdrawals ordered by the Security Council's 
Resolution 242 -- these attitudes are based on insecurity and fear of ultimate 
destruction."  
 
 
Comment by E. M. W.  
These Zionist dogmas give a twisted and distorted meaning to words used by Zionists.  
“Self-determination" applies only to Jews - not to Palestinians.  "Aggression" applies only to 
Arabs who entered Eretz Israel while the true owners were in exile.  It cannot apply to Jews 
"returning to their homeland" or "cleansing the land" or "redeeming the land."  Expelling the 
indigenous population is really, in the Zionist dictionary, only bringing about a return of the 
Arabs to their original home - in the phrase of General Davidi, "doing them a favor in a humane 
way."  "Non-intervention" refers solely to Gentiles trying to influence Jewish ideologies.  When 
the Israeli Government uses Jews abroad or instructs them how to behave, it is merely Jews 
practising their right for the Center to inform their fellow nationals abroad.  
 
These dogmas arise from the Biblical ideology that only the Jews are a Holy, Eternal nation.  All 
the other Goyim are but ephemeral, meaningless and passing forms.  This dogma must be read 
into all Zionist language.  It would be well for the U.S.A. to learn this - before our innocence 
leads us to disaster.


--- PAGE 140 ---
125  
Appendix No. 10  
Copy.  
United States of America  
GENERAL SERVICES ADMINISTRATION  
National Archives and Records Service  
   Harry S. Truman Library  
Independence, Missouri  64050  
 
April 16,1975  
 
Mr. Edwin M. Wright  
618 B. Wayne Ave  
Wooster, Ohio 44691  
 
Dear Mr. Wright:  
 
We have your letter of March 7, addresses to Professor  
McKinzie, and that of April 14,1975 (with enclosures)  
addressed to the Library Director, both of which have  
come to me for reply.  
 
          --- We are happy, of course to have your interpretation  
prepared for the Library, and it will be made available for  
research after Professor McKinzie has seen it. The pamphlets  
that you sent are also certainly of interest and are appreciated  
as all of your interesting comments have been.  
 
       - - -   You will be interested to know that Evan M. Wilson  
is doing research here this week and has been in touch with  
McKinzie about an interview session this summer.  
   Your continued interest and cooperation is most  
gratifying.  
 
With best wishes.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
JAMES R. FUCHS  
Chief, Oral History Project  
 
 
        Keep Freedom in your Future with U.S. Savings Bonds.


--- PAGE 141 ---
Index.             126  
 
Abraham  3, 14, 48, 68, 73    Eban, Abba  11, 77, 98  
Acheson, D.  23, 24, 76    Eden, Lord  78  
Albright, W.  68     Eddy, Wm.   63, 75  
Alexander II  6     Eichmann, A.  77  
Alami, Musa  83     Eiltz, H.  101  
Allon, Y.  36     Eisenhower, D.  2, 61f  
Andronovitch, N. 29, 30     Eliav, Ari  92  
Antiochus II  20     Eliav, Pinhas   53f 
Asmar, Fouzi  55, 91, 104    Eldad, Israel  1, 86  
Austin, Amb.  24     Elon, Amos  10, 19  
Avneri, Uri  9     Elson, Ed  57, 61  
Barbour, N.  6     Epstein (Elath)  31, 32, 42, 94  
Balfour, Lord  66, 7, 23    Esther, Book of  5, 70f, 75, 89  
Barash M.  18     Ettinger, D.  44  
B a r c l a y ,  A .   2 7      E y t a n ,  W .   9 9   
Baron, Salo  16     Ezra, Book of  67  
Baxter, W.  56     Friedman, M.  46f, 51, 59  
Ben-Gurion, D.  5, 13, 15, 26, 27,   Ford, Pres. G.  47, 51, 90, 103  
    32, 34, 39, 40f, 75f, 88, 90f, 93    Frankfurter, F.  75  
Begin, M.  19, 25, 30, 34,    Fulbright, W.  94, 102  
    50, 84, 86       Giles, Gen.  30  
B e r g e r ,  E .   8 7      G l u e c k ,  N .   5 3   
Bergus, D.  51     Goldman, N.  35, 52, 88, 99  
Bernadotte, F.  40     Golomb, E.  29  
Biltmore Program 9, 42, 75, 85    Hagar   73  
Blau, Rabbi  93     Halperin, Rose  42  
Brandeis, Justice 28     Henderson, Loy iv, 2, 10, 21,  
Brilliant, L.  29          23, 63, 76, 87, 89, 102  
Brown, Gen. G.  v, 102     Hermann, K. J.  78  
Byroade, H.  49     Herod, King  21  
Campbell, J.  55     Herzl, Theo.  ii, iv, 1, 4f,  
Cellar, E.  25         8, 12, 15, 19, 22f, 37, 39, 41, 45, 70f  
Chernowitz  30, 31     Herzog, Rabbi Y. 53, 55, 56  
Chomsky, N.  20     Hickerson, J.  24  
Churchill, W.  4     Hildring, Gen.  26  
Cook, Rabbi  3     Hitler, A.  10, 19, 41, 52, 82  
Crane, C.R.  74     Hoskins, H.  61, 64  
Curzon, Lord  80     Howard, H.  52  
Cyrus, The Great 18, 66     Hunloke, Col.  85  
Daiches, D.  18     Hurley, Gen. P. 31  
David, King  14, 15, 19, 21    Hyrcan, King John 20, 81  
Davidi, Y.  20     Jabotinsky, V.  25, 40  
Davis, John  19, 26     Jackson, Henry 13, 88  
Dayan, Moshe  15, 25, 36, 98    Jacobson, E.  26, 37, 104  
Dewey, T.  25     Joseph, Dov  84  
Dreyfus, Capt.  7, 41     Josephus, F.  20, 83  
Dulles, J.F.  49, 50f, 62f    Joshua, Book of  15, 19, 83, 93


--- PAGE 142 ---
127  
 
Joshiah, King  17     Rawlingson, Henry 16  
Kassim of Iraq  96     Reed, Ogden  56  
Kenan, Amos  91     Rodinson, M.  20, 79  
Kenan, I.L.  111, 105    Roosevelt, Eleanor 43, 10  
Khalidi, W.  19         , Pres. F.D. 63, 93  
King, Henry  74         , Kermit 43  
Kissinger, Henry 90, 95     Roots, J.  91  
Kolleck, Ted  29, 56     Rosenman, Sam  iv, ii  
Kraft, J.   10     Rowan, Carl  104  
Levy, Lillian  57f, 61     Roundtree, W.  44, 64f  
Lilienthal. A.  25     Russel, F.  43  
Lindsay, Hal  75     Saffire, Wm.  98, 101  
Lovett, R.  iv     Samson   54, 106  
Mallison, W.T.  4     Samuel, Edwin  29  
Maimonides  58     Sarah   3, 73  
Marshall, G.  2, 76     Schmidt, D.A.  94  
Meir, Golda  3, 5, 13, 15    Shahak, I.  20, 104  
    35, 41, 89, 98       Sharon, Gen. A.  92  
Menuhin, Moshe 7     Shertok, (Sharett) M. 33  
Merriam, G.  24, 85     Silver, Rabbi H.  23, 27f, 32, 34  
Mienertzhagen, R. 86        36, 37, 75f  
Miller, Merle  103     Sisco, J.  112  
Monroe, E.  iii     Slater, L.  26  
Morgenthau, H. Jr. 37     Sokolow  6  
Moses   17, 18, 21f,    Solomon, King  17, 55f  
    33, 67, 93       Speiser, E.  43, 68  
Moyne, Lord  30     Spinoza, B.  16  
McClure, Sen. J. 98     Stein, L.  6, 90  
McDonald, J.  28     Stevens, R.  23  
McDowell, R.  31, 32     Stone, I.  82f, 85  
McLenahan, W.  2     Tekoa, Y.  85, 100  
McGhee, G.  44     Trattner, E.  17  
Nahas, Pasha  81     Truman, Pres. H. ii, iv, v, 2, 10,  
Napoleon  22        11, 21, 23f, 37f, 47, 62f, 66, 74, 78f,  
Nasser   35        90, 93, 95, 103, 106  
Nathan, R.  24     Ushpiazi, Rabbi  18   
Niebuhr, R.  83     Vespasian, Emperor 69 
Niles, David  iv, 11, 76f    Von Plehve  23, 72  
Nixon, Pres. R.  8, 39, 47, 96    Wadsworth, G.  29, 85  
    97, 101       Weizmann, C.  5, 6, 9, 15, 23,  
Pearson, Drew  45        27, 34, 36, 37, 40, 45, 71, 73, 74, 104  
Peled, Gen. M.  105     White, Theo  8  
Percy, Sen. C.  98     Wilhelm II Kaiser 72  
Pfeiffer, R.  18     Wilson, Evan  11  
Pinkerton, L.  29     Wilson, Woodrow 74  
Podhoretz, N.  4     Wise, Rabbi S.  25, 75, 104  
Polier, J.  59, 60     Zaglul, Pasha  81  
Rabin, Y.  10, 100, 102    Zaslani (Shiloah) R. 29, 84

